NICOLAUS COPERNICUS 

ON THE REVOLUTIONS OF THE HEAVENLY SPHERES 

CONTENT 


FOREWORD by Andreas Osiander 
LETTER of Nicholas Schonberg 
DEDICATION 
PREFACE 

INTRODUCTION by Georg Joachim Rherticus de Porris 
A Brief Commentary on the Hypothesis of the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies 

BOOK ONE 

Ch. 1: The Universe Is Spherical 

Ch. 2: The Earth Too Is Spherical 

Ch. 3: How Earth Forms a Single Sphere with Water 

Ch. 4: The Motion of the Heavenly Bodies Is Uniform, Eternal, and Circular or Compounded 
of Circular Motions 

Ch. 5: Does Circular Motion Suit the Earth? What Is its Position? . . 

Ch. 6: The Immensity of the Heavens Compared to the Size of the Earth 

Ch. 7: Why the Ancients Thought that the Earth Remained at Rest in the Middle of the Universe as 
in the Centre 

Ch. 8: The Inadequacy of the Previous Arguments and a Refutation of them 
Ch. 9: Can Several Motions Be Attributed to the Earth? The Centre of the Universe 
Ch. 10: The Order of the Heavenly Spheres 
Ch. 11: Proof of the Earth’s Triple Motion . 

Ch. 12: Straight Lines Subtended in a Circle 

Table of the Straight Lines Subtended in a Circle . 

Ch. 13: The Sides and Angles of Plane Rectilinear Triangles 
Ch. 14: Spherical Triangles 

BOOK TWO . . . 

Ch. 1: The Circles and their Names 

Ch. 2: The Obliquity of the Ecliptic, the Distance between the Tropics, and the Method of 
Determining These Quantities 

Ch. 3: The Arcs and Angles of the Intersections of the Equator, Ecliptic, and Meridian: the Derivation 
of the Declination and Right Ascension from These Arcs and Angles, and the Computation of 

them 

Table of Declinations [of the Degrees of the Ecliptic] 

Table of Right Ascensions 
Table of Meridian Angles 

Ch. 4: For Every Heavenly Body Situated outside the Ecliptic, provided that the Body’s Latitude and 
Longitude Are Known, the Method of Determining its Declination, its Right Ascension, and the 
Degree of the Ecliptic with which it Reaches Mid-Heaven 


Ch. 5: The Intersections of the Horizon 



Ch. 6: The Differences in Noon Shadows 

Ch. 7: How to Derive from one another the Longest Day, the Distance between Sunrises, and the 
Inclination of the Sphere; the Remaining Differences between Days 
Table of the Difference in the Ascensions on an Oblique Sphere 

Ch. 8: The Hours and Parts of the Day and Night 

Ch. 9: The Oblique Ascension of the Degrees of the Ecliptic; How to Determine What Degree Is at 
Mid-Heaven when Any Degree Is Rising 

Ch. 10: The Angle at which the Ecliptic Intersects the Horizon 

Table of the Ascensions of the Zodiacal Signs in the Revolution of the Right Sphere 

Table of the Ascensions in the Oblique Sphere 

Table of the Angles Made by the Ecliptic with the Horizon 

Ch. 11: The Use of These Tables 

Ch. 12: The Angles and Arcs of Those Circles which Are Drawn through the Poles of the Horizon to the 
Ecliptic 

Ch. 13: The Rising and Setting of the Heavenly Bodies 

Ch. 14: The Investigation of the Places of the Stars, and the Arrangement of the Fixed Stars in a Catalogue 
Descriptive Catalogue of the Signs and Stars 
I: Those which Are in the Northern Region 
II: Those which Are in the Middle and near the Zodiac . 

Ill: Those which Are in the Southern Region 

BOOK THREE 

Ch. 1: The Precession of the Equinoxes and Solstices 

Ch. 2: History of the Observations Proving that the Precession of the Equinoxes and Solstices Is Not 
Uniform 

Ch. 3: Hypotheses by which the Shift in the Equinoxes as well as in the Obliquity of the Ecliptic and 
Equator May Be Demonstrated 

Ch. 4: How an Oscillating Motion or Motion in Libration Is Constructed out of Circular [Motions] 

Ch. 5: Proof of the Nonuniformity in the Precession of the Equinoxes and in the Obliquity 

Ch. 6: The Uniform Motions of the Precession of the Equinoxes and of the Inclination of the Ecliptic 

The Uniform Motion of the Precession of the Equinoxes in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 

The Uniform Motion of the Precession of the Equinoxes in Days and Periods of Sixty Days 
The Nonuniform Motion of the Equinoxes in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 
The Nonuniform Motion of the Equinoxes in Days and Periods of Sixty Days 

Ch. 7: What Is the Greatest Difference between the Uniform and the Apparent Precession of the Equinoxes ? 

Ch. 8: The Individual Differences between These Motions, and a Table Exhibiting Those Differences 
Table of the Prosthaphaereses of the Equinoxes and of the Obliquity of the Ecliptic 

Ch. 9: Review and Correction of the Discussion of the Precession of the Equinoxes 

Ch. 10: What Is the Greatest Variation in the Intersections of the Equator and Ecliptic? 

Ch. 11. Determining the Epochs of the Uniform Motions of the Equinoxes and Anomaly 

Ch. 12: Computing the Precession of the Vernal Equinox and the Obliquity 

Ch. 13: The Length and Nonuniformity of the Solar Year. 

Ch. 14: The Uniform and Mean Motions in the Revolutions of the Earth’s Center . 

Table of the Sun’s Simple Uniform Motion in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 

Table of the Sun’s Simple Uniform Motion in Days, Periods of Sixty Days, and Minutes of a Day 

Table of the Sun’s Uniform Composite Motion in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 

Table of the Sim’s Uniform Composite Motion in Days, Periods of Sixty Days, and Minutes 




Table of the Sun’s Uniform Motion in Anomaly in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 
The Sun’s Anomaly in Days and Periods of Sixty Days 

Ch. 15: Preliminary Theorems for Proving the Nonuniformity of the Sun’s Apparent Motion 

Ch. 16: The Sun’s Apparent Nonuniformity 

Ch. 17: Explanation of the First and Annual Solar Inequality, together with its Particular Variations 

Ch. 18: Analysis of the Uniform Motion in Longitude 

Ch. 19: Establishing the Positions and Epochs for the Sun’s Uniform Motion 

Ch. 20: The Second and Twofold Inequality Imposed on the Sim by the Shift of the Apsides 

Ch. 21. How Large Is the Second Variation in the Solar Inequality? 

Ch. 22: How the Solar Apogee’s Uniform and Nonuniform Motions Are Derived 
Ch. 23: Determining the Solar Anomaly and Establishing its Positions 

Ch. 24: Tabular Presentation of the Variations in the Uniform and Apparent [Solar Motions] 

Table of the Solar Prosthaphaereses 

Ch. 25: Computing the Apparent Sun 

Ch. 26: The Nuchthemeron, that Is, the Variable Natural Day 
BOOK FOUR 

Ch. 1: The Hypotheses concerning the Lunar Circles, according to the Belief of the Ancients 

Ch. 2: The Defect in Those Assumptions 

Ch. 3: A Different Opinion about the Moon’s Motion 

Ch. 4: The Moon’s Revolutions, and the Details of its Motions 
The Moon’s Motion in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 
The Moon’s Motion in Days, Periods of Sixty Days, and Day-Minutes 
The Moon’s Motion in Anomaly in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 
The Moon’s Motion in Anomaly in Days, Periods of Sixty Days, and Day-Minutes 
The Moon’s Motion in Latitude in Years and Periods of Sixty Years 
The Moon’s Motion in Latitude in Days, Periods of Sixty Days, and Day-Minutes 

Ch. 5: Exposition of the First Lunar Inequality, which Occurs at New and Full Moon 

Ch. 6: Verification of the Statements about the Moon’s Uniform Motions in Longitude and Anomaly 

Ch. 7: The Epochs of the Lunar Longitude and Anomaly 

Ch. 8: The Moon’s Second Inequality, and the Ratio of the First Epicycle to the Second 

Ch. 9: The Remaining Variation, in which the Moon Is Seen Moving Nonuniformly away from the 
[First] Epicycle’s Higher Apse 

Ch. 10: How the Moon’s Apparent Motion Is Derived from the Given Uniform Motions 

Ch. 11: Tabular Presentation of the Lunar Prosthaphaereses or Normalizations 
Table of the Moon’s Prosthaphaereses 

Ch. 12: Computing the Moon’s Motion 

Ch. 13: How the Moon’s Motion in Latitude Is Analyzed and Demonstrated 
Ch. 14: The Places of the Moon’s Anomaly in Latitude 
Ch. 15: The Construction of the Parallactic Instrument 
Ch. 16: How the Lunar Parallaxes Are Obtained 

Ch. 17: A Demonstration of the Moon’s Distances from the Earth, and of their Ratio in Units of which 
the Earth’s Radius = 1 

Ch. 18: The Diameter of the Moon and of the Earth’s Shadow at the Place where the Moon Passes 
through It 



Ch. 19: How to Demonstrate at the Same Time the Distances of the Sun and Moon from the Earth, 
their Diameters, the Diameter of the Shadow where the Moon Passes through It, and the Axis of 
the Shadow 

Ch. 20: The Size of These Three Heavenly Bodies, Sun, Moon, and Earth, and a Comparison of their 
Sizes 

Ch. 21: The Apparent Diameter and Parallaxes of the Sun 

Ch. 22: The Moon’s Varying Apparent Diameter and its Parallaxes 

Ch. 23: To What Extent Does the Earth’s Shadow Vary? 

Ch. 24: Tabular Presentation of the Individual Solar and Lunar Parallaxes in the Cirde which Passes 
through the Poles of the Horizon 
Table of Solar and Lunar Parallaxes 

Table of the Radii of the Sun, Moon, and [Earth’s] Shadow 
Ch. 25: Computing the Solar and Lunar Parallax 

Ch. 26: How the Parallaxes in Longitude and Latitude Are Separated from each other 

Ch. 27: Confirmation of the Assertions about the Lunar Parallaxes 

Ch. 28: The Mean Conjunctions and Oppositions of the Sun and Moon 
Table of the Conjunction and Opposition of the Sun and Moon 
Ch. 29: Investigating the True Conjunctions and Oppositions of the Sun and Moon 

Ch. 30: How Conjunctions and Oppositions of the Sun and Moon at which Edipses Occur May Be Dis¬ 
tinguished from Others. 

Ch. 31: The Size of a Solar and Lunar Eclipse . . 

Ch. 32: Predicting How Long an Eclipse Will Last 

BOOK FIVE 

Ch. 1: The Revolutions and Mean Motions [of the Planets] 

Saturn’s Parallactic Motion in Years and Periods of 60 Years 

Saturn’s Parallactic Motion in Days, Periods of 60 Days, and Fractions of Days 

Jupiter’s Parallactic Motion in Years and Periods of 60 Years 

Jupiter’s Parallactic Motion in Days, Periods of 60 Days, and Fractions of Days 

Mars’ Parallactic Motion in Years and Periods of 60 Years 

Mars’ Parallactic Motion in Days, Periods of 60 Days, and Fractions of Days 

Venus’ Parallactic Motion in Years and Periods of 60 Years 

Venus’ Parallactic Motion in Days, Periods of 60 Days, and Fractions of Days 

Mercury’s Parallactic Motion in Years and Periods of 60 Years 

Mercury’s Parallactic Motion in Days, Periods of 60 Days, and Fractions of Days 

Ch. 2: The Planets’ Uniform and Apparent Motion, as Explained by the Theory of the Ancients 
Ch. 3: General Explanation of the Apparent Nonuniformity Caused by the Earth’s Motion 
Ch. 4: In What Ways Do the Planets’ Own Motions Appear Nonuniform? 

Ch. 5: Derivations of Saturn’s Motion 

Ch. 6: Three Other More Recently Observed Oppositions of Saturn 
Ch. 7: Analysis of Saturn’s Motion 
Ch. 8: Determining Saturn’s Places 

Ch. 9: Saturn’s Parallaxes Arising from the Earth’s Annual Revolution, and Saturn’s Distance [from 
the Earth] 

Ch. 10: Expositions of Jupiter’s Motion 

Ch. 11: Three Other More Recently Observed Oppositions of Jupiter 




Ch. 12: Confirmation of Jupiter’s Uniform Motion 
Ch. 13: Determining the Places of Jupiter’s Motion 

Ch. 14: Determining Jupiter’s Parallaxes, and its Height in Relation to the Earth’s Orbital Revolution 
Ch. 15: The Planet Mars 

Ch. 16: Three Other Recendy Observed Oppositions of the Planet Mars 
Ch. 17: Confirmation of Mars’ Motion 
Ch. 18: Determining Mars’ Places 

Ch. 19: The Size of Mars’ Orbit in Units whereof the Earth’s Annual Orbit Is One Unit 
Ch. 20: The Planet Venus 

Ch. 21: The Ratio of the Earth’s and Venus’ Orbital Diameters. 

Ch. 22: Venus’ Twofold Motion . 

Ch. 23: Analyzing Venus’ Motion 
Ch. 24: The Places of Venus’ Anomaly 
Ch. 25: Mercury 

Ch. 26: The Place of Mercury’s Higher and Lower Apsides 

Ch. 27: The Size of Mercury’s Eccentricity, and the Ratio of its Circles 

Ch. 28: Why Mercury’s Elongations at about the Side of a Hexagon [= 60°, from the Perigee] Look 
Bigger than the Elongations Occurring at Perigee 

Ch. 29: Analysis of Mercury’s Mean Motion 

Ch. 30: More Recent Observations of Mercury’s Motions 

Ch. 31: Determining Mercury’s Places 

Ch. 32: An Alternative Account of Approach and Withdrawal 

Ch. 33: Tables of the Prosthaphaereses of the Five Planets . 

Table of Saturn’s Prosthaphaereses 
Table of Jupiter’s Prosthaphaereses 
Table of Mars’ Prosthaphaereses . 

Table of Venus’ Prosthaphaereses 
Table of Mercury’s Prosthaphaereses 

Ch. 34: How to Compute the Longitudinal Places of These Five Planets 

Ch. 35: The Stations and Retrogradations of the Five Planets 

Ch. 36: How the Times, Places, and Arcs of Retrogression Are Determined 

BOOK SIX 

Ch. 1: General Explanation of the Five Planets’ Deviation in Latitude 

Ch. 2: The Theory of the Circles by which These Planets Are Moved in Latitude 

Ch. 3: How Much Are the Orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars Inclined ? 

Ch. 4: General Explanation of Any Other Latitudes of These Three Planets 
Ch. 5: The Latitudes of Venus and Mercury 

Ch. 6: Venus’ and Mercury’s Second Latitudinal Digression, Depending on the Inclination of their 
Orbits at Apogee and Perigee 

Ch. 7: The Size of the Obliquation Angles of Both Planets, Venus and Mercury 



Ch. 8: The Third Kind of Latitude, which Is Called the Deviation, in Venus and Mercury 
Latitudes of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars 
Latitudes of Venus and Mercury 

Ch. 9: Computing the Latitudes of the Five Planets 


The Opinion on Johannes Werner's Motion of the 8 th Sphere 



FOREWORD BY ANDREAS OSIANDER 


To the Reader 

Concerning the Hypotheses of this Work 

There have already been widespread reports about the novel hypotheses of this work, 
which declares that the earth moves whereas the sun is at rest in the center of the universe. 
Hence certain scholars, I have no doubt, are deeply offended and believe that the liberal arts, 
which were established long ago on a sound basis, should not be thrown into confusion. But 
if these men are willing to examine the matter closely, they will find that the author of this 
work has done nothing blameworthy. For it is the duty of an astronomer to compose the history 
of the celestial motions through careful and expert study. Then he must conceive and devise 
the causes of these motions or hypotheses about them. Since he cannot in any way attain 
to the true causes, he will adopt whatever suppositions enable the motions to be computed 
correctly from the principles of geometry for the future as well as for the past. The present 
author has performed both these duties excellently. For these hypotheses need not be true 
nor even probable. On the contrary, if they provide a calculus consistent with the observa¬ 
tions, that alone is enough. Perhaps there is someone who is so ignorant of geometry and optics 
that he regards the epicycle of Venus as probable, or thinks that it is the reason why Venus 
sometimes precedes and sometimes follows the sun by forty degrees and even more. Is there 
anyone who is not aware that from this assumption it necessarily follows that the diameter 
of the planet at perigee should appear more than four times, and the body of the planet more 
than sixteen times, as great as at apogee? Yet this variation is refuted by the experience of 
every age. In this science there are some other no less important absurdities, which need not 
be set forth at the moment. For this art, it is quite clear, is completely and absolutely ignorant 
of the causes of the apparent nonuniform motions. And if any causes are devised by the 
imagination, as indeed very many are, they are not put forward to convince anyone that 
they are true, but merely to provide a reliable basis for computation. However, since different 
hypotheses are sometimes offered for one and the same motion (for example, eccentricity and 
an epicycle for the sun’s motion), the astronomer will take as his first choice that hypothesis 
which is the easiest to grasp. The philosopher will perhaps rather seek the semblance of the 
truth. But neither of them will understand or state anything certain, unless it has been di¬ 
vinely revealed to him. 

Therefore alongside the ancient hypotheses, which are no more probable, let us permit 
these new hypotheses also to become known, especially since they are admirable as well as 
simple and bring with them a huge treasure of very skillful observations. So far as hypotheses 
are concerned, let no one expect anything certain from astronomy, which cannot furnish 
it, lest he accept as the truth ideas conceived for another purpose, and depart from this study 
a greater fool than when he entered it. Farewell. 


XVI 



LETTER OF NICHOLAS SCHONBERG 


Nicholas Schonberg, Cardinal of Capua, 
to Nicholas Copernicus, Greetings. 

Some years ago word reached me concerning your proficiency, of which everybody con¬ 
stantly spoke. At that time I began to have a very high regard for you, and also to congratulate 
our contemporaries among whom you enjoyed such great prestige. For I had learned that you 
had not merely mastered the discoveries of the ancient astronomers uncommonly well but 
had also formulated a new cosmology. In it you maintain that the earth moves; that the sun 
occupies the lowest, and thus the central, place in the universe; that the eighth heaven re¬ 
mains perpetually motionless and fixed; and that, together with the elements included in its 
sphere, the moon, situated between the heavens of Mars and Venus, revolves around the sun 
in the period of a year. I have also learned that you have written an exposition of this whole 
system of astronomy, and have computed the planetary motions and set them down in tables, 
to the greatest admiration of all. Therefore with the utmost earnestness I entreat you, most 
learned sir, unless I inconvenience you, to communicate this discovery of yours to scholars, 
and at the earliest possible moment to send me your writings on the sphere of the universe 
together with the tables and whatever else you have that is relevant to this subject. Moreover, 
I have instructed Theodoric of Reden to have everything copied in your quarters at my ex¬ 
pense and dispatched to me. If you gratify my desire in this matter, you will see that you 
are dealing with a man who is zealous for your reputation and eager to do justice to so fine 
a talent. Farewell. 

Rome, 1 November 1536 


XVII 



DEDICATION 

TO HIS HOLINESS, POPE PAUL III 


PREFACE 

I can readily imagine. Holy Father, that as soon as some people hear that in 
s this volume, which I have written about the revolutions of the spheres of the uni¬ 
verse, I ascribe certain motions to the terrestrial globe, they will shout that I must 
be immediately repudiated together with this belief. For I am not so enamored 
of my own opinions that I disregard what others may think of them. I am aware 
that a philosopher’s ideas are not subject to the judgement of ordinary persons, 
xo because it is his endeavor to seek the truth in all things, to the extent permitted 
to human reason by God. Yet I hold that completely erroneous views should 
be shunned. Those who know that the consensus of many centuries has sanctioned 
the conception that the earth remains at rest in the middle of the heaven as its 
center would, I reflected, regard it as an insane pronouncement if I made the 
is opposite assertion that the earth moves. Therefore I debated with myself for 
a long time whether to publish the volume which I wrote to prove the earth’s 
motion or rather to follow the example of the Pythagoreans and certain others, 
who used to transmit philosophy’s secrets only to kinsmen and friends, not 
in writing but by word of mouth, as is shown by Lysis’ letter to Hipparchus. And 
20 they did so, it seems to me, not, as some suppose, because they were in some 
way jealous about their teachings, which would be spread around; on the contrary, 
they wanted the very beautiful thoughts attained by great men of deep devotion 
not to be ridiculed by those who are reluctant to exert themselves vigorously 
in any literary pursuit unless it is lucrative; or if they are stimulated to the non- 
25 acquisitive study of philosophy by the exhortation and example of others, yet 
because of their dullness of mind they play the same part among philosophers 
as drones among bees. When I weighed these considerations, the scorn which I had 
reason to fear on account of the novelty and unconventionality of my opinion 
almost induced me to abandon completely the work which I had undertaken. 
30 But while I hesitated for a long time and even resisted, my friends drew me 
back. Foremost among them was the cardinal of Capua, Nicholas Schonberg, 
renowned in every field of learning. Next to him was a man who loves, me dearly, 
Tiedemann Giese, bishop of Chelmno, a close student of sacred letters as well 
as of all good literature. For he repeatedly encouraged me and, sometimes 
85 adding reproaches, urgently requested me to publish this volume and finally 
permit it to appear after being buried among my papers and lying concealed not 
merely until the ninth year but by now the fourth period of nine years. The 
same conduct was recommended to me by not a few other very eminent scholars. 
They exhorted me no longer to refuse, on account of the fear which I felt, to make 
40 my work available for the general use of students of astronomy. The crazier my 
doctrine of the earth’s motion now appeared to most people, the argument ran, 
so much the more admiration and thanks would it gain after they saw the 
publication of my writings dispel the fog of absurdity by most luminous proofs. 
Influenced therefore by these persuasive men and by this hope, in the end I 
46 allowed my friends to bring out an edition of the volume, as they had long be¬ 
sought me to do. 


3 



REVOLUTIONS 


However, Your Holiness will perhaps not be greatly surprised that I have dared 
to publish my studies after devoting so much effort to working them out that I did 
not hesitate to put down my thoughts about the earth’s motion in written form 
too. But you are rather waiting to hear from me how it occurred to me to venture 
to conceive any motion of the earth, against the traditional opinion of astronomers 5 
and almost against common sense. I have accordingly no desire to conceal 
from Your Holiness that I was impelled to consider a different system of deducing 
the motions of the universe’s spheres for no other reason than the realization 
that astronomers do not agree among themselves in their investigations 
of this subject. For, in the first place, they are so uncertain about the motion of 10 
the sun and moon that they cannot establish and observe a constant length even 
for the tropical year. Secondly, in determining the motions not only of these 
bodies but also of the other five planets, they do not use the same principles, 
assumptions, and explanations of the apparent revolutions and motions. For while 
some employ only homocentrics, others utilize eccentrics and epicycles, and yet 15 
they do not quite reach their goal. For although those who put their faith in homo¬ 
centrics showed that some nonuniform motions could be compounded in this 
way, nevertheless by this means they were unable to obtain any incontrovertible 
result in absolute agreement with the phenomena. On the other hand, those who 
devised the eccentrics seem thereby in large measure to have solved the problem 20 
of the apparent motions with appropriate calculations. But meanwhile they intro¬ 
duced a good many ideas which apparently contradict the first principles of uniform 
motion. Nor could they elicit or deduce from the eccentrics the principal considera¬ 
tion, that is, the structure of the universe and the true symmetry of its parts. 

On the contrary, their experience was just like some one taking from various 25 
places hands, feet, a head, and other pieces, very well depicted, it may be, but 
not for the representation of a single person; since these fragments would not 
belong to one another at all, a monster rather than a man would be put together 
from them. Hence in the process of demonstration or “method”, as it is called, 
those who employed eccentrics are found either to have omitted something essen- 30 
tial or to have admitted something extraneous and wholly irrelevant. This would 
not have happened to them, had they followed sound principles. For if the hy¬ 
potheses assumed by them were not false, everything which follows from their 
hypotheses would be confirmed beyond any doubt. Even though what I am 
now saying may be obscure, it will nevertheless become clearer in the proper s5 
place. 

For a long time, then, I reflected on this confusion in the astronomical tradi¬ 
tions concerning the derivation of the motions of the universe’s spheres. I began 
to be annoyed that the movements of the world machine, created for our sake 
by the best and most systematic Artisan of all, were not understood with greater 40 
certainty by the philosophers, who otherwise examined so precisely the most 
insignificant trifles of this world. For this reason I undertook the task of rereading 
the works of all the philosophers which I could obtain to learn whether anyone 
had ever proposed other motions of the universe’s spheres than those expounded 
by the teachers of astronomy in the schools. And in fact first I found in Cicero that 45 
Hicetas supposed the earth to move. Later I also discovered in Plutarch that 
certain others were of this opinion. I have decided to set his words down here, 
so that they may be available to everybody: 


4 



PREFACE 


Some think that the earth remains at rest. But Philolaus the Pythagorean 
believes that, like the sun and moon, it revolves around the fire in an 
oblique circle. Heraclides of Pontus and Ecphantus the Pythagorean make 
the earth move, not in a progressive motion, but like a wheel in a rotation 
5 from west to east about its own center. 

Therefore, having obtained the opportunity from these sources, I too began 
to consider the mobility of the earth. And even though the idea seemed absurd, 
nevertheless I knew that others before me had been granted the freedom to imagine 
any circles whatever for the purpose of explaining the heavenly phenomena. 
10 Hence I thought that I too would be readily permitted to ascertain whether 
explanations sounder than those of my predecessors could be found for the revolu¬ 
tion of the celestial spheres on the assumption of some motion of the earth. 

Having thus assumed the motions which I ascribe to the earth later on in 
the volume, by long and intense study I finally found that if the motions of the 
ib other planets are correlated with the orbiting of the earth, and are computed for 
the revolution of each planet, not only do their phenomena follow therefrom but 
also the order and size of all the planets and spheres, and heaven itself is so linked 
together that in no portion of it can anything be shifted without disrupting the 
remaining parts and the universe as a whole. Accordingly in the arrangement of 
so the volume too I have adopted the following order. In the first book I set forth 
the entire distribution of the spheres together with the motions which I attribute 
to the earth, so that this book contains, as it were, the general structure of the 
universe. Then in the remaining books I correlate the motions of the other planets 
and of all the spheres with the movement of the earth so that I may thereby 
25 determine to what extent the motions and appearances of the other planets and 
spheres can be saved if they are correlated with the earth’s motions. I have no 
doubt that acute and learned astronomers will agree with me if, as this discipline 
especially requires, they are willing to examine and consider, not superficially 
but thoroughly, what I adduce in this volume in proof of these matters. However, 
30 in order that the educated and uneducated alike may see that I do not run away 
from the judgement of anybody at all, I have preferred dedicating my studies to 
Your Holiness rather than to anyone else. For even in this very remote comer of 
the earth where I live you are considered the highest authority by virtue of the 
loftiness of your office and your love for all literature and astronomy too. Hence 
35 by your prestige and judgement you can easily suppress calumnious attacks 
although, as the proverb has it, there is no remedy for a backbite. 

Perhaps there will be babblers who claim to be judges of astronomy although 
completely ignorant of the subject and, badly distorting some passage of Scripture 
to their purpose, will dare to find fault with my undertaking and censure it. 
40 I disregard them even to the extent of despising their criticism as unfounded. 
For it is not unknown that Lactantius, otherwise an illustrious writer but hardly 
an astronomer, speaks quite childishly about the earth’s shape, when he mocks 
those who declared that the earth has the form of a globe. Hence scholars need 
not be surprised if any such persons will likewise ridicule me. Astronomy is 
45 written for astronomers. To them my work too will seem, unless I am mistaken, 
to make some contribution also to the Church, at the head of which Your Holiness 
now stands. For not so long ago under Leo X the Lateran Council considered 


5 



REVOLUTIONS 


the problem of reforming the ecclesiastical calendar. The issue remained undecided 
then only because the lengths of the year and month and the motions of the sun 
and moon were regarded as not yet adequately measured. From that time on, at 
the suggestion of that most distinguished man, Paul, bishop of Fossombrone, 
who was then in charge of this matter, I have directed my attention to a more 5 
precise study of these topics. But what I have accomplished in this regard, I leave 
to the judgement of Your Holiness in particular and of all other learned astrono¬ 
mers. And lest I appear to Your Holiness to promise more about the usefulness 
of this volume than I can fulfill, I now turn to the work itself. 


6 



GEORG JOACHIM DE PORRIS RHETICUS 
INTRODUCTION 

"Free in mind must be he who desires to have understanding. 

# # Alcinous 

T O THE ILLUSTRIOUS JOHN SCHONER, as to 

his own revered father, G. Joachim Rheticus sends his 
greetings. 

On May 14th I wrote you a letter from Posen in which I 
informed you that I had undertaken a journey to Prussia, 1 and 
I promised to declare, as soon as I could, whether the actuality 
answered to report and to my own expectation. However, I 
have been able to devote scarcely 2 ten weeks to mastering the 
astronomical work of the learned man to whom I have re¬ 
paired $ for I had a slight illness and, on the honorable invita¬ 
tion of the Most Reverend Tiedemann Giese, bishop of Kulm, 
I went with my teacher to Lobau and there rested from my 
studies for several weeks.® Nevertheless, to fulfill my promises 
at last and gratify your desires, I shall set forth, as briefly and 
clearly as I can, the opinions of my teacher on the topics which 
I have studied. 

First of all I wish you to be convinced, most learned Schoner, 
that this man whose work I am now treating is in every field 
of knowledge and in mastery of astronomy not inferior to 
Regiomontanus. I rather compare him with Ptolemy, not be¬ 
cause I consider Regiomontanus inferior to Ptolemy, but because 
my teacher shares with Ptolemy the good fortune of complet¬ 
ing, with the aid of divine kindness, the reconstruction of 
astronomy which he began, while Regiomontanus—alas, cruel 
fate—departed this life before he had time to erect his columns. 

My teacher has written a work of six books in which, in 
imitation of Ptolemy, he has embraced the whole of astronomy, 

1 The basic study for the biography of Rheticus will be found in Vurteljahrt- 
schrift fur Geschtchie und Landeskunde Vorarlbergs , neue Folge, 11(1918), 5-46. 
For subsequent work consult Forschungen zur Geschichte Vorarlbergs und Liech- 
Umtiinty 1(1920), 128-30* Schriften des V {feints fur Geschichte des Bodemees y 
LV(i9i7) t t22-3 7j and Martin Bilgeri, Das Vorarlberger Schrifttum (Vienna, 
1936), pp. 64-70. 

‘Reading mx (Th 447.$) instead of vhi (PII, 195.7). 

1 In the light of this remark, we must regard as incorrect Prowess statement 
(PI*, 395) that the Narratio fr'tma was written at Lobau. Prowe himself declares 
that Rheticus’s trip to Ldhau kept him from his studies (PI** 41*). 



stating and proving individual propositions mathematically 
and by the geometrical method. 

The first book contains the general description of the uni¬ 
verse and the foundations by which he undertakes to save the 
appearances and the observations of all ages. He adds as much 
of the doctrine of sines and plane and spherical triangles as 
h e deemed necessary to the work. 

The second book contains the doctrine of the first motion 4 
and the statements about the fixed stars which he thought he 
should make in that place. 

The third book treats of the motion of the sun. And because 
experience has taught him that the length of the year meas¬ 
ured by the equinoxes depends, in part, on the motion of the 
fixed stars, he undertakes in the first portion of this book to 
ermine by right reason and with truly divine ingenuity the 
motions of the fixed stars and the mutations of the solstitial 
and equinoctial points. 

The fourth book treats of the motion of the moon and 
eclipses; the fifth, the motions of the remaining planets; the 
sixth, latitudes. 

I have mastered the first three books, grasped the general 
idea of the fourth, and begun to conceive the hypotheses of 
the rest. So far as the first two books are concerned, I have 
thought it unnecessary to write anything to you, partly because 
I have a special plan,® partly because my teacher’s doctrine of 
the first motion does not differ from the common and received 
opinion,® save that he has so constructed anew the tables of 
declinations, right ascensions, ascensional differences, and the 
other tables belonging to this branch of the science that they 
can be brought by the method of proportional parts into agree- 

4 The apparent daily rotation of the heavensj see p„ 4j, above. 

* Rheticus doubtless refers to his plan for writing 1 a “Second Account.” For 
an explanation why this “Second Account” was never written see p. ioy above. 

e But in the common and received opinion the first motion was real > in Coper¬ 
nicus’s system* apparent. Rheticus ignores the distinction, for it involves the 
motion of the earth* Throughout the first third of this Account he withholds all 
reference to Copernicus’s principal alteration of astronomical theory, the shift 
from a stationary to a moving earth, and from geocentrism to heliocentrism 
(cf. below, pp. I 35 - 3 & n. llj). 



ment with the observations of all ages. Therefore I shall set 
forth clearly to you, God willing, the subjects treated in the 
third book together with the hypotheses of all the remaining 
motions, so far as at present with my meager mental attain¬ 
ments I have been able to understand them. 

The Motions of the Fixed Stars 

My teacher made observations with the utmost care at 
Bologna, where he was not so much the pupil as the assistant 
and witness of observations of the learned Dominicus Maria} 7 
at Rome, where, about the year 1500, being twenty-seven 
years of age more or less, he lectured on mathematics before a 
large audience of students and a throng of great men and 
experts in this branch of knowledge} then here in Frauenburg, 8 
when he had leisure for his studies. From his observations of 
the fixed stars he selected the one which he made of Spica 
Virginis in 1525. He determined its distance from the autum¬ 
nal point 9 as about I7°2l', and its declination as not less than 
8°4-0' south of the equator. Then comparing all the observa¬ 
tions of previous writers with his own, he found that a revolu¬ 
tion of the anomaly or of the circle of inequality had been 
completed and that the second revolution extends from Tim- 
ocharis to our own time. Thereby he geometrically determined 
the mean motion of the fixed stars and the equations of their 
unequal motion. 

Timocharis’s observation of Spica in the 36th year 10 of the 
first Callippic cycle, when compared with his observation in 
the 48th year of the same cycle, shows us that the stars 
moved i° in 72 years in that era. 11 From Hipparchus to 

* Concerning whom Lino Sighinolfi has assembled some material, chiefly bio¬ 
graphical, in his article “Domenico Maria Novara e Nicolo Copernico” ( Studi 
e memorit fir la storta dill’ unbsersita it Bologna , V [1920], 211.35). 

*Cf. Tb 193, note to line 9. 

"The first point of Libra (cf. Th 161.24-25). 

“ 295/4B. c. ACallippic cycle contained 76years (HTI, 25.16-17; Th 159,11). 
See F. K. Ginzel, Hanibach ier mathematischen uni technischen Chronologie 
(Leipzig, 1906-14), II, 409-19; and J. K. Fotheringham in Monthly Notices 
of the Royal Astronomical Society, LXXXIV(i924), 387-92. 

“HII, 28.11-30.17. 



Menelaus they regularly completed i° in 100 years. 12 My 
teacher therefore concluded that Timocharis’s observations fell 
in the last quadrant of the circle of inequality, 13 in which the 
motion appears mean-diminishing, and that between Hip¬ 
parchus and Menelaus the motion of inequality was slowest. 
A comparison of Menelaus’s observations with Ptolemy’s shows 
that the stars then moved i° in 86 14 years. Therefore Ptolemy’s 

** Ptolemy accepts this estimate as the approximate value for the entire period 
from Hipparchus to himself (HII, 23.11-16); and he regards the rate of pre¬ 
cession as constant (HII, 34.11-17). 

Copernicus held that the rate of precession varied. To represent the variation 
he constructs a “circle of inequality,” (Fig. 26) in which a is the point of slowest 



4 (jncan) 


Roure 26 


motion; c a the point of swiftest motion; b and d , the poinis of mean motion. The 
first quadrant ab is the quadrant of slow-increasing motion; the second quadrant 
be, of mean-increasing motion; the third quadrant cd, swift-diminishing; the 
fourth quadrant da, mean-diminishing. See Th 169.25“!70.4, and p. 100, above. 

14 This should be 96, as an examination of Menzzer’s chart (p. 2 1 of his notes) 
shows. Menelaus determined the longitudinal distance of Spica from the summer 
solstice as 86* 15', and of P Scorpii from the autumnal equinox as 35° 55' (HII, 
30.18-31.16, 33.3-24; Th 159.24-29)- For Ptolemy, 40 years later, the corre¬ 
sponding values were 86* 40' and 36* 20' (HII, 103.16, 109.18; Th 159.29— 
160.4; LXXXVI in Th 160.1 is wrong, as can be seen in the Letter agaimi 
Werner [cf. p. 104, above} and in the three editions of the Syntaxh available 
to Copernicus: 1515, p. 83r; 1528, p. 78r; 1538, p. 187; cf. Th 161.28-31). 
For both stars the motion is 25' in 40 years, or 1* in 96 years. It is more likely 
that an X has fallen out of LXXXXVI than that Rheticus made an error in his 
computations. 



observations were made when the motion of anomaly was in 
the first quadrant, and the stars then moved with a slow- 
increasing 15 or -augmenting motion. Further, from Ptolemy to 
Albategnius, 66 years correspond to I*; 18 a comparison of our 
observations with those of Albategnius shows that the stars 
in their unequal motion again completed i° in 70 years; 17 and 
a comparison of the observation which I mentioned above with 
the others which my teacher made in Italy shows that the 
fixed stars in their unequal motion are once more passing 
through i° in 100 years. Therefore it is clearer than sunlight 
that between Ptolemy and Albategnius the motion of inequality 
passed the first boundary of mean motion and the entire quad¬ 
rant of mean-increasing motion, and about the time of Albateg¬ 
nius was in the region of swiftest motion. Between Albategnius 
and ourselves the third quadrant of unequal motion was com¬ 
pleted (during this time the stars moved with a swift-dimin¬ 
ishing motion) and the other boundary of mean motion was 
passed. In our era the anomaly has again entered the fourth 
quadrant of mean-diminishing motion, and hence the unequal 
motion is once more approaching the point of slowest motion. 

To reduce these calculations to a definite system in which 
they would agree with all the observations, my teacher com¬ 
puted that the unequal motion is completed in 1,717 Egyptian 
years, 1 * the maximum correction is about 70', the mean motion 

“ addito (Th 449.3) has dropped out of Frowe’s text (PII, *98.14). 

^Nallino, AUBatt&nl i I, 124.,3*-33, 12$.2-4. A translation of Albategnius*s 
work into Latin was included in a book printed at Nuremberg in 1537 and was 
presumably available to Copernicus and Rheticus, as may be inferred from the 
latter*s remark about Albategnius on p. 1x4* below. The volume opened with 
a treatise entitled in some copies Rudimenta astronomica Alfragam , and in others, 
Brevis ac feruttlis comfilatio Alfragani. I have been unable to consult this trans¬ 
lation) but the relevant passage was excerpted by Menzrer (n. Si). Rheticus 
ignores the distinction made by Copernicus (Th 161,7-11) that the rate of pre¬ 
cession was 1 0 in 66 years from Menelaus to Albategnius, and 1* in 65 years 
from Ptolemy to Albategnius. The distinction is based on the observations dted 
in Th 159.24—160.10. 

11f Copernicus states this rate as i* in 71 years (Th 162.12-14) > calculation 
from his data gives the fractional result in 70K years. 

* The changing rate o f precession requires 1717 years to pass through the 
four quadrants of the circle of inequality. 



of the stars in an Egyptian year is about 50", 19 and the com¬ 
plete revolution of the mean motion will take 25,816 Egyptian 
20 

years. 

General Consideration of the Tropical Year 

This theory of the motions of the fixed stars is supported 
by the length of the year reckoned from the equinoctial points. 
It is quite clear why from Hipparchus 21 to Ptolemy there was 
a deficiency of of a day; 22 from Ptolemy to Albategnius, 
of about 7 days; 23 and from Albategnius to the observations 
which my teacher made in 1515, of about 5 days. 24 These dis¬ 
crepancies are not at all caused by a defect in the instruments, 
as was heretofore believed, but occur according to a definite 
and completely self-consistent law. Hence equality of motion 
must be measured, not by the equinoxes, but by the fixed stars, 
as observations of the motions not merely of the sun and 
moon but of the other planets as well testify with a remarkable 
unanimity of all ages. 

**The mean rate of precession is about $o" a year, or x* in about 72 years; 
and the greatest difference between the mean equinox and the true equinox is 
about 70' (Th 179.4-7). 

(a) The slowest rate of precession is 1® in 100 years, or 3 6 * a year. The 
difference between the slowest rate and the mean rate is 14." a year, and in 300 
years (the three centuries before Menelaus) the maximum difference of 70' 
between mean and true equinox is attained. 

(b) The swiftest rate is 1® in 66 years, or slightly more than 54^" a year. 
The difference between the swiftest rate and the mean rate is about 4^" a year, 
and in 743 years (between Ptolemy and Albategnius) about % of the maximum 
difference of 70' is attained $ the remaining % accumulates because the rate of 
precession during the 620 years between Albategnius and Copernicus’s observations 
in Italy is slightly more rapid than the mean rate. 

Copernicus’s estimate of the mean precession, about 50* a year, agrees quite 
closely with the determination accepted at present. His belief in the cyclic varia¬ 
tion of the rate of precession is of course erroneous. 

50 The complete passage of the stars around the celestial sphere requires 25,Si 6 
years. 

^Michael Mastlin, editor of the fourth (1596) and fifth (1621) editions 
of the Narratto frima, correctly substituted “Hipparchus” for the older reading 
“Timocharis.” Unfortunately the incorrect reading was revived in Th 449.24-25. 

“HI, 203.22—204.1 S. The tropical year (t) is less than 365K days; the 
“deficiency” from year x to year y is (y — x) (365% days — t), 

“ Nallino, Al~Bat&ni> I, 42.10-14. *Th 193.20-21. 



It is the accepted opinion that because from Timocharis to 
Ptolemy the stars moved very slowly the year was less than 
365 V 4 days by only Ho* of a dayj 25 and from Ptolemy to Alba- 
tegnius, because the stars moved rapidly, by Hoe of a day. 28 
If the observations of our age are compared with those of 
Albategnius, it is clear that the difference is H28 of a day. 37 
Therefore a greater length of the tropical year apparently 
corresponds to a slow motion of the stars, a lesser length to a 
swift motion, and the lengthening of the year to a diminishing 
velocity j so that if the length of the tropical year in our era 
is accurately determined, it will again be almost the same as 
Ptolemy’s value. Hence we must say that the equinoctial points, 
like the nodes of the moon, 28 move in precedence, and not that 
the stars move in consequence. 2 ® 

We must accordingly imagine a mean equinox moving in 
precedence from the first star of Aries in the sphere of the 
fixed stars, and displacing them by its uniform motion. The 
true equinox deviates to either side of this mean equinox in an 
unequal and regular motionj but the radius of the distance 
between the true equinox and the mean equinox does not much 
exceed 70'. Thus a definite law governing the length of the 
tropical year has existed in all ages, and it can be ascertained 
today. It agrees very closely, moreover, and almost to the 
minute with the observations which all scholars have made of 
the fixed stars. 

To offer you some taste of this matter, most learned Schoner, 
I have computed for you the true precession of the equinoxes at 
certain times of observation. 


“Hit 205.9-14, 207*24-2«8.I. 

** AlbategmWs estimate of the length of the tropical year was 365^i4 m 2<>* 
(NalUno, of . cit. y I, 42,17), The difference between this value and 365% days 
(“ 365^15 m ) is 34® or 3 $6ftOO of a day. Albategnius expresses this difference as 

3 % 

360 

Copernicus writes the more accurate fraction (Th 193.2-3). Hence I have fol¬ 
lowed Mastlin in changing our text from to Hoo* 

27 Th 193.20-21, 194.4-5, 

* See p. 73, above. 

* Copernicus interprets precession as a motion of the equator. 


(e cit.y I, 127.19-30). It is much closer to -Jios than to -Jio« of a day, and 



Egyptian Year True Precession Period 

o / 


293 

2 

24 

Timocharis 

127 

4 

3 

Hipparchus 

138 

6 

40 

Ptolemy 

880 

18 

10 

Albategnius 

1076 

19 

37 30 

Arzachel 

1525 

27 

21 

present 


Ptolemy’s precession subtracted from the positions of the 
stars as given by Ptolemy leaves a remainder equal to the dis¬ 
tance of the stars from the first star of Aries $ then the addition of 
Albategnius’s precession gives the true position of the observed 
star. A similar procedure is followed in all the other cases. The 
results thus obtained coincide to the utmost degree of exactness 
with the observations of all scholars, even where the minutes 
are noted, or are derived from recorded declinations or from 
the motion of the moon reduced to greater precision, as a com¬ 
parison of our observations with those of the ancients shows us. 
For when the minutes are neglected, as you see, at least a part 
of a degree is cut off, 81 / 4 C or or Yt° } etc. However, these 
results do not agree with the motions of the planetary apsides, 
and therefore an independent motion had to be assigned to 
them, as will be clear from solar theory. 32 

Realizing that equality of motion must be measured by the 
fixed stars, my teacher carefully investigated the sidereal year. 
He finds that it is 365 days, 15 minutes, and about 24. seconds 83 
and that it has always been of this length from the time of 

“Prowe states (PII, 300 n) that the first edition read incorrectly 12° 37', 
and that the change to 19° 37' was made by Mastlin. But the Basel edition of 
1566 gave 19° 37' (p. i9$r) $ and that number is suspect, for it would make the 
rate of precession (tf) between Albategnius and Arzaehel too slow 27' in 
196 years* or 1* in 135 years) $ and (£) between Arzachel and Copernicus too 
fast (7 0 44' in 449 years, or j° in 58 years)* To be consistent with the theory 
and the rest of the table, the true precession for Arzachel must be about 20* 57'. 

“Reading recidant (Th 450*28) instead of recitant (PII, 301.9), 

“See pp. 119-21, below. 

**The minute of the text is a minutum diet = %o of a day = 24“ j in like 
manner* the second = %t of a minutum diet =e 24*. The length of the sidereal 
year, then, is given here as about 3<$5 d 6 h 9 m 36*. In De rev. it is given as 
3 65 d 6 h 9 m 40* j cf, p. 67, above. 



the earliest observations. For the fact that the Babylonians, 
according to Albategnius, assign 3 seconds more, 34 and Th&bit 
1 second less, 35 can be safely ascribed to either the instruments 
and observations, which, as you know, cannot have been entirely 
accurate, or to the inequality in the motion of the sun, or even 
to the circumstance that the ancients, having no sure theory of 
eclipses, neglected to take account of the solar parallax in their 
observations. In any case, this discrepancy over the entire 
period from the Babylonians to ourselves cannot be compared 
with the discrepancy of 22 seconds between Ptolemy and Alba¬ 
tegnius. 3 * That there necessarily was a deficiency of 19 /zt of a 
day from Hipparchus to Ptolemy, and from Ptolemy to Alba¬ 
tegnius of about 7 days, I have deduced, not without the 
greatest pleasure, most learned Schoner, from the foregoing 
theory of the motions of the stars and from my teacher’s 
treatment of the motion of the sun, as you will see a little 
further on. 3T 

The Change in the Obliquity of the Ecliptic 

My teacher found that the cycle of maximum obliquity 
stands in the following relation: while the unequal motion of 
the fixed stars is once completed, half of the change in the 
obliquity occurs. He therefore concluded that the entire period 
of the change in the obliquity is 3,4.34. Egyptian years. 3 * 

s *The Latin translation of Albategnius gave 3i5% d + % 3 i d — 3 65 <i i5 m 2 7% tJ 
(see above, p. 67, n, 25). However, the Arabic MS on which Nallino based 
his text reads (I, 40-2S-29) 365/4* 1 + — 365^15 m 30*, 

45 Rheticus and Copernicus (Th 194.8-12) probably drew this information 
about Thabit from the Epitome, Bk. Ill, Prop. 2 (see above, p. 65, n. 19)* 
which gave Thibit’s value as 365*6 lk 9 m i 2* (— 3*5^15 m *3®). Proof that Rheticus 
used the Epitome :s afforded by two references to it (p. 124, below) and by a 
quotation from it (pp> 133-34, below). For Thabit see George Sarton, Introduc¬ 
tion to the History of Science (Baltimore, 1927^ ), I, 599-600. 

88 Rheticus is referring to the difference in their determinations of the 
length of the tropical year: Ptolemy 365 d i4 ra 48 < * (HI, 208.11-12) 

Albategnius 365 < *i4 m 26’ (See above, p. 115, n. 26) 

22 s 

37 Pages 1*8-30, below. 

48 It was stated above (p. 113) that the period of the unequal motion of the 
fixed stars is 1,717 Egyptian years. 



In the time of Timocharis, Aristarchus, and Ptolemy the 
change in the obliquity was very slow, so that they believed the 
maximum arc of declination to be invariable, always having the 
value of 11 /b3 of a great circle . 38 After them, Albategnius an¬ 
nounced the obliquity for his own era as about 23*35'’ 
Arzachel, about 190 years after him, 23°34'; and Prophatius 
Judaeus, 230 years later, 23°32'. In our own era it appears 
not greater than 23 ° 28 / 4 ‘\ 41 Accordingly it is clear that in the 
400 years before Ptolemy the change in the obliquity was very 
slow. But from Ptolemy to Albategnius, a period of about 750 
years, the obliquity decreased by 17", and from Albategnius to 
ourselves, a period of 650 years, by only 7'. Hence it follows 
that the variation of the obliquity, like the deviation of the 
planets from the ecliptic, 42 is governed by a motion in libration 
or motion along a straight line. It is a property of such motion 
that in the middle the motion is quickest, and slowest at the 
ends. Then about the time of Albategnius the pole of the equa¬ 
tor or of the ecliptic was approximately in the middle of this 
motion in libration, while at present it is near the second limit 
of slowest motion, where the poles approach each other most 
closely. But I stated above 43 that the motions of the fixed stars 
and the variation in the length of the tropical year are saved 
by the motion of the equator. Now the poles of the equator 

" 1%3 X 360° — 47” 42' 40", which makes the obliquity 23 0 5x’ 20" (HI, 
68.4-6, 81.50). 

“Nallino, Al-Battdnl , I, 12.20-225 Menzzer, n. 87 . 

11 Th 162.24-25, 171.31-172.45 cf. above, p. 64, n. 15. The foregoing state¬ 
ment about the history of the determinations of the obliquity is virtually identical 
with the scholion in Reinhold’s 1542 edition of Peurbach’s Theoricae nova* 
flanelarmn , fol. e8r-vj cf, Boncompagni, Bulletino Ji bib lio graft a e di storia 
idle science, XX(i 887), 594-95- Since the statement in our text is earlier than 
Reinhold’s, but Reinhold’s contains additional items, apparently they both drew 
from some common source. For Arzachel and Prophatius Judaeus see Sarton, 
Introduction , I, 758-59; II, 850-53. Copernicus believed that Prophatius obtained 
his value of 23“ 32' by a direct determination; but it was rather a calculation 
from Arzachel’s tables, according to Duhem (be Systeme du monde. III, 311). 
J. Millas i Vallicrosa has published Prophatius’s translation of Arzachel’s Safkea 
in Don Profeit Tibbon } Tractat de I'assafea d’Azarquiel (Barcelona, 1933). 

“ Cf. pp. 80-81, 84-85, above and pp. 180, 182-85, below. 

**See above, p. 115, n. 29. 



are the prolongations of the earth’s axis, and it is from them 
that the altitude of the pole is measured. Let me in passing 
call your attention, most learned Schoner, to the sort of hy¬ 
potheses or theories of motion that the observations require; 
but you will hear clearer evidence. 

Furthermore, my teacher assumes that the minimum ob¬ 
liquity will be 23°28', and the difference between the minimum 
and the maximum, 24'. On this basis he geometrically con¬ 
structed a table of 44 proportional minutes, from which the 
maximum obliquity of the ecliptic may be derived for all 
ages. Thus the proportional minutes were, in the time of Ptol¬ 
emy 58, Albategnius 18, Arzachel 15, and in our own time i. 48 
If, using these figures, we take proportional parts of the 24' 
difference between minimum and maximum, we shall have a 
sure rule for the change in the obliquity. 46 

The Eccentricity of the Sun and the Alotion of the Solar 

Apogee 

Since every difficulty in the motion of the sun is connected 
with the variable and unstable length of the year, I must first 
speak of the change in the apogee and eccentricity, in order 
that all the causes of the inequality of the year may be eriumer- 
ated. However, by the assumption of theories suitable to the 
purpose, my teacher shows that these causes are regular and 
certain. 

When Ptolemy declared that the apogee of the sun was 
fixed, 47 he preferred accepting the common opinion to trusting 
his own observations, which differed perhaps but little from the 
common opinion. But it can be definitely established from 

44 In his 1621 edition (p, <><)), Miistlin inserted "sixty 

41 Thus in the case of Arzachel, X 24' — 6 ' ~v 23® 28' = 23® 34’. For 
Albategnius, the editions of our text put the number of proportional minutes at 
24 j 1 have emended this obviously incorrect number to 1$, 

M For modern astronomy the change in the obliquity is a progressive diminution. 
The evidence available to Copernicus warranted only the Same conclusion (Th 
76,27-2$)- But he believed that after the obliquity had decreased to 23® 28', it 
would increase to 23° 52'* completing a cycle which would then be repeated* 

** HI, 232»i$-233.i6j cL n, 13, pp* 62-63* above* 



his own account that about the time of Hipparchus, that is, 200 
years before his own time, the eccentricity was 4.1 7 48 of the 
units of which 10,000 constitute the radius of the eccentric, 
and in his own time 414. 40 In the time of Arzachel (in whom 
Regiomontanus had great faith) the eccentricity was about 346, 
according to the maximum inequality. 50 But in our own time 
it is 323, since my teacher states that he finds the maximum 
inequality not greater than i*50 1 /2 / . 51 

Furthermore, carefully investigating the motions of the 
apsides of the sun and of the other planets, he learned, as you 
see from what has been said above, 52 that the apsides have 
independent motions in the sphere of the fixed stars. We are 
no more justified in attributing the apparent motions of the 
fixed stars and apsides, and the change in the obliquity to a 
single motion and a single cause than is one of your experts, 
who speak of the motions of the planets as self-moving, in 
attempting to produce the motions and appearances of each of 
the planets by one and the same device; or than anyone under¬ 
taking to defend the view that the foot, hand, and tongue exer¬ 
cise all their functions by means of the same muscle and by the 
same motive force. Therefore my teacher assigned two motions 
to the solar apogee, one mean and the other unequal, with 
which it moves in the eighth sphere. Moreover, since the true 
equinox moves with a regular unequal motion in the reverse 

** HI, 233,5-85 Hipparchus determined the eccentricity as approximately 
of the radius of the eccentric: X io,oo# ~ 41 6%. 

HI, 236.15-18. Ptolemy’s value for the eccentricity is slightly smaller than 
Hipparchus’s3 but since he believed the eccentricity to be constant (see above, p. 
61, n. 9), he ignored the small difference between the two values, which he 
denotes as approximate (I77i<?ra) in any case. Copernicus held that the eccen¬ 
tricity varies, and hence utilized the difference. Ptolemy’s value would be more 
accurately expressed as 415 than as 414 (Th 209. n. to line 12). 

90 For the method of computing the eccentricity from the maximum inequality, 
see above, p. 61, n. 11. The information that Arzachel had put the maximum 
inequality at 1* 59' 10" (cf. Th 212.15-16) was obtained by Copernicus and 
Pheticus from the Efitome, Book HI, Prop. 13. By the Table of Chords (Th 
44.18-19), this inequality would correspond to an eccentricity of 346 (cf. Th 
2 io.i-6). 

91 Th 211.16-195 212.165 224,8, 37. 

“ Page 116. 



order of the signs, the apogees of the sun and of the other 
planets, like the fixed stars, 58 are displaced eastward. Conse¬ 
quently, to harmonize the observations of all ages in a con¬ 
sistent law, my teacher was compelled to distinguish these three 
motions. 

To understand this analysis, assume a maximum eccentricity 
of 417 units, and a minimum of 321. Let the difference, 96, be 
the diameter of a small circle, on whose circumference the 
center of the eccentric moves from east to west. The distance 
from the center of the universe, then, to the center of the 
small circle will be 369 units. You will recall that 10,000 of 
these units constitute the radius of the eccentric. This is the 
device which my teacher derived from the three above-men¬ 
tioned eccentricities, in a manner closely resembling the surely 
divine discovery by which the uniform motions of the moon are 
determined from three lunar eclipses.* 4 

My teacher further established that the velocity with which 
the center of the eccentric revolves is the same as that with 
which each value of the changing obliquity recurs. This dis¬ 
covery is indeed worthy of the highest admiration, since it is 
achieved with such great and remarkable agreement. 

The eccentricity was greatest about 60 b.c., when the 
declination of the sun was also at its maximum. The eccentricity 
has decreased, moreover, in accordance with this single law, 
similar to no other. This and other* 5 like sports of nature often 
bring me great solace in the fluctuating vicissitudes of my for¬ 
tunes, and gently soothe my troubled mind. 

The Kingdoms of the World Change with the Motion of the 

Eccentric 

I shall add a prediction. We see that all kingdoms have had 
their beginnings when the center of the eccentric was at some 
special point on the small circle. Thus, when the eccentricity 
of the sun was at its maximum, the Roman government be- 

68 See p, ti5, above. 

“HI, 265.16-19, 368.3-12$ Th 236.15-17, 28-32* 246,3-8, 

“Reading alii (Th 453.7) instead of alibi (PII, 305.1)* 



came a monarchy - y as the eccentricity decreased, Rome too de¬ 
clined, as though aging, and then fell. When the eccentricity 
reached the boundary and quadrant of mean value, the 
Mohammedan faith was established} another great empire 
came into being and increased very rapidly, like the change in 
the eccentricity. A hundred years hence, when the eccentricity 
will be at its minimum, this empire too will complete its period. 
In our time it is at its pinnacle from which equally swiftly, God 
willing, it will fall with a mighty crash. We look forward to 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ when the center of the 
eccentric reaches the other boundary of mean value, for it was 
in that position at the creation of the world. This calculation 
does not differ much from the saying of Elijah, who prophesied 
under divine inspiration that the world would endure only 
6,000 years, 56 during which time nearly two revolutions are 
completed. Thus it appears that this small circle is in very 
truth the Wheel of Fortune, by whose turning the kingdoms 
of the world have their beginnings and vicissitudes. For in this 
manner are the most significant changes in the entire history of 
the world revealed, as though inscribed upon this circle. More¬ 
over, I shall soon, God willing, hear from your own lips how 
it may be inferred from important conjunctions and other 
learned prognostications, of what nature these empires were 
destined to be, whether governed by just or oppressive laws. 57 

"From Rheticus’s language it appears that he attributed the dire prophecy 
to the prophet Elijah. But the Old Testament contains no such prediction by 
Elijah; however* the late Prof. Ralph Marcus kindly called my attention to the 
following passage in the Babylonian Talmud: ‘‘The Tanna debe Eliyyahu teaches; 
The world is to exist six thousand years" (Babylonian Talmud\ English translation, 
ed. Isidore Epstein [London, 1935- ], Sanfedrin, Vol. II [= Nezikm, Vol. VI], 

P* * 57 )< 

Rheticus again displays his devotion to astrological superstition in the Preface 
to Werner*s De ftiangulis sfhaericis. He there declares: “The changes in empires 
depend upon celestial phenomena. Lands formerly distinguished for their culture, 
fertile soil, and possessions now lie barren and desolate, inhabited by barbarians, 
oppressed by tyranny . . ♦ The fiercest nations become civilized, unproductive 
land is brought under cultivation, from heaven are sent down new forms of earth, 
culture, and physical type of man. And we see that at intervals of about three 
hundred and fifty years there always occurs some significant change in the sub- 



Now while the center of the eccentric descends toward the 
center of the universe, the center of the small circle, it is clear, 
moves in the order of the signs about 25" each Egyptian year. 
And starting from the point of its greatest distance from the 
center of the universe, the center of the eccentric moves in 
precedence. Hence the inequality arising from the motion of 
the anomaly for any specified time is subtracted from the mean 
motion, until a semicircle is completed; but in the other semi¬ 
circle it is added, in order to obtain the true 58 motion of the 
apogee. Now the greatest difference between the true and mean 
apogee is deduced, in the proper geometrical manner, from 
the above-mentioned data as 7*24'; 59 the other differences are 
determined, in the customary way, from the position of the 
center of the eccentric on the small circle. The unequal motion 
is known, since three positions are given. With regard to the 
mean motion there is some doubt, since we do not have for 
these three positions the true place of the solar apogee on the 
ecliptic. The doubt arises from the disagreement between 

lunar worlds corresponding to some important alteration in the motion of the 
sphere of the fixed stars” ( Abh . j zur Gesch . d. math* Wiss., XXIV, i, fol. a2v). 
Later in the same Preface he asserts: “As far as the stars are concerned, I have 
no doubt that for the Turkish empire there is impending disaster, momentous, 
sudden, and unforeseen, since the influence of the fiery Triangle is approaching, 
and the strength of the watery Triangle is declining. Moreover, the anomaly 
of the sphere of the fixed stars is nearing its third boundary. Whenever it reaches 
any such boundary, there always occur the most significant changes in the world 
and in the empires, as history makes clear” (ibid.> fol. a5r). 

In a letter to Tycho Brahe, Christopher Rothmann censures Rheticus and 
asks: “How can the variation in the eccentricity of the sun produce a change 
of empires?” ( Tychoms Brahe of era, onwia> ed. Dreyer, VI, 160.28-29). I know 
of no evidence indicating that Copernicus shared the astrological views of Rheti¬ 
cus. Dreyer would perhaps not have advanced this suggestion (Planetary Systems^ 
p. 333)> had he been familiar with the aforementioned Preface by Rheticus. 

Schdner’s %fera mathetnatica appeared at Nuremberg in 1551, and again in 
1561. The fir$t paper is an introduction to judicial astrology ( Isagoge astrologia4 
tvdictariae) , and the second is a fearfully thorough essay in genethlialogy (t 
iudiciis nativitatum ). 

58 Reading verus (Th 453.35) instead of verms (PH, 306.3). 

89 In De rev . Copernicus puts the greatest difference at about 7%° (Th 223. 
5-8)5 while an earlier passage gives 7 0 28' (Th 221.3-5), Rheticus has chosen 
to follow Copernicus’s tables, which give 7 0 24' (Th 224.8-10). 



Albategnius and Arzachel, pointed out by Regiomontanus in 
the Epitome t Book III, Proposition 13. 6 * 

Albategnius is too free in his treatment of the inner secrets 
of astronomy, as can be seen in many passages. Did he commit 
this fault in his determination of the solar apogee? Let us grant 
that he had the correct time of the equinox. Nevertheless, it is 
impossible, as Ptolemy states,® 1 by means of instruments to 
determine with precision the times of the solstices. For a single 
minute of declination, which of course easily escapes the eye, 
may deceive us in this matter by about 4 0 , to which four days 
correspond. How was Albategnius able to determine the posi¬ 
tion of the solar apogee? If he used the method of intermediate 
positions on the ecliptic, explained by Regiomontanus in the 
Epkomey Book III, Proposition 14, he failed to employ a more 
trustworthy procedure. He is therefore himself to blame for 
going astray, since he selected eclipses occurring not near the 
apogee, but near the middle longitudes of the eccentric of the 
sun, where the solar apogee, even if mistakenly located 6° 
from its true position, could produce no noticeable error in 
eclipses. 

According to Regiomontanus, 62 Arzachel boasts that he made 
402 observations, and determined from them the position of 
the apogee. We grant that by this diligence he found the true 
eccentricity. But since it is not clear that he took into account 
lunar eclipses occurring near the apsides of the sun, it is ap¬ 
parent that we must no more accept his* 3 determination of 
the higher apse than that of Albategnius. 

80 ^Albategnius determined the eccentricity as 3* 4' 45”, and the arc EH as 
7® 43'* Arzachel, however . . „ found the same eccentricity as Albategnius, but 
his value for the arc BH was 12° 10', This is certainly surprising, since Arzachel 
lived after Albategnius.” The arc BH is the distance from the apogee to the 
summer solstice. 

81 HI, 194.21-197.11, 

** Eftlome, Book III, Prop. 13: “Araachel, 193 years after Albategnius, made 
402 observations [considerationes\ of the four points midway between the equi¬ 
noctial and solstitial points, and found BH to be 13 d 10'.” It should be noted, 
with reference to the equivalence of coitstderalio and obseroatio (see above, p. 
99, n- 2$), that in citing this passage Rheticus altered considerationes to obser * 
valtones* 

**Reading ei (Th 454.20) instead of eis (PII, 306,33)* 



Now you see what great effort my teacher had to put forth 
to determine the mean motion of the apogee. For nearly 40 
years in Italy and here in Frauenburg, he observed eclipses 
and the motion of the sun. He selected the observation by 
which he established that in c.E. 1515 the solar apogee was at 
6 Va° of Cancer. 64 Then examining all the eclipses in Ptolemy 
and comparing them with his own very careful observations, he 
concluded that the mean annual 65 motion of the apogee with 
reference to the fixed stars was about 2 5", 66 and with reference 
to the mean equinox about 1T5". 07 Through this result it is 
established, by applying the true precession to both the mean 
and the unequal motions, that the true 68 position of the apogee 

was in the time of Hipparchus 63° from the true equinox, 

Ptolemy 64/ 4 °, Albategnius 76%°, and Arzachel 82°, while 
in our time all the calculations agree with experience. These 

figures are surely more satisfactory than the Alfonsine, which 

put the solar apogee at 12 0 of Gemini in the time of Ptolemy, 

and at the beginning of Cancer in our time. 69 We are 2° closer 

than the Alfonsine Tables to the estimate of Arzachel. 70 Alba- 

tegnius’s computation of the position of the apogee exceeds the 

Alfonsine by i°, while we, for a good reason, fall short of his 

figure by 6°. 71 For my teacher cannot depart from Ptolemy 
and from his own observations, not only because he made and 

* Th 210,10-21 1.26. 

** Reading aimuunt (Th 454,26) instead of annum (PII, 307,?). 
w Th 221.32^222.3. 

** The mean annual motion of the equinox (mean precession) is about $0" 
(see pp. 113-14, above* cl Th 172.14-17), and it is retrograde (see p* 115, 
above). The motion of the apogee is direct (see p. 123, above). Hence, to obtain 
the motion of the apogee relative to the equinox, the two mean annual rates must 
be added: 25” + 50" = i / 15**, 

08 Heading verus (Th 454.29) instead of versus (PII, 307.12). 

**That is, at 72° for Ptolemy’s time, and at 90 0 for Copernicus’s time. 

70 As we saw above (notes 60 and 62 on p. 124), the Efitome stated that 
Arzachel found the apogee 12 0 10' irom the summer solstice — 77 0 50' from the 
equinox* cl Th 210.5-8. 

Albategnius located the apogee 7 0 43’ from the summer solstice = 82 0 ij 
from the equintx* cf. above, p. 124, n. 60 and Nallino, ALBatt&nZ, I, 44.29-33. 
The version of the Alfonsine Tables to which Rheticus refers evidently contained 
the following values: for Ptolemy’s time, 72Albategnius’s, Araachel’s, 

72° (or 84°?)* Copernicus’s, 90°. 



noted his own observations with his own eyes, but also because 
he knows that Ptolemy, working with the utmost care and 
making use of eclipses, accurately investigated the motions of 
the sun and the moon and established them correctly, so far as 
he could. We are compelled, nevertheless, to differ from him 
by about I °, 72 as the motion of the apogee has made clear to us. 
For Ptolemy regarded the apogee as fixed and therefore 
showed little care in his treatment of this topic. 

You have the opinion of my teacher regarding the motion 
of the sun. He has accordingly drawn up tables in which he 
collects for any specified time the true position of the solar 
apogee, the true eccentricity, the true inequalities, the uniform 
motions of the sun with reference to the fixed stars and to the 
mean equinoxes, and hence the true position of the sun cor¬ 
responding to the observations of all ages. Clearly the tables 
of Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Theon, Albategnius, and Arzachel, 
and the Alfonsine Tables, which are to some extent a composite 
of the others, are temporary only and can endure at most 200 
years, until, that is, the discrepancy in the length of the year, 
eccentricity, inequality, etc., becomes evident, a thing which oc¬ 
curs in the motions and appearances of the other planets for a 
similar definite reason. Not undeservedly, therefore, could the 
astronomy of my teacher be called perpetual, as the observa¬ 
tions of all ages testify, and the observations of posterity will 
doubtless confirm. But he calculates his motions and the posi¬ 
tions of the apsides from the first star of Aries, 7 * since equality 
of motion is measured by the fixed stars. Then by adding the 
true precession, he computes and determines the distance in 
each age of the true positions of the planets from the true 
equinox. 

If such an account of the celestial phenomena had existed a 

19 Hipparchus found the apogee *4-54* from the summer solstice (HI> 233.8*10) 
— 65%" from the equinox, and Ptolemy accepted his determination (MI, 237.6- 

it). 

79 y Arieds (Th 130-6-7)* not a, Arieris (Th 130.22) as Berry thought 
(A Short History of Astronomy, p. no n) j cf. above, p. 63, n, 135 Rudolf 
Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomic (Munich, 1877), p. 240j Dreyer, Planetary 
Systems, p, 330J Armitage, Copernicus, pp. 105-6. 



little before our time, Pico would have had no opportunity, in 
his eighth and ninth books, 74 of impugning not merely astrol¬ 
ogy but also astronomy. For we see daily how markedly 
common calculation departs from the truth. 

Special Consideration of the Length of the Tropical Year 

In improving the calendar most scholars enumerate various 
lengths of the year as computed by writers. But they do this 
in a confused way and come to no conclusion—surely a re¬ 
markable procedure for such great mathematicians. 

From what has been said above, however, most learned 
Schoner, you see the four causes of the unequal motion of the 
sun as measured by the equinoxes: the inequality of the pre¬ 
cession of the equinoxes, the inequality of the motion of the 
sun in the ecliptic, the decrease of the eccentricity, and last, 
the motion of the apogee for a twofold reason. By virtue of the 
same causes, the tropical year cannot be equal. 

We may readily pardon Ptolemy for measuring equality of 
motion by the equinoxes, 75 since he held that the fixed stars 
move in consequence, 7 * the position of the apogee is fixed, 77 and 
the eccentricity of the sun does not decrease. 78 How others 
would excuse themselves, I do not know. Let us even grant 
them that the stars and the solar apogee have the same motion 
in consequence j that therefore time measured by the true 
equinox in reality does not change} and that the entire in¬ 
equality (though to assert this in our time would be most 
absurd) is caused by the defect in the instruments, since the 
motion of the solar apogee produces only a slight change in the 
length of the year. Nevertheless, it will not therefore follow 
that the sun regularly returns to the true equinox always in 
equal times, as we say that the moon regularly increases its 
distance from the mean apogee of the epicycle, and returns to 
the same position in equal times—a statement quoted by the 

n Pico della Mirandola, DUfutationts achersus astrologos, Books VIII-IX (pp. 
457-82 in the Venice, 1498, edition of Pico’s Of era omnia). 

15 See above, p. 65, n. 18. 

w HI, 193.14-16; cf. above, p, 63, n. 13. 

,T See p. 119, above. 


™ See above, p. 1*0, n. 49. 



learned Marcus Beneventanus 79 from the Alfonsine Tables. 
For since we surely cannot deny that the eccentricity of the 
sun changes, how can they assert that the variation of the angle 
of anomaly from the mean motion does not alter the length of 
the tropical year? I heartily congratulate the state and all 
scholars, whom the work of my teacher will advantage, that we 
have a sure understanding of the inequality of the year. 

But that you may the more readily grasp all these ideas, 
most learned Schoner, I set them forth numerically before 
your eyes, in order that I may at length fulfill the pledge I 
made above. 80 

Let the sun be at the mean vernal equinoctial point, which 
was 3°29' west of the first star of Aries at the time of the 
observation of the autumnal equinox made by Hipparchus in 
147 b.c.* 1 Let the sun move from this point in the eighth 
sphere and return to it in a sidereal year (365 days, 15 min¬ 
utes, and about 24 seconds). 82 However, because the mean 
equinox in a sidereal year moves about 50” in the direction 
opposite to that of the sun, the result* 3 is that the sun reaches 
the new position of the mean vernal equinoctial point before it 
reaches the starting point, where the sun and the mean equinox 
had occupied the same position on the ecliptic. Therefore the 
year as measured by the mean equinox is shorter than the 
sidereal year, 84 and is computed to be, on the basis of our hy¬ 
potheses, 365 days, 14 minutes, and about 34 seconds. 85 Now if, 
for the year measured by the mean equinox, we inquire what 
the excess** in days and fractions of days amounted to in the 

w For a brief account of the life and work of Marco da Benevento see L. Birk- 
enmajer in Bulletin international de Vacademie des sciences de Cracovte y classe des 
sciences math* et natur tiles (1901), pp. 63-71 > and A. Birkenmajer in Philosofh - 
isches lahrbuchy XXXVI 11(1925), 33 6-44. 

80 Page 117, ^HI, i95.i7~20> 204,1-6, 

**See above, p. xi6, n. 33. 

** Reading fit (Th 456.17) instead of sk (PII, 310.11). 

w See p, 465 above. 

^Thatis, 365 <3 5 b 49 m 36*, Newcomb^ determination (1900) is 365^24219879 
= 365 <3 5 b 4$ m 46* (American EfheTneris for 1940, p. rx). 

**That is, the length of time by which the tropical year exceeds the Egyptian 
year of exactly 365 days. 



285® t years between Hipparchus and Ptolemy, we shall find 
that it was about 69° 9 m . 8 * Then there would be a deficiency of 
2 <i j£ we assumed that each y ear exceeded 365 days by 

% of a day. Let us therefore consider the remaining causes, 
until we find a deficiency of only of a day. 

At the time of Hipparchus’s observation, the true equinox 
was about 21' of the starry ecliptic west of the mean equinox, 
and the sun was then in the same position as the mean 
equinox. But in the time of Ptolemy the true equinox was about 
47 f east of the mean equinox. Therefore when the sun in the 
time of Ptolemy arrived at the point 2T west of the mean 
equinox, where the true equinoctial point had been in the time of 
Hipparchus, the equinox did not occur. Nor did it occur when 
the sun reached the mean equinox. But after it had moved 47' 
beyond the mean equinox, it came to the center of the earth, 
as Pliny says,* 0 that is, to the true equinoctial point. The sun, 
then, had to pass through an arc which it completed in 

its true motion in i d 8 m . Retaining this as a side, I ask how much 
the angle of anomaly decreased in this instance, and I find that 
about 1 minute of a day corresponds to it. Thus it is clear that 
to the excess computed for the year as measured by the mean 
equinox, there is an addition of i d 9 m . 92 Ptolemy correctly 
stated, 98 then, that between his own observation and that of 
Hipparchus, from true equinox to true equinox, there were 
285* 70 d l8 m . Therefore there was a deficiency of 57 minutes 
of a day, the result of subtracting i d 9™ from 2 d 6 E \ the defi¬ 
ciency which appeared above for the year as measured by the 
mean equinox. 

Let us now consider the deficiency of 7 days between 

** In the table on p, n6> above, the interval between Hipparchus and Ptolemy 
is 265 years> because Hipparchus is assigned to 127 B.c. The present passage uses 
an observation made by Hipparchus in 147 B.c. 

88 285 X i4 m 34 g 69 d n% m , 

“2S5 X W = 7i d i5 m 
“ 6 9 9 
2 d 6 m 

99 Natural History ii.i9(i7).8i. 

+ 47' 5= x° 8". **69 d 9 m + iV° — 70 d i8™ * HI, 204«ii-i6, 



Ptolemy and Albategnius. The situation is clear because the 
interval of time, 743 years, is greater, and hence all the causes 
will be more obvious. In the time of Ptolemy the mean equinox 
was about 7°28' west of the first star of Aries. 94 But since the 
mean equinox moved from that position, as has been explained, 
in the direction opposite to that of the sun, the result is that 
between Ptolemy and Albategnius there was an excess of about 
i8o d 14“ for the year as measured by the mean equinox. 9 * Then 
there will be a deficiency of 5 d 31™, if we compare the year as 
measured by the mean equinox with the result obtained by 
adding a day every four years. 90 Whereas in the time of 
Ptolemy the true equinox was 47' east of the mean equinox, in 
the time of Albategnius it was 22' west of the mean equinox. 
Therefore the sun reached the true equinox before it reached 
the mean equinox or the former position of the true equinox, sT 
in contrast with our previous example. Hence the time cor¬ 
responding to i°9' 98 will be subtracted from the excess for the 
year as measured by the mean equinox, and added to the defi¬ 
ciency of 5 d 31“. We must deal in the same way with the varia¬ 
tion in the angle of anomaly caused by the decrease in the 
eccentricity, to which 30 minutes of a day correspond. Then 
the change in the angle of anomaly, and the unequal motion 
of precession, combined with the other two causes of the un¬ 
equal motion of the sun, produce a further deficiency of l d 30 m 
to be subtracted from the excess for the year as measured by 
the mean equinox. Hence the true excess from the time of 
Ptolemy to the time of Albategnius’s observation becomes 
178 d 44“ * 9 But the addition of this further deficiency to 
5 d 3 l m shows that the total deficiency was 7 d r”. 1 ** Q.E.D. 

**For it had moved 3* 59' from its position at the time of Hipparchus: 
185 X $0" — 3 d 57W. 

“743 X i4 n3 34 8 — i8o 4 23 ,cx . 

** 743 X 34 d — 185^45“ 

— 180 14 

^Prowe states (PII> 312 n) that Mastlin substituted aequinocHum for the 
older reading- aequinoctialem* But b*th of Mast!in’s editions show acquinoctialem. 

as _ .* r f a f 

47 T 22 - I 9 * 

* l8o d i4 m — = 178^44“, ydjtri 



It was a difficult task to recover by this analysis the motions 
of the fixed stars and of the sun, and through the computation of 
these motions to attain a correct understanding of the length 
of the tropical year. A boundless kingdom in astronomy has 
God granted to my learned teacher. May he, as its ruler, deign 
to govern, guard, and increase it, to the restoration of astro¬ 
nomic truth. Amen. 

I intended to report briefly to you, most learned Schoner, 
the entire treatment of the motions of the moon and of the 
remaining planets, as well as of the fixed stars and sun, in 
order that you might understand what benefits to students of 
mathematics and to all posterity will flow from the writings of 
my teacher, as from a most plentiful spring. But when I saw 
that my book was already growing excessively long, I decided 
to compose a special “Account” 1 * 1 of these topics. However, the 
material which I thought must precede and prepare the way, 
as it were, I shall set forth at this point. And I shall interweave 
with my teacher’s hypotheses for the motions of the moon and 
of the remaining planets certain general considerations, in 
order that you may conceive greater hope for the entire work, 
and understand why he was compelled to assume other hy¬ 
potheses or theories. 

Having stated at the beginning of this Account 102 that my 
teacher in writing his book imitated Ptolemy, I see that there 
is practically nothing left for me to take up with you in refer¬ 
ence to his method of improving the motions. For Ptolemy’s 
tireless diligence in calculating, his almost superhuman accuracy 
in observing, his truly divine procedure in examining and 
investigating all the motions and appearances, and finally his 
completely consistent method of statement and proof cannot be 
sufficiently admired and praised by anyone to whom Urania 
is gracious. 

In one respect, however, a burden greater than Ptolemy’s 
confronts my teacher. For he must arrange in a certain and 
consistent scheme or harmony the series and order of all the 

101 Cf. above, p* i r o, n* 5. 

100 Pages 109-1 o* 



motions and appearances, marshalled on the broad battlefield 
of astronomy by the observations of 2,000 years, as by famous 
generals. Ptolemy, on the other hand, had the observations of 
the ancients, to which he could safely entrust himself, for 
scarcely a quarter of this period. Time, the true god and 
teacher of the laws of the celestial state, discloses the errors of 
astronomy to us. For an imperceptible or unnoticed error at 
the foundation of astronomical hypotheses, principles, and 
tables is revealed or greatly increased by the passage of time. 
Therefore my teacher must not so much restore astronomy as 
build it anew. 

Ptolemy was able to harmonize satisfactorily most of the 
hypotheses of the ancients—Timocharis, Hipparchus, and 
others—with every inequality in the motions known to him 
from so small an elapsed period of observation. Therefore he 
quite rightly and wisely—a praiseworthy action—selected 
those hypotheses which seemed to be in better agreement with 
reason and our senses, and which his greatest predecessors had 
employed. 1 * 3 Nevertheless, the observations of all scholars and 
heaven itself and mathematical reasoning convince us that 
Ptolemy’s 104 hypotheses and those commonly accepted do not 
suffice to establish the perpetual and consistent connection and 
harmony of celestial phenomena and to formulate that har¬ 
mony in tables and rules. It was therefore necessary for my 
teacher to devise new hypotheses, by the assumption of which 
he might geometrically and arithmetically deduce with sound 
logic systems of motion like those which the ancients and Ptol¬ 
emy, raised on high, once perceived “with the divine eye of the 
soul,” 105 and which careful observations reveal as existing in 
the heavens to those today who study the remains of the an¬ 
cients. Surely students hereafter will see the value of Ptolemy 
and the other ancient writers, so that they will recall these men 
who have been until now excluded from the schools, and restore 
them, like returned exiles, to their ancient place of honor. The 

** Reading fueront (Th 458.27) instead of futrunt (PII, 314.6). 

Reading PtoUmaei (Th 458.28) instead of Pi olemaco (PII, 314.8). 

A Greek phrase quoted from the pseudo-Aristotelian Dt mundo 391315. 



poet says: “No one desires the unknown.” 10 ® Hence it is not 
strange that heretofore Ptolemy together with all antiquity 
has lain ignored in obscurity, as doubtless you, most excellent 
Schoner, together with other good and learned men have often 
grieved. 

General Considerations Regarding the Motions of the Moon, 
Together with the New Lunar Hypotheses 

The theory of eclipses all by itself seems to maintain respect 
for astronomy among uneducated people; yet we see daily how 
much it differs nowadays from common calculation in the pre¬ 
diction of both the duration and extent of eclipses. In construct¬ 
ing astronomical tables we should not, as we see certain writers 
doing, 1 * 7 reject the precise observations of Ptolemy and other 
excellent authorities as false and untrustworthy, unless the 
passage of time discloses to us that some manifest error has 
crept in. For what is more human than sometimes to be mis¬ 
taken and deceived even by the appearance of truth, especially 
in these difficult, abstruse, and by no means obvious matters? 

In his exposition of the motion of the moon, my teacher as¬ 
sumes such theories and schemes of motion as make it clear 
that the eminent ancient philosophers were not at all blind 
in their observations. Just as we showed above that the increase 
and decrease of the tropical year are regular, so, from a careful 
investigation of the motions of the sun and moon, it is possible 
to deduce for each age the true distances of the sun, moon, and 
earth from one another, or the reason why the diameters of 
the sun, moon, and earth’s shadow have been found different 
at different times, and thus, in addition, to attain a correct un¬ 
derstanding of the solar and lunar parallax. 

In the Epitome, Book V, Proposition 22, Regiomontanus 
says: “But it is noteworthy that the moon does not appear so 
great at quadrature, when it is in the perigee of the epicycle, 
whereas, if the entire disk were visible, it should appear four 

M *Ovid Ars amatoria iii.397. 

w Doubtless Rheticus intended to include Weiner in the groups cf. Copernicus** 
sharp protests in the Letter against Werner, pp. 99-100, 103-5, above. 



times its apparent size at opposition, when it is in the apogee of 
the epicycle.” 108 This difficulty was noticed by Timocharis and 
Menelaus, who always use the same lunar diameter 109 in their 
observations of the stars. But experience has shown my teacher 
that the parallax and size of the moon, at any distance from 
the sun, differ little or not at all from those which occur at 
conjunction and opposition, so that clearly the traditional ec¬ 
centric cannot be assigned to the moon. He supposes therefore 
that the lunar sphere encloses the earth together with 110 its 
adjacent elements, and that the center of the deferent is the 
center of the earth, about which the deferent revolves uni¬ 
formly, carrying the center of the lunar epicycle. 

The second inequality, which appears in the distance of the 
moon from the sun, he saves as follows. He assumes that the 
moon moves on an epicycle of an epicycle of a concentric; that 
is, to the first epicycle, which in general in evidence at con¬ 
junction and opposition, he joins a second small 111 epicycle 
which carries the moon; and he shows that the ratio of the 
diameter of the first epicycle to the diameter of the second is 
as 1,097:237. The scheme of motions is as follows. The in¬ 
clined circle has the same motion as heretofore, save that its 
equal periods are measured by the fixed stars. The deferent, 
which is concentric, moves regularly and uniformly about its 
own center (which is also the center of the earth), at the same 
time rotating uniformly and regularly from the line of mean 
motion of the sun. The first epicycle also revolves uniformly 
about its own center; in its upper circumference it carries the 
center of the small second epicycle in precedence, in its lower 
circumference, in consequence. 112 My teacher computes this 
uniform and regular motion from the true apogee. This point 

309 The quotation is substantially correct. But the original has aux and ofposi- 
turn augtSy for which Rheticus substitutes afogium and pertgmm (cf. above, 
P* 34, n. 117). 

***%* (Th 235*8-11)$ the observations referred to are cited in HII, 15-34.8, 

***Prowess text (PII, 335.29) omits cunt between terram and adtacentibus 

(Th 459 - 3 °)* 

111 Reading farvuin (Th 459.35) f*r fatum (PII, 316.3). 

113 Cf. above, pp, 68-69, n * *8. 



is marked on the upper circumference of the first epicycle by 
a line drawn from the center of the earth through the center 
of the first epicycle to its circumference. Starting from the 
small epicycle’s true apogee, which is indicated on its circum¬ 
ference by a line drawn from the center of the first epicycle 
through the center of the second epicycle, the moon also moves 
regularly and uniformly on the circumference of the small sec¬ 
ond epicycle. The rule governing this motion is the following: 
the moon revolves twice on its epicycle 113 in one period of the 
deferent, so that at every conjunction and opposition the moon 
is found in the perigee of the small epicycle, but at the quad¬ 
ratures in its apogee. This is the device or hypothesis by which 
my teacher removes all the aforementioned incongruities, and 
which satisfies all the appearances, as he clearly shows, and as 
can be inferred also from his tables. 

Furthermore, most learned Schoner, you see that here in the 
case of the moon we are liberated from an equant by the as¬ 
sumption of this theory, which, moreover, corresponds to ex¬ 
perience and all the observations. My teacher dispenses with 
equants for the other planets as well, by assigning to each of 
the three superior planets only one epicycle and eccentric; each 
of these moves uniformly about its own center, while the planet 
revolves on the epicycle in equal periods with the eccentric. To 
Venus and Mercury, however, he assigns an eccentric on an 
eccentric. The planets are each year observed as direct, station¬ 
ary, retrograde, near to and remote from the earth, etc. lw 
These phenomena, besides being ascribed to the planets, can be 
explained, as my teacher shows, by a regular motion of the 
spherical earth; that is, by having the sun occupy the center 
of the universe, while the earth revolves instead of the sun on 
the eccentric, 115 which it has pleased him to name the great 

***While discarding an unnecessary emendation of Mastlin’s, Prowe’s text 
(PII, 316.30) inserts far<vo> for which there is no warrant in the Basel edition 
of t$66 (p. aoiv). 

“Reading#^. with the editions of t 566 (p. 202r) t 1596 (p. no), and 1611 
(p. 107), instead of et cam (PH, 3i7»xo> Th 460.24)* 

^This is the first indication in the Narratio frima that the astronomy of Co¬ 
pernicus involves heliocentrism and a moving earth. Rheticus evidently deemed 



circle. Indeed, there is something divine in the circumstance 
that a sure understanding of celestial phenomena must depend 
on the regular and uniform motions of the terrestrial globe 
alone. 

The Principal Reasons Why We Must Abandon the 
Hypotheses of the Ancient Astronomers 

In the first place, the indisputable precession of the equi¬ 
noxes, as you have heard, and the change in the obliquity of the 
ecliptic persuaded my teacher to assume that the motion of the 
earth could produce most of the appearances in the heavens, or 
at any rate save them satisfactorily. 

Secondly, the diminution of the eccentricity of the sun is 
observed, for a similar reason and proportionally, in the eccen¬ 
tricities of the other planets. 

Thirdly, the planets evidently have the centers of their 
deferents in the sun, as the center of the universe. That the 
ancients, not to mention the Pythagoreans for the moment, 
were aware of this fact is sufficiently clear for example from 
Pliny’s statement, following undoubtedly the best authorities, 
that Venus and Mercury do not recede further from the sun 
than fixed, ordained limits because their paths encircle the 
sunj 116 hence these planets necessarily share the mean motion 
of the sun. As Pliny says, 117 the course of Mars is hard to trace. 
In addition to the other difficulties in the correction of its mo¬ 
tion, Mars unquestionably shows a parallax sometimes greater 

it advisable, before introducing these ideas, to paint the portrait of Copernicus 
as a great astronomer, who made careful observations and painstaking calcula¬ 
tions, who studied thoroughly the work of his predecessors and respected, in par¬ 
ticular, the authority of Ptolemy, The cautiousness of Rhedcus stands in striking 
contrast to the forthright procedure of Copernicus in the Commentariolus (cf. 
PP. 57 - 59 > above). 

118 Natural History 11.17(14.). jt. It is more likely that Pliny’s coiwersas absidas 
meant simply “different courses,” i.e., orbits unlike those of the superior planets $ 
cf, Rackham’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library (London, 1938). Rheti¬ 
cus’s understanding of the passage was governed by Th 17,18-25, For Kepler** 
comments on this obscure section in Pliny and on Copernicus’s interpretation of 
it see his Optra, ed. Frisch, I, 271-72. 

117 Natural History ii. 17(15).77. 



than the sun’s, and therefore it seems impossible that the earth 
should occupy the center of the universe. Although Saturn and 
Jupiter, as they appear to us at their morning and evening 
rising, readily yield the same conclusion, it is particularly and 
especially supported by the variability of Mars when it rises. 
For Mars, having a very dim light, does not deceive the eye 
as much as Venus or Jupiter, and the variation of its size is 
related to its distance from the earth. Whereas at its evening 
rising Mars seems to equal Jupiter in size, so that it is differ¬ 
entiated only by its fiery splendor, when it rises in the morn¬ 
ing just before the sun and is then extinguished in the light 
of the sun, it can scarcely be distinguished from stars of the 
second magnitude. Consequently at its evening rising it ap¬ 
proaches closest to the earth, while at its morning rising it is 
furthest away; surely this cannot in any way occur on the 
theory of an epicycle. Clearly then, in order to restore the 
motions of Mars and the other planets, a different place must 
be assigned to the earth. 

Fourthly, my teacher saw that only on this theory could all 
the circles in the universe be satisfactorily made to revolve 
uniformly and regularly about their own centers, and not about 
other centers—an essential property of circular motion. 

Fifthly, mathematicians as well as physicians must agree with 
the statements emphasized by Galen here and there: “Nature 
does nothing without purpose” 118 and “So wise is our Maker 
that each of his works has not one use, but two or three or often 
more.” 11 * Since we see that this one motion of the earth satisfies 
an almost infinite number of appearances, should we not at¬ 
tribute to God, the creator of nature, that skill which we ob¬ 
serve in the common makers of clocks? For they carefully avoid 
inserting in the mechanism any superfluous wheel or any whose 
function could be served better by another with a slight change 

***De um fartium x.14 (ed. Helmreich, Leipzig, 1907^9, II, 109.2). Rheticus 
quotes the Greek text, the first edition (Venice, 1525) of which was available to 
him, as was also the Basel edition of 1538. The words quoted appear in the 
1525 edition, Vol. I, fol. H7V.4.7 (= fol. 63V of the separate pagination for the 
De usu fartium ). 

^ Ibid, (ed. Helmreich, II, 111.5-85 1525 ed., Vol. I, fol. H8r.i4-i6). 
Rheticus accommodates the quotation to the structure of his own sentence. 



of position. What could dissuade my teacher, as a mathema¬ 
tician, from adopting a serviceable theory of the motion of the 
terrestrial globe, when he saw that on the assumption of this 130 
hypothesis there sufficed, for the construction of a sound science 
of celestial phenomena, a single eighth sphere, and that mo¬ 
tionless, the sun at rest in the center of the universe, and for 
the motions of the other planets, epicycles on an eccentric or 
eccentrics on an eccentric or epicycles on an epicycle? Moreover, 
the motion of the earth in its circle produces the inequalities of 
all the planets except the moon; this one motion alone seems 
to be the cause of every apparent inequality at a distance from 
the sun, in the case of the three superior planets, and in the 
neighborhood of the sun, in the case of Venus and Mercury. 
Finally, this motion makes it possible to satisfy each of the 
planets by only one deviation in latitude of the deferent of the 
planet. Hence it is particularly the planetary motions that 
require such hypotheses. 

Sixthly and lastly, my teacher was especially influenced by 
the realization that the chief cause of all the uncertainty in 
astronomy was that the masters of this science (no offense is 
intended to divine Ptolemy, the father of astronomy) fashioned 
their theories and devices for correcting the motion of the 
heavenly bodies with too little regard for the rule which re¬ 
minds us that the order and motions of the heavenly spheres 
agree in an absolute system. We fully grant these distinguished 
men their due honor, as we should. Nevertheless, we should 
have wished them, in establishing the harmony of the morions, 
to imitate the musicians who, when one string has either tight¬ 
ened or loosened, with great care and skill regulate and adjust 
the tones of all the other strings, until all together produce the 
desired harmony, and no dissonance is heard in any. If Albateg- 
nius, to speak of him for the moment, had followed this precept 
in his work, we should doubtless have today a surer under¬ 
standing of all the motions. For it is likely that the Alfonsine 
Tables drew heavily from him; and since this one rule was 
neglected, we should have had to face at some time, if we 
intend to speak the truth, the collapse of all-astronomy. 

1,0 Reading tali (Th 4-61.31) instead of talia (PII, 319.13). 



Under the commonly accepted principles of astronomy, it 
could be seen that all the celestial phenomena conform to the 
mean motion of the sun and that the entire harmony of the 
celestial motions is established and preserved under its control. 
Hence the sun was called by the ancients leader, governor of 
nature, and king. But whether it carries on this administration 
as God rules the entire universe, a rule excellently described 
by Aristotle in the De mundo, 121 or whether, traversing the 
entire heaven so often and resting nowhere, it acts as God’s 
administrator in nature, seems not yet altogether explained and 
settled. Which of these assumptions is preferable, I leave to 
be determined by geometers and philosophers (who are math¬ 
ematically equipped). For in the trial and decision of such 
controversies, a verdict must be reached in accordance with not 
plausible opinions but mathematical laws (the court in which 
this case is heard). The former manner of rule has been set 
aside, the latter adopted. My teacher is convinced, however, 
that the rejected method of the sun’s rule in the realm of na¬ 
ture must be revived, but in such a way that the received and 
accepted method retains its place. For he is aware that in hu¬ 
man affairs the emperor need not himself hurry from city to 
city in order to perform the duty imposed on him by God; and 
that the heart does not move to the head or feet or other parts 
of the body to sustain 122 a living creature, but fulfills its func¬ 
tion through other organs designed by God for that purpose. 

Now my teacher concluded that the mean motion of the sun 
must be the sort of motion that is not only established by the 
imagination, as in the case of the other planets, but is self- 
caused, since it appears to be truly “both choral dancer and 
choral leader.” He then showed that his opinion was sound 
and not inconsistent with the truth, for he saw that by his 
hypotheses the efficient cause of the uniform motion of the sun 
could be geometrically deduced and proved. Hence the mean 
motion of the sun would necessarily be perceived in all the 

’ 51 Chap. vi. This work is now athetiaed; see Wilhelm Capelle, Neue }ahr- 
biicker far das klassische AlUrtuns , XVV1905), J32. 

““Reading conservatiomm (Th 462.37) instead of cowoersatianem (PH, 
3*i-4>- 



motions and appearances of the other planets in a definite man¬ 
ner, as appears in each of them. Thus the assumption of the 
motion of the earth on an eccentric provides a sure theory of 
celestial phenomena, in which no change should be made with¬ 
out at the same time re-establishing the entire system, as would 
be fitting, once more on proper ground. While we were unable 
from our common theories even to surmise this rule by the sun 
in the realm of nature, we ignored most of the ancient encomia 
of the sun as poetry. You see, then, what sort of hypotheses 
for saving the motions my teacher had to assume under these 
circumstances. 

Transition to the Explanation of the New Hypotheses 

for the Whole of Astronomy 

I interrupt your thoughts, distinguished sir, for I am aware 
that while you listen to the reasons, investigated by my teacher 
with remarkable learning and great devotion, for revising the 
astronomical hypotheses, you thoughtfully consider what 
foundation may finally prove to be suitable for the hypotheses 
of astronomy reborn. But the men who endeavor to pull all 
the stars together around in the ether in accordance with their 
own opinion, as though they had put chains upon them, merit 
pity rather than resentment, in your judgment as in that of 
other true mathematicians and all good men. You are not un¬ 
acquainted with the importance to astronomers of hypotheses 
or theories, and with the difference between a mathematician 
and a physicist. 123 Hence you agree, I feel, that the results to 
which the observations and the evidence of heaven itself lead 
us again and again must be accepted, and that every difficulty 
must be faced and overcome with God as our guide and math¬ 
ematics and tireless study as our companions. 

Accordingly, anyone who declares that he must be mindful 
of the highest and principal end of astronomy will be grateful 

158 Presumably a reference to Aristotle’s Physics 193b::2-23 7 and to Simplicius’* 
Commentary on Aristotle > s Phystcs ? second comment on Book ii.z ( Commentaries 
in Aristotelem Graeca y Vol. IX, ed. H. Diels, Berlin, 1882, pp. 290-93)$ the 
first edition of Simplicius’s Commentary (Venice, 1526) was available to Rheticus 
and Schonen 



with us to my teacher and will consider as applicable to himself 
Aristotle’s remark: “When anyone shall succeed in finding 
proofs of greater precision, gratitude will be due to him for 
the discovery.” 124 The examples of Callippus and Aristotle 128 
assure us that, in the effort to ascertain the causes of the phe¬ 
nomena, astronomy must be revised as unequal motions of the 
heavenly bodies are encountered. Hence I may hope that Aver- 
roes, who played the role of the severe Aristarchus 126 to Ptol¬ 
emy, would not receive the hypotheses of my teacher harshly, 
if only he would examine natural philosophy patiently. In my 
opinion, Ptolemy was not so bound and sworn to his own hy¬ 
potheses that, were he permitted to return to life, upon seeing 
the royal road blocked and made impassable by the ruins of so 
many centuries, he would not seek another road over land and 
sea to the construction of a sound science of celestial phenomena, 
since he could not rise through the air and open sky to the 
desired goal. For what else shall I say of the man who wrote 
the following words: 

Propositions assumed without proof, if once they are perceived to be in 
agreement with the phenomena, cannot be established without some 
method and reflection; and the procedure for apprehending them is 
hard to explain, since in general, of first principles, there naturally is 
either no cause or one difficult to set forth . 121 

How modestly and wisely Aristotle speaks on the subject of 
the celestial motions can be seen everywhere in his works. He 
says in another conhection: “It is the mark of an educated man 
to look for precision in each class of things just so far as the 

™De caelo 12.5 2 8 7b 34^ 8 8a 1 (J. L. Stocks’s rendering in the Oxford trans¬ 
lations of the works of Aristotle, 1930, VoL II). 

Metaphysics xii,8 io73b3x-io74a5. 

139 For Averroes as an adversary of the Ptolemaic astronomy see pp* 194-95, 
below, and Duhem, Le Systhne clu moncle, II, 133-39. a long article devoted to 
the relation between Copernicus and the astronomer Aristarchus of Samos, Brack- 
vogel failed to recognize that the Aristarchus of our passage is unquestionably Aris¬ 
tarchus of Alexandria, the severe critic of Homer, not Aristarchus of Samos (ZE, 
XXV[i 933 - 3 5 ], 703, n* i 5 )- 

** HII, 212* 11*16. Rheticus presented to Copernicus (PI* 411) a copy of the 
first edition of the Greek text of the Syntaxis (Basel, 1538)5 the passage quoted 
begins at the foot of the page numbered (incorrectly) 219. 



nature of the subject admits.” 128 Now in physics as in astron¬ 
omy, one proceeds as much as possible from effects and observa¬ 
tions to principles. Hence I am convinced that Aristotle, who 
wrote careful discussions of the heavy and the light, circular 
motion, and the motion and rest of the earth, 120 if he could 
hear the reasons for the new hypotheses, would doubtless hon¬ 
estly acknowledge what he proved in these discussions, and 
what he assumed as unproved principle. I can therefore well 
believe that he would support my teacher, inasmuch as the 
well-known saying attributed to Plato 13 * is certainly correct: 
“Aristotle is the philosopher of the truth.” On the other hand, 
were he to burst forth in harsh language, it would be only to 
lament bitterly, I am persuaded, the condition of this most 
beautiful part of philosophy in the following terms: “It has 
been said very well by Plato 131 that ‘geometry and the studies 
that accompany it dream about being, but the clear waking 
vision of it is impossible for them as long as they leave the 
assumptions which they employ undisturbed and cannot give 
any account of them’ ”j and he would add: “We must be 
deeply grateful to the immortal gods for the knowledge of 
such a theory of the phenomena.” 

But since these remarks are less appropriate here than in a 
certain other treatise, 132 I shall proceed to set forth the re¬ 
maining hypotheses of my teacher in an open and orderly 
manner, in an endeavor to throw some light on my previous 
statements. 

The Arrangement of the Universe 

Aristotle says: “That which causes derivative truths to be 
true is most true.” 133 Accordingly, my teacher decided that he 

*“Nicomachean Ethics 1094.b23.25 (W. D. Ross’s translation, Oxford, 1925). 

359 De caelo 11.3, 13-14; Physics viii.8-9. 

330 The authentic works of Plato contain no reference to the philosopher Aris¬ 
totle, 

^Republic vii.13 533B-C, slightly altered (P. Shorey^ translation, Loeb 
Classical Library, London, 1930^35). 

ias Probably Rheticus has in mind his projected “Second Account” 

134 Metaphysics 1 minor -1 yyibzt-zy (W, D- Ross^ translation, Oxford, 19*8). 
Although Rheticus usually quotes from Greek authors in the original language, 
in the present instance he is using Bessarion’s Latin translation of the Metaphysics. 



must assume such hypotheses as would contain causes capable 
of confirming the truth of the observations of previous cen¬ 
turies, and such as would themselves cause, we may hope, all 
future astronomical predictions of the phenomena to be found 
true. 

First, surmounting no mean difficulties, he established by 
hypothesis that the sphere of the stars, which we commonly 
call the eighth sphere, was created by God to be the region 
which would enclose within its confines the entire realm of 
nature, and hence that it was created fixed and immovable as 
the place of the universe. Now motion is perceived only by 
comparison with something fixed; thus sailors on the sea, to 
whom 

land is no longer 

Visible, only the sky on all sides and on all sides the water 134 

are not aware of any motion of their ship when the sea is un¬ 
disturbed by winds, even though they are borne along at such 
high speed that they pass over several long miles in an hour. 
Hence this sphere was studded by God for our sake with a 
large number of twinkling stars, in order that by comparison 
with them, surely fixed in place, we might observe the posi¬ 
tions and motions of the other enclosed spheres and planets. 

Then, in harmony with these arrangements, God stationed 
in the center of the stage His governor of nature, king of the 
entire universe, conspicuous by its divine splendor, the sun 

To whose rhythm the gods move, and the world 
Receives its laws and keeps the pacts ordained . 135 

The other spheres are arranged in the following manner. 
The first place below the firmament or sphere of the stars falls 
to the sphere of Saturn, which encloses the spheres of first 
Jupiter, then Mars; the spheres of first Mercury, then Venus 

la * Vergil Aenttd iii. 192-93. 

155 Giovanni Gioviano Pontano, Urania or De sullis 1.24.0-4.1 (Florence 1514, 
p. jr) > Pontano^s poems were reprinted in loannis lovUmi Pontani cartnina (ed. 
Benedetto Soldati, Florence, 1902), where the quoted lines appear on p. 10. 
Copernicus owned a copy of the selection of Pontano’s prose works which was 
printed at Venice in 1501 (pi 2 , +17)- 



surround the sun; and the centers of the spheres of the five 
planets are located in the neighborhood of the sun. Between 
the concave surface of Mars’ sphere and the convex of Venus’, 
where there is ample space, the globe of the earth together 
with its adjacent elements, surrounded by the moon’s sphere, 
revolves in a great circle which encloses within itself, in addi¬ 
tion to the sun, the spheres of Mercury and Venus, so that the 
earth moves among the planets as one of them. 

As I carefully consider this arrangement of the entire uni¬ 
verse according to the opinion of my teacher, I realize that 
Pliny set down an excellent and accurate statement when he 
wrote: “To inquire what is beyond the universe or heaven, by 
which all things are overarched, is no concern of man, nor can 
the human mind form any conjecture concerning this question.” 
And he continues: “The universe is sacred, without bounds, 
all in all; indeed, it is the totality, finite yet similar to the 
infinite, etc.” 13 * For if we follow my teacher, there will be 
nothing beyond the concave surface of the starry sphere for 
us to investigate, except insofar as Holy Writ has vouchsafed us 
knowledge, in which case again the road will be closed to plac¬ 
ing anything beyond this concave surface. We will therefore 
gratefully admire and regard as sacrosanct all the rest of na¬ 
ture, enclosed by God within the starry heaven. In many ways 
and with innumerable instruments and gifts He has endowed 
us, and enabled us I3T to study and know nature; we will ad¬ 
vance to the point to which He desired us to advance, and we 
will not attempt to transgress the limits imposed by Him. 

That the universe is boundless up to its concave surface, and 
truly similar to the infinite is known, moreover, from the fact 
that we see all the heavenly bodies twinkle, with the exception 
of the planets including Saturn, which, being the nearest of 
them to the firmament, revolves on the greatest circle. But this 
conclusion follows far more clearly by deduction from the hy¬ 
potheses of my teacher. For the great circle which carries the 

“Abridged from Natural History ii.1.1-2. 

137 Prowe’s text (P1I, 314.1$) omits nos between idotieos and e ft ecu (Th 
4.66.20). 



earth has a perceptible ratio to the spheres of the five planets, 
and hence every inequality in the appearances of these planets 
is demonstrably derived from their relations t« the sun. Every 
horizon on the earth, being a great circle of the universe, di¬ 
vides the sphere of the stars into equal parts. Equal periods in 
the revolutions of the spheres are shown to be measured by the 
fixed stars. Consequently it is quite clear that the sphere of the 
stars is, to the highest degree, similar to the infinite, since by 
comparison with it the great circle vanishes, and all the phe¬ 
nomena are observed exactly as if the earth were at rest in the 
center of the universe. 

Moreover, the remarkable symmetry and interconnection of 
the motions and spheres, as maintained by the assumption of 
the foregoing hypotheses, are not unworthy of God’s work¬ 
manship and not unsuited t* these divine bodies. These rela¬ 
tions, I should say, can be conceived by the mind (on account 
of its affinity with the heavens) more quickly than they can be 
explained by any human utterance, just as in demonstrations 
they are usually impressed upon our minds, not so much by 
words as by the perfect and absolute ideas, if I may use the 
term, of these most delightful objects. Nevertheless it is pos¬ 
sible, in a general survey of the hypotheses, to see how the 
inexpressible harmony and agreement of all things manifest 
themselves. 

For in the common hypotheses there appeared no end to the 
invention of spheres; moreover, spheres of an immensity that 
could be grasped by neither sense nor reason were revolved 
with extremely slow and extremely rapid motions. Some writ¬ 
ers stated that the daily motion of all the lower spheres is 
caused by the highest movable sphere; 13 ® but when a great 
storm of controversy raged over this question, they could not 
explain why a higher sphere should have power over a lower. 
Others, like Eudoxus 138 and those who followed him, assigned 
to each planet a special sphere, the motion of which caused the 

138 See Dreyer, Planetary Systems , p. 91. 

133 See Aristotle Metaphysics xii.8 1073)517-265 and Simplicius's Commentary 
on Aristotle’s De caelo (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeea, Vol. VII, ed. Hei- 



planet to revolve about the earth once in a natural day. More¬ 
over, ye immortal gods, what dispute, what strife there has 
been until now over the position of the spheres of Venus and 
Mercury, and their relation to the sun. But the case is still 
before the judge. Is there anyone who does not see that it is 
very difficult and even impossible ever to settle this question 
while the common hypotheses are accepted? For what would 
prevent anyone from locating even Saturn below the sun, pro¬ 
vided that at the same time he preserved the mutual propor¬ 
tions of the spheres and epicycle, since in these same hypotheses 
there has not yet been established the common measure of the 
spheres of the planets, whereby each sphere may be geo¬ 
metrically confined to its place? I refrain from mentioning here 
the vast commotion which those who defame this most beauti¬ 
ful and most delightful part of philosophy have stirred up on 
account of the great size of the epicycle of Venus, and on ac¬ 
count of the unequal motion, on the assumption of equants, of 
the celestial spheres about their own centers. 

However, in the hypotheses of my teacher, which accept, as 
has been explained, the starry sphere as boundary, the sphere 
of each planet advances uniformly with the motion assigned to 
it by nature and completes its period without being forced into 
any inequality by the power of a higher sphere. In addition, 
the larger spheres revolve more slowly, and, as is proper, those 
that are nearer to the sun, which may be said to be the source 
of motion and light, revolve more swiftly. Hence Saturn, mov¬ 
ing freely in the ecliptic, revolves in thirty years, Jupiter in 
twelve, and Mars in two. The center of the earth measures the 
length of the year by the fixed stars. Venus passes through the 
zodiac in nine months, and Mercury, revolving about the sun 
on the smallest sphere, traverses the universe in eighty days. 
Thus there are only six moving spheres which revolve about 

berg, Berlin, 1894, 493.11-15} 494.12-18, 23-26} 495.8-9, 17-22} 496.13-19). 
The first edition of Simplicius's Commentary (Venice, 1526) was available to 
Rheticus} it was a Greek version, done by Bessarion or one of his circle, of Wil¬ 
liam of Moerbeke’s Latin translation (Sitzimgsberichte dm Akademie der WUsen- 
schaften m Berlin, 1892, pp. 74-75). 



the sun, the center of the universe. Their common measure is 
the great circle which carries the earth, just as the radius of the 
spherical earth is the common measure of the circles of the 
moon, the distance of the sun from the moon, etc. 

Who could have chosen a more suitable and more appropri¬ 
ate number than six? By what number could anyone more easily 
have persuaded mankind that the whole universe was divided 
into spheres by God the Author and Creator of the world? For 
the number six is honored beyond all others in the sacred 
prophecies of God and by the Pythagoreans and the other phil¬ 
osophers. What is more agreeable to God’s handiwork than 
that this first and most perfect work should be summed up in 
this first and most perfect number ? 140 Moreover, the celestial 
harmony is achieved by the six aforementioned movable 
spheres. For they are all so arranged that no immense interval 
is left between one and another j and each, geometrically de¬ 
fined, so maintains its position that if you should try to move 
any one at all from its place, you would thereby disrupt the 
entire system. 

But now that we have touched on these general considera¬ 
tions, let us proceed to an exposition of the circular motions 
which are appropriate to the several spheres and to the bodies 
that cleave to and rest upon them. First we shall speak of the 
hypotheses for the motions of the terrestrial globe, on which 
we have our being. 

The Motions Appropriate 141 to the Great Circle and Its 
Related Bodies. The Three Motions of the Earth: 

Daily , Annual t and the Motion in Declination 

Following Plato and the Pythagoreans, the greatest math¬ 
ematicians of that divine age, my teacher thought that in order 

14a This passage, in which Rheticus reveals his acceptance of number mysticism, 
finds no parallel in the works of Copernicus; cf. above, p. 122, n. 57. For an 
excellent discussion of the metamathematical superstructure, erected in the early 
modern period on the basis of Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy, see Edward 
W, Strong, Procedures and Metaphysics (Berkeley, Calif., 1936), chap. viii. 

^Reading competant (Th 4^8.9) instead of compvtant (PII, 329.23). 



to determine the causes of the phenomena circular motions 
must be ascribed to the spherical earth . 142 He saw (as Aristotle 
also points out 143 ) that when one motion is assigned to the 
earth, it may properly have other motions, by analogy with 
the planets. He therefore decided to begin with the assumption 
that the earth has three motions, by far the most important 
of all. 

For in the first place, having assumed the general arrange¬ 
ment of the universe described above, he showed that, enclosed 
by its poles within the lunar sphere, the earth, like a ball on a 
lathe, rotates from west to east, as God’s will ordains; and that 
by this motion, the terrestrial globe produces day and night 
and the changing appearances of the heavens, according as it 
is turned toward the sun. In the second place, the center of the 
earth, together with its adjacent elements and the lunar sphere, 
is carried uniformly in the plane of the ecliptic by the great 
circle, which I have already mentioned more than once , 144 in 
the order of the signs. In the third place, the equator and the 
axis of the earth have a variable inclination to the plane of the 
ecliptic and move in the direction opposite to that of the motion 
of the center, so that on account of this inclination of the earth’s 
axis and the immensity of the starry sphere, no matter where 
the center of the earth may be, the equator and the poles of the 
earth are almost invariably directed to the same points in the 
heavens. This result will ensue if the ends of the earth’s axis, 
that is, the poles of the earth, are understood to move daily in 
precedence a distance almost exactly equal to the motion of the 
center of the earth in consequence on the great circle, and to 
describe about the axis and poles of the great circle or ecliptic 
small circles equidistant from them. 

But to these motions we should add, in the opinion of my 
teacher, two librations of the poles of the earth and the two 
motions, the one uniform and the other unequal, with which 

14 'Whether Plat* held that the earth is at rest or in motion is much disputed} 
see Thomas L. Heath, Aristarchus of Samos (Oxford, 1913), pp. 174-85. 

Dt Caelo ii.14 

"Pages 135-36, 144 ) J 45 , H 7 - 



the center of the great circle advances in the ecliptic ; 145 let us 
also recall what was said above 14 ® concerning the motions of 
the moon about the center of the earth. We shall then have, 
most learned Schoner, a true system of hypotheses for deducing 
in its entirety what the moderns call the doctrine of the first 
motion, which at present is derived from all sorts of motions 
of the starry sphere; and for determining the causes of the 
motions and phenomena of the sun and moon, as they have 
been carefully observed by scholars for the past two thousand 
years. I may merely mention, since I shall have occasion to deal 
with the topic more fully below , 141 that the motion of the great 
circle unquestionably affects the appearances of the other five 
planets. With so few motions and, as it were, with a single 
circle is so vast a subject comprehended. 

In the doctrine of the first motion nothing need be changed. 
For, utilizing the properties of things which are interrelated, 
we shall determine the maximum obliquity and in the same 
way investigate the declinations of the remaining parts of the 
ecliptic, right ascensions, the theory of shadows and gnomons 
in all regions of the earth, the lengths of days, oblique ascen¬ 
sions, the rising and setting of the stars, etc. However, our 
hypotheses differ from those of antiquity in that in ours, as 
opposed to the views 148 of the ancients, no circle except the 
ecliptic is properly described by the imagination on the starry 
sphere. The other circles, to wit, the equator, the two tropics, 
arctics and antarctics, horizons, meridians, and all the others 
connected with the doctrine of the first motion, e.g., vertical 
circles, parallels of altitude, colures etc. are properly traced 
upon the globe of the earth, and transferred by a certain rela¬ 
tion to the heavens. 

In addition to the apparent daily revolution about the earth, 
which the sun shares with all the stars and the other planets, 
there are those phenomena related to the sun which Ptolemy 
and the moderns have attributed to the sun’s own motions and 
also those which are observed to occur in connection with the 

’“See pp. i*i, 123, above. ’“Pages 134.-35. “’Pages 168-85. 

’“Reading fraster iftum (Th 469.9) instead of frasesftum (PII, 331.12). 



shift of the solstitial and equinoctial points, the distance of the 
stars from them, and the motion of the apogee among the fixed 
stars. All these phenomena present themselves to our eyes as 
if the sun and the sphere of the stars move. For the way in 
which, according to common belief, these bodies emerge in the 
east or rise, gradually climb above the horizon until they reach 
the meridian, from which they descend in like manner, and 
then traverse the lower hemisphere, daily completing their 
diurnal revolutions, is caused, clearly enough, by the first mo¬ 
tion which my teacher, in company with Plato , 149 assigns to 
the earth. 

The sun seems to us to move in the order of the signs, and 
we persuade ourselves that by tftis motion it describes the 
ecliptic and determines the length of the year. But these phe¬ 
nomena can be produced by the second motion which my 
teacher attributes to the earth. For as the earth moves on the 
great circle and comes to a position between the constellation 
Libra and the sun, those of us who suppose the earth to be at 
rest think that the sun is in the constellation Aries, because a 
line drawn from the center of the earth through the sun to the 
sphere of the stars strikes that constellation. Then, as the earth 
advances to Scorpio, the sun seems to be in Taurus, and so to 
traverse the zodiac . 109 I assert, however, that with the sun 
at rest this motion is properly the earth’s. And the sidereal 
year is the time in which the center of the earth or, in appear¬ 
ance, of the sun completes a single revolution from a star to 
the same star. 

The third motion of the earth produces the regular, cyclic 
changes of season on the whole earth} for it causes the sun and 
the other planets to appear to move on a circle oblique to the 
equator, and the sun to appear to the several regions of the 
earth exactly as it would if the earth were by hypothesis at 
the center of the universe and the planets moved on an oblique 
circle. For on account of the above-mentioned motion of its 

™CL above, p. i 4 $> n. 142. 

390 Prowess text (PlI, 332,9) inserts tctutn, for which there is no warrant in 
the Basel edition of 1566 and MSstlin’s editions of 1596 and 1621. 



poles, the plane of the equator, in comparison with the sun, 
turns away from the plane of the ecliptic and returns toward it, 
or as the Greeks say Xo&verat «ai ey/cMvet. 151 Hence the same 
inclination of the equator to the ecliptic recurs at almost the 
same points on the ecliptic, and the poles of the daily rotation 
are always in very nearly the same spot on the starry sphere. 

Now when the equator attains its greatest inclination to the 
plane of the ecliptic, that is, to the sun, the line drawn from 
the center of the sun to the center of the earth cuts a cone in 
the globe of the earth as it performs its daily rotation, thereby 
describing the tropics. Furthermore, when the plane of the 
equator returns to the plane of the ecliptic, that is, to the sun, 
all over the earth the equinox occurs, since the line of which I 
just spoke divides the globe of the earth along the equator 
into two hemispheres. But the other parallels of latitude are 
marked on the earth according as the motions of the equator 
away from and toward the sun (or to use Ptolemy’s terms 
XAfcoffts Kai eYKWu) are combined. The arctics and antarctics 
are described by their points of contact with the horizons . 182 
The poles of the ecliptic, in the opinion of my teacher, describe 
the polar circles equidistant from the poles of the equator. The 
great circle of the earth’s globe which passes through the poles 
of the equator and the aforesaid equidistant poles of the ecliptic 
is the solstitial colure j and another great circle, intersecting the 
first in the poles of the equator at spherical right angles, is the 
equinoctial colure. And it is to be understood that in this man¬ 
ner the circles of any point at all and any other circles what¬ 
soever are readily traced upon the earth and thence transferred 
to the overarching heavens. 

Moreover, in obedience to the command given by the ob¬ 
servations, the globe of the earth has risen to the circumference 
of the eccentric, while the sun has descended to the center of 
the universe. Now, in the common hypotheses the center of 
the eccentric was situated in our age between the center of the 
entire dniverse (which in these hypotheses was also the center 

“For example, Syniaxis xiii.i (HII, 528.11-16) and wii passim. 

*** Cf. Th 74.23-2$. 



of the earth) and the constellation Gemini. Conversely, in my 
teacher’s hypotheses the center of the great circle, which X re¬ 
ferred to in the beginning of this Acc»unt 1Z3 as the center of 
the eccentric, is found between the sun, which is the center of 
the universe according to my teacher, and the constellation 
Sagittarius $ and the diameter of the great circle that passes 
through the center of the earth represents the line of mean 
motion of the sun. Since the line drawn from the center of the 
earth through the center of the sun to the ecliptic determines 
the true place of the sun, it is not difficult to see how in the 
system of Ptolemy and the moderns the sun is conceived to 
move unequally in the ecliptic and how the angle of inequality 
from the mean motion is investigated geometrically. When the 
earth is in the higher apse of the great circle, the sun is thought 
to be at the apogee on the eccentric, and, conversely, when the 
earth is in the lower apse, the sun seems to be in perigee. 

But the manner in which the fixed stars appear to alter their 
distance from the equinoctial and solstitial points, and the 
greatest obliquity of the sun to vary, etc. (my treatment of 
these topics at the beginning of the Account is drawn from 
Book III of my teacher’s work) has been shown by him to 
depend on the motion in declination, which I have set forth in 
a general way, and on two mutually interacting librations. From 
the poles which were referred to just above as the equidistant 
poles of the ecliptic, in both hemispheres let 23°4o' 154 of a 
great circle be measured off, and let two points be marked there 
in order to designate the poles of the mean equator. Let the 
two colures be drawn in the proper manner to indicate the mean 
solstices and equinoxes. For purposes of study, let these points 
be imagined and indicated on a small sphere which encloses 
the globe of the earth and which, by its uniform motion, pro¬ 
duces the third motion assigned to the earth. 

Now, with the center of the earth between the sun and the 
constellation Virgo, let the mean equator be inclined or oblique 
to the sun, and let the line of the true place of the sun pass 

188 Page i*i. 

,w The mean value between the maximum of 23* 52' and minimum of 23° 38'. 



through the common intersection of the plane of the ecliptic, 
the mean equator, and the mean equinoctial colure. Let the 
mean vernal equinox and true vernal equinox occur simul¬ 
taneously where required by the scheme of motions, as will be 
crystal clear from what follows. The center of the earth ad¬ 
vances from its position 59'g"n'" 155 each day with uniform 
motion as reckoned by the fixed stars. In addition to this mo¬ 
tion of the center of the earth, let the mean vernal point move 
an equal distance in precedence; and since it moves at a slightly 
faster rate, let it describe an angle greater by about 8'". This 
is the reason why I said just above that the motion in declina¬ 
tion is almost exactly equal to the uniform motion of the center 
of the earth as reckoned by the fixed stars. But there is a con¬ 
tinual increase in the angle made by the vernal point of the 
mean equator as compared with the center of the earth (in 
accordance with the rule given above). Hence, before the cen¬ 
ter of the earth finally returns to the point on the ecliptic 
whence it set out, the line of the true place of the sun reaches 
the mean equinox, and the stars seem to us to move with a 
mean or uniform motion in consequence, to the amount of the 
precession. This precession, as I stated in the beginning, 159 is 
about 50" 157 in an Egyptian year, and in 25,816 Egyptian years 
it performs a complete revolution. Thus it is clear what the 
mean equinox is, what the mean precession is, and how these 
phenomena can be presented to the eyes as though by a me¬ 
chanical device. 

1 

Libra lions 

Let there be 158 a straight line a b of finite length, for ex¬ 
ample 24', divided at d into two equal parts. Then with the 
point of the compass placed at d, describe a circle c e with 
the radius d c directed to a and 6" long (that is, a quarter of the 
entire length). Construct a second circle of the same size in this 

““Although PII, 334.14 and Th 471.12 give 59' 8" 2'", the correct reading 
is unquestionably 59' 8* 11'" (ck Th 196*9-11, 198.5). The error undoubtedly 
arose because 11 was interpreted as a Roman numeral, whereas it was Arabic 
(cf. 1566 ed., p. 205Vj 1596 ed., p. 124} and 1621 ed*, p. 123). 

Pages 113-14* “*8"' x 365 = 48%*. ““Readings# (Th 471.27)- 



figure j 159 and let the two small circles (to use this term for the 
moment) be so placed that each is attached to the circumference 
of the other and can move freely about its own center. Call that 
circle the first which carries the other on its circumference, and 
let it be fastened to the center of the line a b at the point d . 
Denote the center of the second small circle by /, and any point 
chosen at random on its circumference by h. Place the point h 
of the second small circle upon a, the end of the given line; 
and / upon c . Let h describe in one direction, about / as center, 
an angle twice as great as that described in equal time by / 
about d in the opposite direction. Clearly, then, in one revolu¬ 
tion of the first small circle the point h twice describes and 
traverses the line a b, and the second small circle revolves 
twice. 160 

While thus describing a straight line through the combina¬ 
tion of two circular motions, the point h moves most slowly 
near the ends a and b } and more rapidly near the center d. It 
has therefore pleased my teacher to name this motion of the 
point h along the line a b a “libration,” because it resembles 
the motion of objects hanging in the air. 161 It is also called 

MI> Prowe altered “ab” (Th 4.71.30) to a b (PII, 335.6), thereby making a 
difficult passage hopeless. 

™ ¥or a detailed explanation of this device see above, p. 88, n* 100. 

m In the corresponding passage of De re*. Copernicus wrote motus . . * fen* 
dentibus similes librattonibus and fendentium instar (Th 163.13,19)- Menzzer 
(p- X36) rendered the former expression by; “Pendelsehwingungen ahnliche 
Bewegungen” (motions like the swinging of a pendulum) * and the latter by; 
“den Pendeln ahnlich” (like a pendulum). Accepting Menzzer’s interpretation, 
Dreyer stated that the librations were so named because they are “like the motion 
of a pendulum” ( Planetary Systems , p. 330). 

Are we justified in attributing the pendulum to Copernicus^ I think not. In 
the sentence under discussion Rheticus’s language is ad similitudinem fendentium 
in aere , “it resembles the motion of objects hanging in the air.” This formulation 
is modeled after a phrase used by Copernicus in a wholly different context, 
in aere fendentibus (Th 22.14). Here Menzzer (p. 21) translated by: “in der 
Luft Schwebende” (objects suspended in the air). We may safely conclude that 
Copernicus is not referring to the pendulum, but in general to the kind of motion 
which is quickest in the middle and slowest at the ends (cf. p. iz8, above). 

E. Wiedemann corrected a false attribution of the pendulum to the Arabs 
(Verhandlungen der deutschen fhysikalischen Gesellschaft , XXI[1919], 663-64 
and Zeitschrijt fur Physik , X[i922], 267-68) $ his strictures were overlooked by 
Edmund Hoppe, Geschichte der Physik (Braunschweig, 1926), p» 25* 



motion along the diameter} for if you imagine a circle with 
diameter a b and center the position on the diameter a b> to 
which the point h is brought by the aforesaid combined motion 
of the small circles, is determined from the doctrine of chords} 
and by this method the table of prosthaphaereses 192 is con¬ 
structed. 

My teacher calls the motion of the first small circle about 
d the anomaly, since the prosthaphaeresis is derived from this 
motion. 193 Thus let /, the center of the second small circle, de¬ 
scribe an angle by starting from the point e 104 and moving to 
the left on the circumference of the first small circle} let the 
angle c d f be 30 °. The line d f g, drawn from the center d } 
will cut off, on the circumference of the circle a b } an arc a g of 
the same number of degrees as the arc c f of the first small 
circle. Since the point h of the second small circle moves from 
g to the right at twice the speed of /, a straight line drawn from 
the point g to the point h clearly subtends half of double the 
arc ag } and h d half of double the arc which remains when the 
arc a g is subtracted from a quadrant. 1 * 5 Therefore a h } that is, 
the distance of h from a along the diameter ab } is i,34O 10e 
units, of which the radius constitutes 10,000. But if a b is di- 

16 The varying differences between an apparent and mean motion. When the 
mean motion is smaller than the apparent, the difference is added (prosthesis) 
to the mean motion, in order to get the apparent motion $ conversely, when the 
mean motion is greater than the apparent, the difference is subtracted (aphaere- 
sis). The Latin equivalent for this Greek term is aeqvatio (Th 130-14-19). 

Reading motu (Th 472.17) instead of motus (PII, 336-18). 

Copernicus’s discussion of this topic (De rev , iii.4) is accompanied by a 
diagram, which Rheticus follows, save that he interchanges c with d y and g 
with h . Now the first three editions of the Narratio frima contained no figures, 
and Mastlin supplied them from De rev. To eliminate disagreement between 
Copernicus’s diagram and Rheticus’s lettering, Masdin adopted the simple expedi¬ 
ent of transposing the letters in the diagram. But Prowe, following Th, resolved 
to adhere faithfully to Copernicus’s figure, and therefore to alter the text of the 
Natratio frima wherever necessary. In the present instance d was left unchanged, 
although it should have been replaced by c (Th 472.18^ PII, 336-19). 

^Cf. Th 167.4-7. If we employ the notation used by Manidus in his PtoU 
emaus Hondbuch (I, 47 n), we should write: 

gh r= sib ag 

hd = Uzsib (90° ~^ag). 

w Because h d y subtending an arc equal to 6o° on the circle a b y is 8,660 (Th 
49.37); 10,000 — 8,660 = 1,340. 



vided into 60 units, a h will be 4, 167 and h h 56. Then by taking 
the proportional part of 24we shall know the position of the 
point h on the given finite straight 163 line in this case. 

Now that we understand this argument in a rough way, it 
will be easy to see how the greatest obliquity of the equator 
to the plane of the ecliptic varies and how the true precession 
of the equinoxes becomes unequal. Since short arcs do not differ 
sensibly from straight lines, let us begin by imagining that the 
point d is placed upon the north pole of the mean equator and 
that the line ah is an arc of the mean solstitial colure. Lying 
between the north pole of the mean equator and the nearby 
pole, 168 which is one of the poles that move at a uniform dis¬ 
tance from the poles of the ecliptic, h m marks the least distance 
of the pole of the daily rotation, or pole of the earth, from the 
aforesaid pole of the ecliptic. 171 And a, lying between the north 
pole of the mean equator and the plane of the ecliptic, marks 
the greatest distance of the pole of the earth from the pole of 
the ecliptic. Then with the two small circles properly fitted into 
place by means of the line a b y it may be understood what part 
of the 24' of the line a b is described at the present time by the 
north pole of the earth in the point h by reason of the combined 
motion of the two small circles. Observing the law of opposi¬ 
tion, the south pole moves by a similar device, as the shifting 
universe alters the greatest obliquity. 

Assume that the first small circle completes its revolution 
in 3,434 172 Egyptian years and that the terminus from which 

167 Since a b = 60, the radius =2: 30. And 1,340 : 10,000 — 4.0a : $o f 

168 Reading rectae (Th 472.27) instead of rede (PII, 336.30); and subsistat „ 

***The true pole of the equator. 

^Reading quote et (Th 472.36) instead of Quote b est (PII, 337.7)* 

171 In a note Prowe cites this passage as it appeared in the first edition and 
declares it to be corrupt. It is, however, entirely sound. But a textual difficulty 
was introduced by the 1566 edition, which gives el instead of ab after terra* 
(p. 2o6r) ; and the difficulty was aggravated by Th, which keeps *t and inserts 
a after dictum (472.36-37). 

** Reading lllMCCCCXXXllll (Th 473.4) instead of XXXUUMCCCCXXX* 
1111 (PII, 337.17). From two other passages in the Narrati0 frima (PH, 3 **. 
5 - 6 , 339.5-7), Prowe should have seen that the number he gives here is incorrect 
(cf. p. 117, above and p. 15s, below). 



the motion of anomaly begins is the point a on the circumfer¬ 
ence of the circle whose diameter is described by the first libra- 
tion. If the poles of the earth had no libration other than this 
one, and did not deviate from the mean solstitial colure, it will 
be clear at once to anyone that only the angle of inclination of 
the plane of the true equator to the plane of the ecliptic would 
vary on account of this motion of the poles of the earth, de¬ 
creasing when they move from a through d to b and increasing 
while they complete the opposite movement from b through d 
to a; and that hence no inequality would appear in the preces¬ 
sion of the equinoxes. 

However, it is certainly clear from the observations that the 
true equinoctial points move 70' to either side of the mean 
equinoctial points in the greatest prosthaphaeresis and that the 
change in the obliquity takes twice as long as this motion. My 
teacher was therefore persuaded to introduce, 173 in addition to 
the first, a second lesser libration, whereby the poles of the 
earth deviate from the mean solstitial colure toward the sides 
of the universe in such a way that the arc or straight line a d b 
of the second libration forms four right angles with the mean 
solstitial colure. In the north let a lie to the right side of the 
universe, b to the left j and in the south a to the left, b to 
the right. Through the points h of the first libration let d of the 
second libration describe lines of 24' to either side of a db. 
Finally, let the poles of the earth be in reality fixed t* the 
points h of the second libration, and let them be deflected by 
the second libration only 28' to either side of the said colure, 
with a and b taken as the outermost points. For when the poles 
are at these points, the true solstitial colure makes with the 
mean solstitial colure an angle not perceptibly greater than 70'. 

Now the prosthaphaereses of precession must be taken in 
relation to the mean vernal point. Hence my teacher’s analysis 
of the second libration deals with the relation of the true vernal 
point to the mean, especially since this method of examining 
the prosthaphaereses is rather easy. Then the line a b will be 
140' long; and it will be so placed that it corresponds to the 

™ Reading' ad before CGnUit-utndam (Th 473.15} PII, 338.6). 



north line of the second libration, with d at the mean vernal 
point, the true vernal point at h , and the radius of either small 
circle 35'. Moreover, the terminus from which the motion 
begins is the mean vernal point, from which the true vernal 
point moves to the right toward a. But the anomaly is meas¬ 
ured from the northernmost point of the circle whose diameter 
is described by the true vernal point; and the northernmost 
point is marked on the circumference of the circle by the mean 
equinoctial colure. And since in one cycle of the obliquity the 
inequality of the precession is twice completed, the anomaly 
of the second libration has a period of 1,717 Egyptian years. 174 
Therefore the anomaly of the obliquity, as taken from the 
tables and doubled, equals the anomaly of the precession. The 
name “simple anomaly” is given to the former, “double anom¬ 
aly” to the latter. 

But if the second libration alone were to be assumed, the 
angle of inclination of the planes of the true equator and 
ecliptic clearly would not vary; and this would be a serious 
fault, for every inequality of the phenomena would be observed 
only in connection with the inequality of the precession of the 
equinox. 175 However, since both librations occur together and 
sance, as has been said, their motions interact, the poles of the 
earth describe about the poles of the mean equator the figure 
of twisted rings. 178 

When the poles of the earth cross the mean solstitial colure, 
the true 177 colure lies in the same plane with the mean, and the 
true vernal point coincides with the mean; however, unless the 
poles of both equators coincide, the planes of the equators and 
of the mean and true solstitial and equinoctial colures do not 178 
completely coincide. Now, when the north pole lies between d 
of the second libration and a, the outermost point to the right, 
the south pole occupying the opposite point, the true equinox 

174 Cf. above, p. 156, n, 172. 

175 Omitting veri (Th 474-5-6? PH, 339*14)* 

178 That is, the figure $ (cf. Th 163.30—165.15). 

177 Reading verus (Th 474.9) instead of versus (PH, 339- i 9)- 

i78 Reading with Mastlin (1596 ed T , p. 12$* 1621 ed., p. 126) non before 
omntno (PII, 339^3), 



follows the mean, and the sun comes to the mean equator be¬ 
fore it comes to the true. But when the poles of the earth cross 
over to the opposite sides of the universe, so that the north 
pole lies to the left of the mean solstitial colure and the south 
to the right, the true equinox precedes the mean, and the sun 
meets the true equator before it meets the mean. Besides, when 
the poles of the earth move from a toward b, the tropical year 
decreases, because the true equinox advances, as it were, to meet 
the sun; but when the poles move from b toward a, since the 
equinox, as it were, flees from the sun, the tropical year in¬ 
creases. And when the poles of the earth are near d } for a brief 
span of years the increase or decrease in the year is distinctly 
perceptible. Moreover, since the apparent motion of the fixed 
stars is bound up with the length of the tropical year, in the 
same way the motion in precedence of the solstitial and equi¬ 
noctial points among the fixed stars is observed as swifter and 
slower. 

So far as the solar apogee is concerned, 178 and the distance of 
the vernal equinox from it, the conclusions which in the be¬ 
ginning 1 ® 0 I drew from the observations in accordance with my 
teacher’s opinion are clarified by the preceding discussion. The 
motion of the apogee in the ecliptic depends on the motion of 
the center of the small circle and on the uniform motion of the 
center of the great circle in the circumference of the small 
circle. The diameter of the great circle or ecliptic that passes 
through the centers of the sun and small circle is the mean 
apse-line of the sun; but the diameter through the centers of 
the sun and great circle is the true apse-line. The center of the 
great circle is found between the sun and the point on the 
ecliptic where the sun is thought to be in perigee. 181 Similarly, 
the center of the small circle is situated between the point of 
mean perigee and the sun. 

In the time of Ptolemy the true apse-line was at one end, 
the point of apparent apogee, from the first star of 

Reading \rith Mastlin instead of the first ah (1621 ed., p. iz 7 $ PII, 
340.13), 

130 Pages 119 


m The point of apparent perigee. 



Aries; and at the other end, the perigee, 23 7 0 50'. 182 But for 
the mean apse-line this distance was 6o°i6', and in the opposite 
point, 240*16'. For, starting from that point on the small circle 
which is at the greatest distance from the center of the sun, the 
center of the great circle had moved about 21V3 0 in precedence; 
and the simple anomaly, that is, the anomaly of the obliquity, 
had at that time an equal value. 1 * 3 But since the center of the 
small circle moves uniformly about the center of the sun, and 
the center of the great circle moves uniformly on the circum¬ 
ference of the small circle, the higher apse of the sun, at the 
time of the observation made by my teacher, was found to be 
69° 25' from the first star of Aries. 184 Because at that time the 
simple anomaly was almost exactly 165*, the prosthaphaeresis 
was determined as almost exactly 2° to', 185 and the center of 
the small circle fixed the point of mean perigee between the 
sun and 251 *3 5'. 188 Furthermore, the eccentricity of the great 
circle, or eccentric of the sun if this term is preferred, which 
Ptolemy computed as %4 of the radius of the great circle, is in 
our time about %i, 181 as the observations show, and as is readily 
deduced if the hypotheses of my teacher are adopted and math¬ 
ematics applied. 

The manner in which the eccentricities of the five planets 
vary on account of the motion of the center of the great circle 
on the small circle, as I pointed out in the reasons for revising 
the hypotheses, 188 can be understood with no great effort. In 
the investigation of the five planets two considerations are of 
special importance: first, i n what manner and to what extent the 
center of the earth approaches to or withdraws from the centers 
of the deferents of the planets; second, what relation this ap- 

MJ For the true apogee was 64° 30' from the true equinox (see p. 125, above) ^ 

subtract 6° 40', the true precession (see p. 116, above) 

57° 5o' 180 9 “ 237 0 50' for the perigee. 

188 Hence the prosthaphaeresis was about 2 0 26' (Th 224.14-15): 57* 50' + 
2 0 26' = 6o° 16' + 180 0 “ 240° 16\ 

Th 221.23-28. 

188 Th 221.28-30, 224.32* 

™ 6<> 0 25' + 2 0 *o' + 180° = 251" 35 '' 
above, p. 6 1, n. 9. 


See p. x 36 - 



proach or withdrawal bears to the radius of the deferent of 
each planet. The causes will not be far to seek. 

In the case of Saturn the entire diameter of the small circle 
has no perceptible ratio whatever to the radius of the deferent, 
since Saturn is the first planet beneath the starry sphere. Hence 
observations can reveal no variation in the eccentricity of 
Saturn. As for Jupiter, its apogee is about a quadrant from the 
apogee of the sun. Hence the motion of the center of the great 
circle produces no observable change in the eccentricity at the 
present time, even though the ratio of the diameter of the 
small circle to the radius of the deferent is perceptible and 
measurable. And this is the reason why in the case of Mercury 
also no change is observed in the eccentricity, since its apogee 
is at a similar distance from the apogee of the sun. 

Because the apogee of Mars is about 50° to the left of 
the sun’s apogee, and the apogee of Venus 42* to the right, the 
centers of their deferents are suitably placed to reveal the 
change in the eccentricity j 189 and the diameter of the small 
circle has a perceptible ratio to the deferent of each. By a 
trigonometrical analysis of the observations of these two planets, 
my teacher found that the eccentricity of Mars has decreased by 
142 , of Venus by V*, 190 on account of the approach of the center 
of the great circle to the sun. 

Lest any of the motions attributed to the earth should seem 
to be supported by insufficient evidence, our wise Maker ex¬ 
pressly provided that they should all be observed equally 
perceptibly in the apparent motions of all the planets; with so 
few motions was it feasible to satisfy most of the necessary 
phenomena of nature. Therefore the motion of the center of 
the great circle affects not only the sun and the planets revolv¬ 
ing about it but also the phenomena of the moon. For Ptolemy 

189 Cf. Til 327.16..18, 

199 Prowess text (PII, 34.2.9) omits fartem before frofUr (Th 4.75.35)* Ac¬ 
cording to Copernicus’s findings* the eccentricity of Mars had decreased from 
to 1460 (cf. above, p. 77, a 58)* a decrease of %7 or rather than 
%2> as Kheticus has it. As for the eccentricity of Venus, Copernicus explicitly 
reports a diminution of somewhat more than not % (from 416 to 350$ cf. 
Th 369.8-11). 



computed the greatest distance of the sun from the earth to be 
r ,210 units, of which the radius of the earth is one, and the 
axis of the earth’s shadow 268; 191 and my teacher shows that in 
our time the greatest distance of the sun from the earth is 1,179 
units, and the axis of the cone of shadow 265. m But I have 
decided to reserve the other related topics 193 for a “Second 
Account” to follow this one, wherein I shall examine the mo¬ 
tions and phenomena of the sun and moon by the light of the 
change in the hypotheses. 

THE SECOND PART OF THE HYPOTHESES 
The Motions of the Five Planets 

When I reflect on this truly admirable structure of new 
hypotheses wrought by my teacher, I frequently recall, most 
learned Schoner, that Platonic dialogue which indicates the 
qualities required in an astronomer and then adds “No nature 
except an extraordinary one could ever easily formulate a 
theory.” 194 

When I was with you last year and watched your work and 
that of other learned men in the improvement of the motions 
of Regiomontanus and his teacher Peurbach, I first began to 
understand what sort of task and how great a difficulty it was 
to recall this queen of mathematics, astronomy, to her palace, 
as she deserved, and to restore the boundaries of her kingdom. 
But from the time that I became, by God’s will, a spectator and 
witness of the labors which my teacher performs with energetic 
mind and has in large measure already accomplished, I realized 
that I had not dreamed of even the shadow of so great a burden 
of work. And it is so great a labor that it is not any hero who 
can endure it and finally complete it. F«r this reason, I suppose, 

M HI, 425.1721, 

Tli 282,25-26, 

““Omitting his (PII, 342,24; Th 476.6). 

“* Efintmis »9*B; Beapijaat here means “observe’’ rather than “theorize,” 
as Rheticus interpreted it. The authenticity of the Bfinomis is disputed j for the 
view that it is genuine see J. Harward, The Efinomis of Plato (•xford, 1928), 
pp. 26-58 and, for the opposing view, J. Geffcken, Griechische Literalurgrschichte 
(Heidelberg, 1926-34), II, 174-76. 


the ancients related that Hercules, sprung of Jupiter most 
high, no longer trusting his own shoulders, replaced the 
heavens upon Atlas, who, being long accustomed to the burden, 
resumed it with stout heart and undiminished vigor, as he 
had borne it in former days. 

Moreover, divine Plato, master of wisdom as Pliny styles 
him, 195 affirms not indistinctly in the Epintmis that astronomy 
was discovered under the guidance of God. 19 * Others perhaps 
interpret this opinion of Plato’s otherwise. But when I see that 
my teacher always has before his eyes the observations of all 
ages together with his own, assembled in order as in catalogues; 
then when some conclusion must be drawn or contribution 
made to the science and its principles, he proceeds from the 
earliest observations to his own, seeking the mutual relationship 
which harmonizes them all; the results thus obtained by cor¬ 
rect inference under the guidance of Urania he then compares 
with the hypotheses of Ptolemy and the ancients; and having 
made a most careful examination of these hypotheses, he finds 
that astronomical proof requires their rejection; he assumes 
new hypotheses, not indeed without divine inspiration and the 
favor of the gods; by applying mathematics, he geometrically 
establishes the conclusions which can be drawn from them by 
correct inference; he then harmonizes the ancient observations 
and his own with the hypotheses which he has adopted; and 
after performing all these operations he finally writes down 
the laws of astronomy—when, I say, I behold this procedure, 
I think that Plato must be understood as follows. 

The mathematician who studies the motions of the stars 
is surely like a blind man who, with only a staff to guide him, 
must make a great, endless, hazardous journey that winds 
through innumerable desolate places. What will be the result? 
Proceeding anxiously for a while and groping his way with 
his staff, he will at some time, leaning upon it, cry out in 

Natural History vii.jo^i).! 10, 

*** This proposition is not expressly formulated anywhere in the Efinomis y 
but is derived from the argument in 989P-990A. For the question of the authen¬ 
ticity of the Efinovtit see n. 194, above. 



despair to heaven, earth, and all the gods to aid him in his 
misery. God will permit him to try his strength for a period of 
years, that he may in the end learn that he cannot be rescued 
from threatening danger by his staff. Then God compassion¬ 
ately stretches forth His hand to the despairing man, and with 
His hand conducts him to the desired goal. 

The staff of the astronomer is mathematics or geometry, by 
which he ventures at first to test the road and press on. For 
in the examination from afar of those divine objects so remote 
from us, of what avail is the strength of the human mind? Of 
what avail 1 * 7 dim-sighted eyes? Accordingly, if God in His 
kindness had not endowed the astronomer with heroic ambi¬ 
tions and led him by the hand, as it were, along a road other¬ 
wise inaccessible to the human intellect, the astronomer would 
not be, I think, in any respect better circumstanced and more 
fortunate than the blind man, save that trusting in his reason 
and offering divine honors to his staff, he will one day rejoice in 
the recall of Urania from the underworld. When, however, he 
considers the matter aright, he will perceive that he is not more 
blessed than Orpheus, who was aware that Eurydice was fol¬ 
lowing him as he danced his way up from Orcusj but when 
he reached the jaws of Avernus, she whom he dearly longed 
to possess disappeared from view and descended once m»re 
to the infernal regions. Let us then examine, as we set out to 
do, my teacher’s hypotheses for the remaining planets, to see 
whether with unremitting devotion and under the guidance 
of God, he has led Urania back to the upper world and restored 
her to her place of honor. 

With regard to the apparent motions of the sun and moon, 
it is perhaps possible to deny what is said about the motion of 
the earth, although I do not see how the explanation of pre¬ 
cession is to be transferred to the sphere of the stars. But if 
anyone desires to look either to the principal end of astronomy 
and the order and harmony of the system of the spheres or to 

Reading quid (Th 4.77.15) instead of quam (PII, 34.4..S4.). In a note, 
Prowe attributes the change from quam to quid to Mastlinj but the 1566 edition 
has quid (p. 207V). 



ease and elegance and a complete explanation of the causes of 
the phenomena, by the assumption of no other hypotheses will 
he demonstrate the apparent motions of the remaining planets 
more neatly and correctly. For all these phenomena appear to 
be linked most nobly together, as by a golden chain ; and each 
of the planets, by its position and order and every inequality of 
its motion, bears witness that the earth moves and that we who 
dwell upon the globe of the earth, instead of accepting its 
changes of position, believe that the planets wander in all sorts 
of motions of their own. And if it is possible anywhere else to 
see how God has left the universe for our discussion, it surely 
is eminently clear in this matter. No one can be affected, 1 
think, by the argument that God permits Ptolemy and other 
famous heroes to dissent on this point. For it is not the sort 
of opinion which Socrates in the Gorgias 10 * declares to be 
evil for men; and it does not cause any harm to either the 
science itself or the divining art derived therefrom. 

The ancients attributed to the epicycles of the three superior 
planets the entire inequality of motion which they discovered 
that these planets had with respect to the sun. Then they saw 
that the remaining apparent inequality in these planets did not 
occur simply on the theory of an eccentric. The results obtained 
by calculating the motions of these planets in imitation of the 
hypotheses for Venus agreed with experience and the observa¬ 
tions. Hence they decided to assume for the second apparent 
inequality a device like that which their analyses established 
for Venus. As in the case of Venus, the center of the epicycle of 
each planet was to move at a uniform distance from the center 
of the eccentric, but at a uniform rate with respect to the center 
of the equant; and this point was to be the center of uniform 
motion also for the planet, as it moved on the epicycle with its 
own motion, starting from the mean apogee. So long as the 
ancients strove to retain the earth in the center of the universe, 

1,8 458 A $ Rheticus is quoting not the original Greek but a Latin translation, 
Copernicus used the translation of Marsilio Fidno {Stromata Cofernicatta, pp* 
306-7)* But fernicfasas in our text shows that Rheticus used Simon Grynaeus’s 
revision of Ficino’s translation, for Grynaeus replaced Ficino’s malum by fer~ 
niciosum (Basel, 1532, p, 342)- 



they were compelled by the observations to affirm that, just as 
Venus revolved with its own special motion on the epicycle, 
but by reason of the eccentric advanced with the mean motion 
of the sun, so conversely the superior planets in the epicycle 
were related to the sun, but moved with special motions on the 
eccentric. But in 19 * the theory of Mercury, the ancients thought 
that they had to accept, in addition to the devices which they 
deemed adequate to save the appearances of Venus, a different 
position for the equant, and revolution on a small circle for the 
center from which the epicycle was equidistant. All these 
arrangements were shrewdly devised, like most of the work of 
antiquity, and would agree satisfactorily with the motions and 
appearances if we granted that the celestial circles admit an 
inequality about their centers—a relation which nature abhors 
—and if we regarded the especially notable first inequality of 
apparent motion as essential to the five planets, although it is 
clearly accidental. 

Moreover, in the latitudes of the planets, the ancients seem 
to neglect the axiom that all the motions of the heavenly bodies 
either are circular or are composed of circular motions j unless 
perhaps it is proposed to explain the reflexions and declinations 
of Venus and Mercury, the inclinations 2 ** of the epicycles in 
the three superior planets, and the deviations in the inferior 
planets by motions in libration, as was done just above for the 
earth’s motion in declination. We may admit this for the re¬ 
flexions and declinations of Venus and Mercury, inasmuch as 
the angles of inclination of the planes of their eccentrics and 
epicycles remain everywhere unchanged. But common calcula¬ 
tion shows that the inclinations of the epicycles in the three 
superior planets, and the deviations of Venus and Mercury 
do not occur through librations. Let me speak only of the 
deviations. The proportional minutes, by which we compute 
the deviations in relation to the distance of the center of the 
epicycle from the nodes and apsides, have been investigated 
and determined by the same method by which the declinations 

“Emitting in (PII, 346.19; Th 478.21). 

“Reading declittationes (Th 478.33) instead of declinationis (MI, 347.3). 



of the parts of the ecliptic are examined in the doctrine of the 
first motion. Therefore, when the center of the epicycle of 
Venus is 60° from any of the apsides of the eccentric, we infer 
a deviation of 5', and for Mercury 22%'. But if the deferent 
were assumed to oscillate by means of librations, true science 
would require for this position of the epicycle of Venus a devia¬ 
tion not greater than 2%' and for Mercury II%'. For in this 
position of the center of the epicycle the angle of inclination of 
the plane of the eccentric to the plane of the ecliptic would be 
found not greater than 5' for Venus and 22%' for Mercury, on 
account of the properties of motion in libration. Perhaps for 
this reason John Regiomontanus thought it advisable to caution 
his readers that calculation of latitudes is concerned only with 
the approximate truth. 4 * 1 

Finally, as Aristotle points out at length in another connec¬ 
tion, 202 men by nature desire to know. Hence it is quite vexing 
that the causes of phenomena are nowhere else so hidden and 
wrapped, as it were, in Cimmerian darkness, a feeling which 
Ptolemy shares with us. Concerning the hypotheses of the 
ancients for the five planets I shall say no more for the present 
than is required perhaps by an explanation of the new hy¬ 
potheses (if I may so term them) and a comparison of them 
with the ancient hypotheses. I sincerely cherish Ptolemy and 
his followers equally with my teacher, since I have ever in 
mind and memory that sacred precept of Aristotle: “We must 
esteem both parties but follow the more accurate.” 2 * 3 And yet 
somehow I feel more inclined to the hypotheses of my teacher. 

861 As Mastlin (i596 ed., p. 13 6) indicates, the reference is to the Efitome, 
Book XIII, Prop, ait “But to find the inclinations of this kind for every position 
of the epicycle on the eccentric is no mean task. Hence attention was necessarily 
directed toward another means whereby the latitudes for the remaining positions 
of the epicycle would be readily determined approximately.” 

** Metaphysics i.i 980am. Kheticus is quoting, not the original Greek, but 
some Latin translation which is neither the antiqaa translatio nor Bessarion’sj 
cf. above, p. 142, n. 133* 

** Metaphysics xii.8 1073^6-17 (W. D. Ross’s translation). The precept per¬ 
haps came to the attention of Kheticus because it was quoted in Simplicius’s 
Commentary on Aristotle's De caelo (ed. Heiberg, 506.1-3) $ cf. above, p. 145, 
n. 139* 



This is so perhaps partly because I am persuaded that now at 
last I have a more accurate understanding of that delightful 
maxim which on account of its weightiness and truth is at¬ 
tributed to Plato: “God ever geometrizes”; 2 * 4 but partly 
because in my teacher’s revival of astronomy I see, as the saying 
is, with both eyes and as though a fog had lifted and the sky 
were now clear, the force of that wise statement of Socrates in 
the Phaedrus: “If I think any other man is able to see things 
that can naturally be collected into one and divided into many, 
him I follow after and ‘walk in his footsteps as if he were a 
god.’ ” 205 

The Hypotheses for the Motions in Longitude of the 

Five Planets 

What has been said thus far regarding the motion of the 
earth has been demonstrated by my teacher. Consequently (as 
I pointed out 2 *® in the reasons for revising the hypotheses) the 
entire inequality in the apparent motion of the planets which 
seems to occur in their positions with respect to the sun 207 is 
caused by the annual motion of the earth on the great circle. 
It likewise follows that the planets in reality have a single 
inequality, which is observed in relation to the parts of the 
zodiac, and is one of the two recognized heretofore. Hence 
only those hypotheses are acceptable which can explain both 
inequalities of motion. Just as my teacher chose to employ an 
epicycle on an epicycle for the moon, 208 so, for the purpose of 
demonstrating conveniently the order of the planets and the 
measurement of their motion, he has selected, for the three 
superior planets, epicycles on an eccentric, but for Venus and 
Mercury eccentrics on an eccentric. 

““This celebrated maxim is cot found in the Platonic corpus. See Plutarch’s 
Moralia; Quaestiones convkiales Book viii. Question 2 (ed. Bemardakis, IV 
[Leipzig, 1892], 307.11-308.2). The first edition of this work (Venice, 1509) 
was available to Rheticus; the passage cited appears on p, 882. 

** Phaedrus 166B (H. N. Fowler’s translation, Loeb Classical Library, 1913). 

“Page 138. 

301 A Greek phrase borrowed from Ptolemy; cf., e.g., HIT, 250.14-15. 

“Cf. above, pp. < 58 - 69 , i 34 - 



Now since we look up at the motions of the three superior 
planets as from the center of the earth, but regard the revolu¬ 
tions of the inferior planets as below us, the centers of the 
deferents of the planets may properly be brought into relation 
with the center of the great circle; and from this point we 
may then quite correctly transfer all the motions and phenom¬ 
ena to the center of the earth. Therefore there must be under¬ 
stood for the five planets an eccentric, the center of which lies 
outside the center of the great circle. 

But to gain a better understanding of the method of estab¬ 
lishing the new hypotheses, in short to place everything in an 
increasingly clearer light, let us suppose first that the planes of 
the eccentrics of the five planets are in the plane of the ecliptic, 
and that the centers of the deferents and equants are related to 
the center of the great circle, as with the ancients they were 
related to the center of the earth. Then let us divide into four 
equal parts the distances between the center of the great circle 
and the points or centers of the equants. Next let us place the 
center of the eccentric of each of the three superior planets at 
the third dividing point, as you move upward from the center 
of the great circle toward the apogee. With the remaining 
fourth part as radius, let us describe an epicycle with its center 
on the circumference of the eccentric, and the scheme of real 
motion in longitude will become apparent for each of these 
planets. 209 

Then, in the opinion of my teacher, as the epicycle revolves, 
the planet moves in its upper circumference in consequence, 
in its lower in precedence, so that when the center of the 
epicycle is in the apogee of the eccentric, the planet is found in 
the perigee of the epicycle; and conversely, when the center 
of the epicycle is in the perigee of the eccentric, the planet is 
in the apogee of the epicycle. By this similarity of motions, the 
planet completes its periods on the epicycle in equal time with 
the center of the epicycle on the eccentric. If the equants are 
removed, the inequality in the motion of the superior planets 
with respect to the center of the great circle is clearly regular 

**Cf. above, p. 74, n. jo. 



and composed of uniform motions. For the epicycle assumed in 
this theory succeeds t* the function of the equant; and the 
eccentric describes equal angles about its own center in equal 
times, while the planet, moving on the epicycle to which it is 
attached, likewise describes equal angles about the center of 
the epicycle in equal times. 

But the motion of Venus will be established as follows. 
Rejecting the deferent, which is replaced by the great circle, 
describe a small circle about the third dividing point, with the 
remaining quarter of the line as radius. Then let the center 
of the epicycle of Venus, which will here be called eccentric 
on the eccentric, second eccentric, and movable eccentric, move 
on the circumference of the said small circle 210 according to this 
law, that whenever the center of the earth crosses the apse-line, 
the center of the eccentric is in the point of the small circle that 
is nearest to the center of the great circle; and whenever the 
earth is midway on its circle between the two apsides, the center 
of the eccentric of Venus is in the point of the small circle that 
is most remote from the center of the great circle. The center of 
the eccentric moves in the same direction as the earth, that is, 
in the order of the signs; but, as follows from the foregoing, 
it revolves twice in each period of the earth. 

While the scheme of motions for Mercury agrees in general 
with the theory of Venus, on account of the remaining in¬ 
equality, there is an additional epicycle, 211 whose diameter 
Mercury describes by a libration. To put the scheme in terms 
of the earth’s motion, the length of the radius of the movable 
deferent is 3,573, 818 the eccentricity of the first deferent 736, 
the length of the radius of the small circle, which carries the 
movable center of the deferent, 211, and the diameter of the 
said epicycle 380 units, of which 10,000 constitute the line 
from the center of the great circle to the center of the earth. 
But in the motion of Mercury the following law is observed: 

“ Cf. above, p. St, n* 69. 

“ Cf. above, p* SS, n. 9 

“Rheticus has chosen to give the minimum value (c£ Th 382.27—383.1, and 
above, p. 8$, n. 90)« 



the center of the movable eccentric, in contrast with the case 
of Venus, is most remote from the center of the great circle 
whenever the earth is in the line of the planet’s apsides; and 
nearest, whenever the earth is at a quadrant’s distance from the 
apsides of the planet. Mercury will have, as is apparent, a fixed 
epicycle. The diameter of this epicycle is directed to the center 
of the movable deferent and is described by a motion in libra- 
tion of the planet moving along it in a straight line according 
to the following law. Whenever the center of the movable 
eccentric is most remote from the center of the great circle, 
the planet is in the perigee of the epicycle, which is the lower 
limit of the diameter described by the planet. Conversely, 
Mercury is at the other limit, which may be called the apogee, 
whenever the center of the movable eccentric is nearest to the 
center of the great circle. But the motions of the apsides of the 
planets, like certain other topics, are reserved for the “Second 
Account.” 

The foregoing is very nearly the whole system of hypotheses 
for saving the entire real inequality of the motion in longitude 
of the planets. Therefore, if our eye were at the center of 
the great circle, lines of sight drawn from it through the planets 
to the sphere of the stars would, as the lines of the true 
motions, be rotated in the ecliptic by the planets exactly as the 
schemes of the aforementioned circles and motions require, so 
that they would reveal the real inequalities of these motions in 
the zodiac. But we, as dwellers upon the earth, observe the 
apparent motions in the heavens from the earth. Hence we 
refer all the motions and phenomena to the center of the earth 
as the foundation and inmost part of our abode, by drawing 
lines from it through the planets, as though our eye had moved 
from the center of the great circle to the center of the earth. 
Clearly it is from this latter point that the inequalities of all 
the phenomena, as they are seen by us, must be calculated. But 
if it is our purpose to deduce the true and real inequalities in 
the motion of the planets, we must use the lines drawn from 
the center of the great circle, as has been explained. To smooth 
our way through the topics in planetary phenomena which 



remain to be discussed and to make the whole treatise easier 
and more agreeable, let us imagine not only the lines of true 
apparent motion drawn from the center of the earth through 
the planets to the ecliptic but also those drawn from the center 
of the great circle and therefore properly called the lines of the 
inequality of motion. 

When, as the earth advances with the motion of the great 
circle, it reaches a position where it is on a straight line between 
the sun and one of the three superior planets, the planet will 
be seen at its evening rising} and because the earth, when so 
situated, is at its nearest to the planet, the ancients said that the 
planet was at its nearest to the earth and in the perigee of its 
epicycle. But when the sun approaches the line of the true and 
apparent place of the planet—this occurs when the earth 
reaches the point opposite the above-mentioned position—the 
planet begins to disappear by setting in the evening and to 
attain its greatest distance from the earth, until the line of the 
true place of the planet passes also through the center of the 
sun. Then the sun lies between the planet and the earth, and 
the planet is occulted. After occultation, since the motion of 
the earth continues uninterrupted and since the line of the 
true place of the sun withdraws from the line of the true place 
of the planet, the planet reappears at its morning rising, when 
it has attained the proper distance from the sun required by 
the arc of vision. 

Moreover, in the hypotheses of the three superior planets, 
the great circle takes the place of the epicycle attributed to 
each of the planets by the ancients. Hence the true apogee and 
perigee of the planet with respect to the great circle will be 
found on the diameter of the great circle prolonged to meet 
the planet. But the mean apogee and perigee will be found on 
the diameter of the great circle that moves 213 parallel to the 
line drawn from the center of the eccentric to the center of the 
epicycle. Since in the semicircle closer to the planet the earth 
approaches the planet, and in the other, opposite semicircle 
recedes from it, in the former semicircle the ends of the 

“Reading’ mowetur (Th 4.82.11) instead of moventur (PII, j52.11). 



diameters of the great circle are the perigees, but in the latter 
the apogees. For the former semicircle takes the place of the 
lower part of the epicycle, but the latter, the upper. 

Imagine that a conjunction of sun and planet is not far off. 
Let the center of the earth be in the true place of the apogee 
of the planet with respect to the great circle; and let the line of 
the real inequality coincide with the line of the apparent place 
of the planet. However, as the earth in its motion moves away 
from this position, the line 314 of the real inequality and the 
line of the true place of the planet begin to intersect in the 
planet. The former advances with the regular unequal motion 
of the planet in the order of the signs; and the latter, as it 
separates from the former, makes the planet seem to us to move 
more rapidly in the ecliptic than it really does with its own 
motion. 

But when the earth reaches the part of the great circle that 
is nearer 215 to the planet, the direction of its motion at once 
becomes westward, so that the apparent motion of the planet 
forthwith seems slower to us. Moreover, because the earth 
mounts toward the planet, the line of the true motion of the sun 
moves away from the planet, and the planet is thought to 
approach us, as though it were descending from its upper cir¬ 
cumference. However, the motion of the planet seems to be 
direct, until the center of the earth reaches the point on the 
great circle with respect to the planet 216 where the angle 
through which the line of the true place of the planet moves 
daily in precedence equals the diurnal angle of the real in¬ 
equality in consequence. For there, since the two motions 
neutralize each other, the planet appears to remain at its first 
stationary point for a number of days, depending on the ratio 
of the great circle to the eccentric of the planet under considera¬ 
tion, the position of the planet on its circle, and the real rate 
of its motion. Then as the earth moves from this position 
nearer to the planet, we believe that the planet retrogrades 

n< Reading- linen (Th 484.18} instead of lineae (PII, 351.10). 

,,s Reading frofiorem (Th 481.11) Instead of frofriorem (PII, 352.25). 

“*Reading flanetam (Th 482.27) instead of flanetae (PII, 352.31). 



and moves in precedence, since the regression of the line of the 
true place of the planet perceptibly exceeds the real motion of 
the planet. This apparent retrogradation continues until the 
earth reaches the true perigee of the planet with respect to the 
great circle, where the planet, at the mid-point of regression, 
is in opposition to the sun and nearest to the earth. When Mars 
is found in this position, it has, in addition to the common 
retrogradation or parallax caused by the great circle, another 
parallax caused by the sensible ratio of the radius of the earth 
to the distance of Mars, as careful observation will testify. 

Finally, as the earth moves in consequence from this central 
conjunction with the planet, so to say, the westward regression 
diminishes exactly as it had previously increased, until when 
the motions are again equal, the planet reaches its second sta¬ 
tionary point. Then as the real motion of the planet exceeds the 
motion of the line of the true place of the planet, and as the 
earth advances, the situation is reached where the planet at 
length appears at the mid-point of its direct motion and the 
earth again comes to the true apogee of the planet, whence we 
started its motion, and produces for us in order all the above- 
mentioned phenomena of each of the planets. 

The foregoing is the first use made of the great circle in the 
study of the planetary motionsj by it we are freed from 
the three large epicycles in Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. What the 
ancients called the argument of the planet, my teacher calls 
the planet’s motion in commutation , 217 for by means of it we 
explain the phenomena arising from the motion of the earth 
on the great circle. These phenomena are clearly caused by the 
great circle, as the parallaxes of the moon are caused by 
the ratio of the radius of the earth to the lunar circles. The 
motion of the center of the epicycle of each planet, when sub¬ 
tracted from the uniform motion of the earth, which is also 
the mean motion of the sun, leaves as a remainder the uniform 
motion of commutation} and it is computed from the mean 
apogee, from which the earth also moves uniformly. Hence 
the true and apparent motion of each planet in the ecliptic is 

*“Th 308.2-8} cf. p. +8, above. 



readily obtained from my teacher’s tables of the prostha- 
phaereses of the planets. 

Moreover, we shall find the second of the uses 218 of the 
great circle, no less important than the first, in the theory of 
Venus and Mercury. For since we observe these two planets 
from the earth as from a lookout, even if they should remain 
fixed like the sun, nevertheless, because we are carried about 
them by the motion of the great circle, we would think that 
they, like the sun, traverse the zodiac in motions of their own. 
Now the observations testify that Venus and Mercury move 
on their circles in independent motions of their own. Hence, 
in addition to the mean motion of the sun, by which they are 
carried in the order of the signs, other accidental phenomena 
caused by the great circle are observed in them. For in the 
first place we will consider their circles as epicycles which, as 
though on their own deferents, traverse the zodiac at an equal 
rate with the sun. Thus when the earth is in the perigee of 
the first deferents, their entire circles will be thought to be 
in the apogee of the eccentric, and conversely in the perigee 
with the earth in apogee. Moreover, just as in the superior 
planets the apogees and perigees with respect to the planets 
are designated on the great circle, so conversely they are 
marked on the circles of Venus and Mercury with respect to the 
center of the earth, wherever it may be; and, by reason of the 
annual motion of the earth, are drawn through all the points 
on the deferents. The ends of the diameter of the movable 
deferent that moves 219 parallel to the line of the mean motion 
of the sun, that is, the line from the center of the great circle 
to the center of the earth, are the mean apsides. The apsides 
in the part of the movable deferent that is more remote from 
the earth are called, not without reason, the higher apsides; 
those in the nearer part, the lower. 

Venus revolves in nine months, as was stated above , 220 and 

r ' R Reading utilitatum (Th 483.20) instead oi utilitaietn (PII, 354.24). 

“Reading movetur (1566 ed., p. 210V} 1596 ed., p. 143; 1621 ed., p. 137) 
instead of fnovtnlur (PII, 355.19). 

“Page 1+5. 



Mercury in approximately three. Hence, if 221 the annual motion 
of the earth should cease, each planet would appear to us on the 
earth to be in each period twice in conjunction with the sun, 
twice stationary, and twice at the outermost points in the 
curvature 222 of the deferents, and once morning, evening, retro¬ 
grade, direct, in apogee, and in perigee. Moreover, if our eye 
were at the center of the great circle, only the independent 
unequal motions of Venus and Mercury, as of the other planets, 
would 223 appear} and as the planets traversed the entire zodiac 
by their own motions, they would come to be in opposition to 
the sun and would be seen in the other configurations with 

• 2°4 

respect to it. * 

But since we do not observe the motions of the planets from 
the center of the great circle, nor does the annual motion of 
the earth cease, it will be quite clear why these phenomena 
appear in such great variety to us who inhabit the earth. In 
accordance with the size of their circles, Venus and Mercury 
outrun the earth by their swifter motion, while the earth 
follows them in its annual motion. Therefore Venus overtakes 
the earth in about sixteen months , 225 and Mercury in four} 
with these intervals as their period, the planets show us again 
and again all the phenomena which God desired to be seen 
from the earth. 

The lines of the real inequalities of motion move 228 regu¬ 
larly, revolving about the center of the great circle in the 
period allotted to them by God} but the lines of the true 
places, which are drawn from the center of the earth through 
Venus and Mercury, move in an altogether different manner, 
not only because they are drawn from a point outside the orbits, 
but also because the point is movable. We think that Venus and 

231 Reading Si (Th 483.39) instead of Sic (PII* 355.22). 

^Reading curvaiuris (Th 484,3$ PII, 355 **$)* 
m Reading oferrent (Th 484.5-6) instead of oftereni (PII, 356.3). 
m Reading eum (Th 484,7) instead of cum (PII, 356.4)* 

235 This estimate of the synodic period of Venus is too low. Mastlin^s correction* 
nineteen months (1596 ed.* p. 1435 1621 ed.* p. 137)) should be unhesitatingly 
adopted, since it agrees with Th 310.1-7 and the tables (Th 318-19). 

Reading ince&tml (Th 484.15) instead of incedant (PII, 356.14). 



Mercury move on their circles with the motion with which the 
ancients said that they moved on the epicycle. But since this 
motion is merely the difference by which the swifter planet 
exceeds the mean motion of the earth or sun, my teacher calls 
this excess the motion in commutation, for exactly the same 
reasons as in the three superior planets. Consequently all the 
phenomena of Venus and Mercury which would appear if the 
earth were fixed recur more slowly on account of the earth’s 
motion; and they occur at all the parts of the deferents and 
points on the ecliptic where their motions of every sort would 
be observed. For even without the earth fixed in Cancer, 
Ptolemy would have found that Mercury has its least elonga¬ 
tions from the sun in Libra, and Venus in Taurus . 287 No matter 
where the earth may be on the great circle, Venus and Mercury 
seem to us to have their greatest elongation from the sun 
when they are observed at the sides of the deferent. If both 
tangents are drawn from the center of the earth to the deferents 
of Venus and Mercury, the planets will move in the order of 
the signs in the upper circumference, upper, that is, with refer¬ 
ence to the earth; but in the opposite direction in the lower 
circumference, which is nearer to the earth. For here they 
appear to the senses to be stationary and retrograde, since the 
line of the true place of the planet makes about the center of 
the earth a diurnal angle in precedence equal to the angle of 
the mean motion, which is also the motion of the earth, in 
consequence, or a greater angle, etc. It is clear from these con¬ 
siderations why Venus and Mercury are seen to revolve about 
the sun. 

It is also clearer than sunlight that the circle which carries 
the earth is rightly called the great circle. If generals have 
received the surname “Great” on account of successful exploits 
in war or conquests of peoples, surely this circle deserved to 
have that august name applied to it. For almost alone it makes 
us share in the laws of the celestial state, corrects all the errors 
of the motions, and restores to its rank this most beautiful 

** For Ptolemy found the apogee of Mercury in Libra, and of Venus m Taurus 
(H 1 I, 3 7i.z-4> 300.15-16* cf. above, p. $5, n. $7 and p. 81, n. 71)* 



part of philosophy. Moreover, it is called the great circle be¬ 
cause it has, in comparison with the circles of both the superior 
and inferior planets, a sensible magnitude which is the explana¬ 
tion of the principal phenomena. 

The Apparent Deviation of the Planets from the Ecliptic 

In the latitudes of the planets the first point to observe is 
that the name “great” is correctly assigned to the circle that 
carries the center of the earth. This circle deserves even higher 
commendation for the reason that the views of the ancients 
regarding the latitudes are quite involved and obscure, as is 
well known. The motions in longitude of the planets offer 
excellent evidence that the center of the earth describes what 
we call the great circle; but in the latitudes of the planets, the 
uses of this circle, as if placed in some well-lighted spot, are 
more obvious, since the great circle is the principal cause of every 
inequality of the appearances in latitude, even though it no¬ 
where departs from the plane of the ecliptic. You see, most 
learned Schiner, that this circle should be honored and em- 
.braced with the greatest affection; for when all the causes have 
been set forth, it puts the whole subject of motion in latitude so 
briefly and so clearly before our eyes. 

First, let the deferents of the three superior planets be in¬ 
clined to the ecliptic as in Ptolemy’s system; let their apogees 
be found to the north, their perigees to the south; and let the 
planets revolve on their deferents like the moon on its oblique 
circle, out of the plane of which it does not move. The lines 
of the real inequality, the dragons 33 ® of the planets, as they 
are commonly called, indicate the inclinations of the deferents 

528 This term was employed to designate the deviation of the moon and the 
placets from the ecliptic. The point on the ecliptic where the moon or planet 
passes from south latitude to north (ascending node) was called the “dragon^ 
head," cafut Vraconis (Th 261.29)5 the point where it passes from north lati¬ 
tude to south (descending node) was called the ^dragon^ tail," canda Vracoms 
(Th 261.30). The usage survives in (a) the modern name, draconitic month, 
for the average time between two successive passages of the moon through the 
same node, and (£) the symbols still used to denote the nodes (for these symbols 
in a MS of the fourteenth century see Paul Tannery, Memoires scientifiques, 
Toulouse and Paris, 19x2- , IV, 356*5?) plate II). 



to the plane of the ecliptic and its intersections with the 
motions of the planets. Intersecting these lines in the centers 
of the planets are the lines of the true places. The latter, ac¬ 
cording to the position of the earth’s center 320 on the great 
circle in relation to the planet, and the position of the planet 
on its oblique circle, mark the true places of the planets as 
nearer 330 to and remoter from the line through the middle of 
the signs , 251 in accordance with the size of the angles which 
the lines of the true places make with the plane of the ecliptic, 
as mathematical theory requires. Therefore, no matter what 
part of its deferent and epicycle the planet is in on the oblique 
circle, when the center of the earth is in the half of the great 
circle that is more remote from the planet—the half which 
the ancients called the upper part of the epicycle—the apparent 
latitudes clearly must be smaller than the angle of inclination 
of the deferent to the plane of the ecliptic; for in this position 
of the center of the earth in relation to the planet, the angle of 
apparent latitude is smaller than the angle of inclination, being 
an interior angle in comparison with the exterior and opposite. 
Furthermore, when the center of the earth reaches the half of 
the great circle that is nearer to the planet, conversely the ap¬ 
parent latitude is seen to be greater than the angle of inclina¬ 
tion, obviously for the same reasons; for what was previously 
the exterior and opposite angle is now the interior angle. 

This is the reason why the ancients thought that when the 
center of the epicycle was outside the nodes, the upper part 
of the epicycle was always between the planes of the deferent 
and ecliptic; that the other half of the epicycle was tilted in 
the same direction as the half of the deferent occupied by the 
center of the epicycle; that the diameter which passed through 
the middle longitudes of the epicycle moved parallel to the 
plane of the ecliptic; and that when the epicycle was in 

Reading with Mastlin (1596 ed., p. 145) centri instead of centro (PII, 
358.12); cf. in tali centri terrae situ (PII, 358.22). 

““Reading frofiora (Th 485.27) instead of frofriora (PII, 358.14). 

“A term for the ecliptic; -per signorum medium, “through the middle of the 
signs,” is a literal translation of the standard Greek term ixiaur twi> iy&iay 
(cf. HI, 68.17-18). 



the nodes, the planet had no latitude wherever it might be on 
the epicycle. In our hypotheses, the planet has no latitude when 
it is in one of the nodes, no matter where the earth may be 
found on the great circle. If the angle between the planes of 
the epicycle and deferent had been found, in the hypotheses 
of the ancients, invariably equal to the angle of inclination of 
the planes of the deferent and ecliptic; that is, if the plane 
of the epicycle had been found always parallel to the ecliptic, the 
aforementioned theory of latitudes would be sufficient. But an 
inequality is implied in the observations geometrically exam¬ 
ined, as can be seen in the last book of Ptolemy’s Great 
Syntaxis . 232 Therefore, using a motion in libration, my teacher 
makes the angle of inclination of the deferent to the ecliptic 
increase and diminish in a definite relation to the mean motion 
of the planet on its oblique circle, and of the earth on the great 
circle. This result will be obtained if in each period of the 
motion in commutation the diameter along which the libration 
takes place is twice described by the outermost limits of the 
oblique circle, and if the following condition is observed: that 
when the planet is at its evening rising the angle of inclination 
is greatest, and hence the angle of apparent latitude is even 
greater; but with the planet at its morning rising, minimal, 
and hence the apparent latitude, as is consistent, even smaller . 233 

But the appearances of Venus and Mercury in latitude, with 
the single exception of the deviation, are more easily under¬ 
stood than the theories of the superior planets. Let us examine 
the latitudes of Venus first. Within the great circle the sphere 
of Venus is the first to occur. According to my teacher, the plane 
in which Venus moves is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic or 
great circle along the diameter through the true apsides of the 
first deferent, so that the eastern half rises northward from the 
plane surface of the ecliptic by the angle of inclination which 
would be contained, in Ptolemy’s hypotheses, between the 
planes of the epicycle and deferent; and the western half dips 
southward. By “eastern half” is to be understood the half that 

537.7-542.15, 
m Cf. pp. 79-80, above. 



extends in consequence from the place of the higher apse, etc. 
By this simple hypothesis alone we can easily derive all the 
rules for the declinations and reflexions, together with their 
causes, from the relation of the position of the earth to the 
plane of the planet. 

For when by the annual motion of the earth we reach the 
place opposite the higher apse of the first deferent, where we 
think that the circle of Venus is like an epicycle in the apogee 
of its deferent, the plane in which Venus moves seems to us to 
have a reflexion from the plane of the ecliptic, because in this 
position we see the plane of Venus crosswise. And because we 
look at this plane from below, the part that rises northward 
will be to the left, and the other part, that dips southward, to 
the right, for us whose eyes are directed southward. But as the 
earth moves upward toward the higher apse of the planet, 
the circle of Venus is thought to descend from the apogee of 
its eccentric, and we begin to look down as from above upon 
the inclined plane of the deferent of Venus. Therefore the 
reflexion gradually changes into a declination, so that when the 
earth is at a quadrant’s distance from its former position, no 
matter where the planet may be seen in the part of its path 
that tilts upward, it has only a declination from the ecliptic. In 
this position, since we on the earth are opposite the half of the 
deferent that extends in consequence from the higher apse 
and rises northward from the plane of the ecliptic, the ancients 
said that the epicycle of Venus was in the descending node and 
that the apogee of the epicycle reached its greatest northern 
declination, and the perigee its greatest southern. 

Then, as the earth in its annual motion carries us upward 
toward the place of the higher apse of Venus, its circle, like an 
epicycle, seems to approach the lower apse of its deferent; 
the plane of the epicycle, which is for us the plane in which 
Venus moves, and which previously had a declination to the 
plane of the ecliptic, again appears to have a reflexion to us; 
and the northern half of the deferent, rising from the plane of 
the ecliptic, lies to the right because we see Venus from above. 
But when the center of the earth reaches the place of the higher 



apse of Venus, no declination and only a reflexion is seen; and 
the circle of Venus is believed to be in the lower apse of its 
deferent, as the ancients would have said. This is the order of 
the phenomena while the center of the earth completes half a 
revolution, as it mounts in the order of the signs from the place 
of the lower apse of Venus to the place of the higher apse of 
Venus. 

When the earth descends in the same way, the reflexion, 
to our eyes, gradually changes into a declination; and because 
the half of the plane of the deferent that extends in prece¬ 
dence from the higher apse becomes, through this motion of 
the earth, opposite to us, the apogee of the deferent of Venus 
begins to have a southward declination from the plane of the 
ecliptic, until when the earth is 90* from the place of the apse 
both halves are seen in declination to the plane of the ecliptic 
and the circle of Venus like an epicycle is thought to be in the 
ascending node at the higher apse. As the earth moves on from 
this position, the declination again changes into a reflexion; and 
when the earth reaches the place of the lower apse of Venus, it 
begins to produce once more the same phenomena of latitude 
in Venus. From these considerations it is clear that when the 
earth is on the apse-line of Venus, the plane of the deferent 
of the planet appears to have a reflexion; when the earth is at 
a quadrant’s distance from the apsides, a declination; and when 
the earth is at the intervening points, mixed latitudes are 

234 

seen. 

Mingled with these latitudes, which the ancients assigned 
to the epicycle of Venus, there is still another, called ‘‘devia¬ 
tion'” by the ancients, by Ptolemy “tilting of the eccentric 
circles,” 235 which they demonstrated by the center of the 
deferent of the epicycle of Venus, now eliminated. Hence my 
teacher has decided that another theory must be constructed 
in better agreement with the observations. To make this theory 
of my teacher for saving the deviation easier to understand, 
like the other ideas heretofore set forth, let us define the plane 

** C i. pp. 8 3-84, above. 

**For example, HII, 535.6-7. 



discussed above as the mean plane, and therefore fixedj from 
it the true plane deviates in a definite way, now to one side, 
now to the other. We comprehend all motions with less effort 
and expenditure of time by directing our attention to their 
poles. We should therefore begin with the statement that one 
of the poles of the mean plane lies north of the plane of the 
ecliptic by the amount of the angle of inclination j the other 
pole on the opposite side lies an equal distance to the south j 
and what we shall prove with regard to the north pole, or the 
phenomena related to it, must be understood in like manner 
with regard to the south pole, the law of opposition being, of 
course, observed. 

Accordingly, let us assume that about the north pole of the 
mean plane there is a movable circle, whose radius equals 
the greatest inclinations of the mean and true planes. Let the 
north pole of the true plane describe the diameter of the said 
circle by a motion in libration. Furthermore, let the movable 
circle follow the motion of the planet, so that as Venus proceeds 
with its own motion it observes the following rule: it leaves 
behind one of the two intersections that follow it, and exactly 
in a year overtakes the intersection left behind. Draw a great 
circle through the poles of both planes, mark off 90 0 on each 
side of 230 its intersection with the true plane, and the nodes 
or intersections, as I have called them, are determined when 
the poles of the true and mean planes do not coincide. While 
a periodic return of Venus to either one of the nodes is being 
completed, let the pole of the true plane twice describe the 
diameter of the said movable circle by a motion in libration. 
Let these phenomena so occur that the planet appears to have 
entered into a covenant with the center of the earth whereby, 
whenever the earth is at the apsides of the deferent, no matter 
where Venus is on its true deferent, it has its greatest north¬ 
ward deviation from the mean plane, that is, it is at its greatest 
distance from its mean course j moreover, when the earth is at a 
quadrant’s distance from the apsides of the deferent, the planet, 
together with its entire true plane, lies in the plane of the mean 

“Reading ab (Th 488.1*) instead o£ ad (PII, 36a.18). 



deferent; and when the earth passes through the intervening 
points, the path of the planet likewise has intermediate devia¬ 
tions. That this covenant of earth and planet might be ever¬ 
lasting, God ordained that the first small circle of libration, 
to use this term, should revolve once in the time in which one 
return of Venus to either of the movable nodes occurs. 

Let us make these relations clearer by an example. If at 
any beginning of the motion of deviation the north pole of 
the true plane is at its greatest southward distance from the 
pole of the adjacent mean plane, and if Venus is at the limit 
of its deviation, which lies to the north, the center of the earth 
being in one of the apsides of Venus, in the fourth part of a 
year the earth in its annual motion will come to the mid-point 
between the apsides, and in the same time the planet will reach 
its movable intersection or node. Because the motion in libration 
is commensurable with the periodic return of the planet to its 
nodes or intersections, the first small circle of libration will 
likewise complete a quadrant; and the second small circle, 
which moves at twice the rate of the first, will join the pole 
of the true plane to the pole of the mean plane, and therefore 
the two planes will coincide. But as the planet moves away 
from the node, the earth proceeds toward the other apse of 
the first eccentric, and the pole of the true plane moves 
northward in libration from the pole of the mean plane. Thus 
it happens that even though Venus is in south latitude, as in 
our example, the latitude, if south, nevertheless diminishes, if 
north, increases. When the earth reaches the other apse, the 
pole of the true plane attains the northern limit of its motion 
in libration; and the planet, midway between the two inter¬ 
sections in its annual return to the nodes, again has its greatest 
northward deviation. It is therefore clear that the motion of the 
circle which has been assumed has this advantage, that the 
revolution of Venus with respect to the nodes occurs in a year; 
and that when the earth is in the apse-line, no matter where the 
planet is in its true plane, it always has its greatest deviation 
from the mean plane; and that when the earth is midway 



between the apsides, the planet is in the nodes. Moreover, by 
reason of the motion in libration, it happens that when Venus is 
in one of the nodes, the two planes coincide 3 and that part of 
the true plane in which Venus is moving always deviates north¬ 
ward from the mean plane, so that this latitude, as is proper, 
always remains a north latitude. 

The mean plane of Venus, as we have called it, is inter¬ 
sected by the ecliptic in the apse-line of the first eccentric 3 and 
the half of this plane that lies in consequence from the higher 
apse rises northward, and the other half, by the law of oppo¬ 
sition, dips southward. In Mercury there is a mean plane of a 
similar nature. It is inclined to each side of the plane of the 
ecliptic along the apse-line, as is proper, so that conversely 
the half of the mean plane that lies in precedence from the 
higher apse extends northward. Therefore, in the annual revo¬ 
lution of the center of the earth the declinations and reflexions 
in Mercury will be found interchanged, as compared with 
those of Venus. To make this contrast more striking, God 
arranged the deviation of the true plane of Mercury from the 
mean plane so that the half in which Mercury is moving always 
deviates southward from the mean plane 3 and when the earth 
is at the apsides, the planet lies with its true plane in the mean 
plane. Consequently Mercury has only the above-mentioned 
differences in latitude from Venus, except that this deviation is 
greater in Mercury than in Venus, 237 as the former has also 
the greater angle of inclination. 238 The other changes of lati¬ 
tude in Mercury will quite easily be found exactly as in Venus. 

A part of the task remains, and part is done; 

Here let the anchor drop and moor our boat, 

to conclude this First Account with the words of the poet. 238 

287 The traditional estimates were, respectively, 45' and 10'$ although Coperni¬ 
cus departed from them somewhat, he did not alter their relative value (cf. 
above, p. 90, n. 102)* 

888 Cf, pp. 83, 89, above. 

** Ovid Art atnatoria 2.771-72. Kepler also used this couplet to close Part Ill 
of his work on Mars (Of era, ed. Frisch, 111 , 325). 



Just as soon as I have read the entire work of my teacher with 
sufficient application, I shall begin to fulfill the second part 
of my promise. I hope that both will be more acceptable to 
you, because you will see clearly that when the observations 
of scholars have been set forth, the hypotheses of my teacher 
agree so well with the phenomena that they can be mu¬ 
tually interchanged, like a good definition and the thing 
defined. 

Most illustrious and most learned Schoner, whom I shall 
always revere like a father, it now remains for you to receive 
this work of mine, such as it is, kindly and favorably. For 
although I am not unaware what burden my 240 shoulders can 
carry and what burden they refuse to carry, nevertheless your 
unparalleled and, so to say, paternal affection for me has 
impelled me to enter this heaven not at all fearfully and to 
report everything to you to the best of my ability. May Al¬ 
mighty and Most Merciful God, I pray, deem my venture 
worthy of turning out well, and may He enable me to conduct 
the work I have undertaken along the right road to the pro¬ 
posed goal. If I have said anything with youthful enthusiasm 
(we young men are always endowed, as he says, with high, 
rather than useful, spirit) or inadvertently let fall any remark 
which may seem directed against venerable and sacred antiquity 
more boldly than perhaps the importance and dignity of the 
subject demanded, you surely, I have no doubt, will put a 
kind construction upon the matter and will bear in mind my 
feeling toward you rather than my fault. 

Furthermore, concerning my learned teacher I should like 
you to hold the opinion and be fully convinced that for him 
there is nothing better or more important than walking in the 
footsteps of Ptolemy and following, as Ptolemy did, the 
ancients and those who were much earlier than himself. How¬ 
ever, when he became aware that the phenomena, which control 
the astronomer, and mathematics compelled him to make certain 
assumptions even against his wishes, it was enough, he thought, 

'“Reading mei (Th +S9.36) instead of me (PII, 364.30). 



if he aimed his arrows by the same method to the same target 
as Ptolemy, even though he employed a bow and arrows of far 
different type of material from Ptolemy’s. At this point we 
should recall the saying “Free in mind must he be who desires 
to have understanding.” 241 But my teacher especially abhors 
what is alien to the mind of any honest man, particularly to a 
philosophic nature j for he is far from thinking that he should 
rashly depart, in a lust for novelty, from the sound opinions 
of the ancient philosophers, except for good reasons and when 
the facts themselves coerce him. Such is his time of life, such his 
seriousness of character and distinction in learning, such, in 
short, his loftiness of spirit and greatness of mind that no such 
thought can take hold of him. It is rather the mark of youth 
or of “those who pride themselves on some trifling specula¬ 
tion,” to use Aristotle’s words, 242 or of those passionate intel¬ 
lects that are stirred and swayed by any breeze and their own 
moods, so that, as though their pilot had been washed over¬ 
board, they snatch at anything that comes to hand and struggle 
on bravely. But may truth prevail, may excellence prevail, may 
the arts ever be honored, may every good worker bring to 
light useful things in his own art, and may he search in such 
a manner that he appears to have sought the truth. Never will 
my teacher avoid the judgment of honest and learned men, 
to which he plans of his own accord to submit. 

911 This sentence serves as motto for the Narratio fritna (see p, 108, above) 
and also for Kepler *s Dissertatio cum nuncio sidereo (Prague, 16105 see K*fl*r* 
of era omnia, ed. Frisch, II, 485). It is quoted substantially correctly from the 
DidaskaUkos (C. F. Hermann’s Teubner edition of Plato, VI [Leipzig, 1&9*]* 
152). This elementary textbook of Platonic philosophy was available to Rheticus 
in the Aldine editions of Iamblichus (1516) and Apuleius (1521)5 in the latter 
work the words quoted appear on fol. t zr. The DidaskaUkos was formerly 
attributed to Alcinous, but now it is held that its author was Albinus, who flour¬ 
ished in Smyrna during the middle of the second century c*E-, and was a teacher 
of Galen (R. E. Witt, Albinus and the History of Middle Platonism, Cambridge, 
i 9 S 7 > PP- 104-9)* 

De mundo 391 at3-245 Rheticus has adapted the original to the structure 
of his sentence and has shifted the meaning of titwpiy. from ^spectacle” to ^specu¬ 
lation” (cf. above, p, 162, n. 194). The De mundo is pseudo-Aristotelian (cf. 
above, p. 139, n. 121), 



In Praise of Prussia 

In the ode 244 which is said to be preserved in golden letters 
in the temple of Minerva and which celebrates the Olympic 
victory of the boxer Diagoras of Rhodes, Pindar says that 
Diagoras’s native land is the daughter of Venus and the dearly 
beloved spouse of the sun; that Jupiter, moreover, rained much 
gold there, inasmuch as the Rhodians worshipped his daughter 
Minerva; and that in consequence, through Minerva, the 
Rhodians gained a reputation for wisdom and education, to 
which they were deeply devoted. 

I am not aware that anyone could apply this resounding 
praise of the Rhodians to any region of our time more suitably 
than to Prussia, concerning which I propose to say a few words 
that perhaps you desired to hear. Doubtless the same divinities 
would be found to be presiding over this region, should some 
skillful astrologer make careful inquiry about the stars that 
rule over this most beautiful, most fertile, and most fortunate 
area. As Pindar says: 245 

But the tale is told in ancient story that, when Zeus and the immortals 
were dividing the earth among them, the isle of Rhodes was not yet 
to be seen in the open main, but was hidden in the briny depths of the 
sea; and that, as the Sun-god was absent, no one put forth a lot on his 
behalf, and so they left him without any allotment of land, though 
the god himself was pure from blame. But when that god made men¬ 
tion of it, Zeus was about to order a new casting of the lot, but the 
Sun-god would not suffer it. For, as he said, he could see a plot of 
land rising from the bottom of the foaming main, a plot that was 
destined to prove rich in substance for men, and kindly for pasture. 

343 This section was omitted from the Basel edition of 1566, the Warsaw edi¬ 
tion of 1854., and Th. It was included in the following editions: Danzig, 154°$ 
Basel, 15415 Tubingen, 15965 Frankfurt, 16215 and PII, 367-77. It was also 
printed, in incomplete form, in Acta Borusska, II (Kiinigsberg and Leipzig, 
1731), 413-255 and completely in Hipler, SflciUgium Cofsrmcanum, pp. 215- 
22- It was translated into German by Franz Beckmann (ZE, III[1866]> 5-17) 
and Prowe (PI 3 , 448-63). 

344 Pindar, seventh Olympian ode. 

** Ibid., 54-635 the translation is by J. E. Sandys in the Loeb Classical Library 
(London, 1915). 



Doubtless the sea once covered Prussia, too. What more 
definite and more important 24 ® evidence could anyone produce 
than that today amber is found inland, at a very great distance 
from the coast? Therefore, on the principle that it rose from 
the sea, by an act of the gods Prussia passed into the hands of 
Apollo, who cherishes it now, as once he cherished Rhodes, 
his spouse. Cannot the sun reach Prussia as well as Rhodes 
with vertical rays? I grant that it cannot. But it makes up for 
this in many other ways; and what it accomplishes in Rhodes 
by its vertical rays, it performs in Prussia by lingering above 
the horizon. Moreover, amber is a special gift of God, with 
which He desired to adorn this region above all others, as I 
think nobody will deny. Indeed, anyone who considers the 
nobility of amber and its use in medicine will regard it, not 
without reason, as sacred to Apollo and as a magnificent gift, 
an abundance of which he presents, like a most valuable jewel, 
to his spouse Prussia. 

But besides the medical and prophetic arts, which Apollo 
invented and first practiced, he is filled with a passion for hunt¬ 
ing. For this reason he seems to have chosen this land before 
all others. And since he long foresaw that the savage Turks 
would despoil Rhodes, he transferred his abode to these parts 
and migrated hither with his sister Diana, as seems not im¬ 
probable. For no matter where you turn your eyes, if you look 
at the woods, you will say that they are game preserves (“para¬ 
dise” in Greek) and beehives stocked by Apollo; if you look 
at the orchards and fields, rabbit warrens and birdhouses, 
lakes, ponds, and springs, you will say that they are the holy 
places of Diana and the fisheries of the gods. And Apollo 
appears to have chosen Prussia before other regions, I say, as 
his paradise. Besides stag, doe, bear, boar, and the kind of wild 
beast that is commonly known elsewhere, he brought in also 
urus, elk, bison, etc., species scarcely to be found in other 
places, to say nothing of the numerous and quite rare types of 
bird and fish. 

The progeny which Apollo received from his spouse Prussia 

’“Reading -pro-piusqtu (i596 ed., p. isj) instead of frofriusqitt (PIT, 369.x j). 



is as follows: Konigsberg, seat of the illustrious prince, 
Albrecht, duke of Prussia, margrave of Brandenburg, etc., 
patron of all the learned and renowned men of our time; 
Thorn, once quite famous for its market, but now for its foster- 
son, my teacher; Danzig, metropolis of Prussia, eminent for 
the wisdom and dignity of its Council, for the wealth and 
splendor of its renascent literature; Frauenburg, residence of 
a large body of learned and pious men, famous for its eloquent 
and wise Bishop, the Most Reverend John Dantiscus; Marien- 
burg, treasury of His Serene Majesty, the king of Poland; 
Elbing, ancient settlement in Prussia, where, too, the sacred 
pursuit of literature is undertaken; Kulm, famous for its litera¬ 
ture, where the Law of Kulm had its origin. 

You might say that the buildings and the fortifications are 
palaces and shrines of Apollo; that the gardens, the fields, and 
the entire region are the delight of Venus, so that it could be 
called, not undeservedly, Rhodes. What is more, Prussia is 
the daughter of Venus, as is clear if you examine either the 
fertility of the soil or the beauty and charm of the whole land. 

As Venus is said to have risen from the sea, so Prussia is 
the daughter of Venus and of the sea. And therefore it is fer¬ 
tile enough to feed Holland and Zealand with its crops and 
to serve as granary for the neighboring kingdoms and also for 
England and Portugal. Besides this excellent produce it exports 
quantities of fish of every sort and other valuable resources, 
with which it abounds. But Venus is interested in the things 
that promote culture, dignity, and the good and humane life. 
These could not grow and develop in this region, for the char¬ 
acter of the country forbade it. So she saw to it that with the 
aid of the sea they could be successfully imported into Prussia 
from abroad. 

But since these facts are so well known to you, most learned 
Schoner, that there is no need for me to speak of them at 
greater length; and since they are treated in other books, 
wholly devoted to this subject, I refrain from further praise. 
I add only this item, that by the grace of the presiding divinity 
the Prussians are a numerous people and also possess an un- 



usual talent for culture. Moreover, they worship Minerva with 
every type of art and for this reason receive the kindness of 
Jupiter. For, not to speak of the lesser arts attributed to Min¬ 
erva, like architecture and its allied disciplines, the revival of 
literature in the world is everywhere welcomed with keenest 
interest, as befits heroes, by the illustrious duke most of all, 
and also by all the dignitaries and nobles of Prussia, in whose 
hands lies the direction of affairs, and by the rulers of states. 
They strive to encourage and support it, both independently 
and jointly. Therefore Jupiter forms a yellow cloud and rains 
much gold. This means, as I interpret it, that because Jupiter 
is said to preside over kingdoms and states, when the mighty 
undertake to support studies, learning, and the muses, then 
God gathers the minds of his subject and neighboring kings, 
princes, and peoples into a golden cloudj from it he distils 
peace and all the blessings of peace, like drops of gold; minds 
in love with tranquillity and public order j cities governed by 
just laws; wise men j upright and devout education of children^ 
pious and pure spread of religion, etc. 

The story is frequently told of the shipwreck of Aristippus, 
which they say occurred off the island of Rhodes. Upon being 
washed ashore, he noticed certain geometrical diagrams on the 
beach j exclaiming that he saw the traces of men, he bade his 
companions be of good cheer. And his belief did not play him 
false. For through his great learning he easily obtained for 
himself and his comrades from educated and humane men the 
things necessary for sustaining life. 

So may the gods love me, most learned Schoner, it has not 
yet happened to me that I should enter the home of any dis¬ 
tinguished man in this region—for the Prussians are a most 
hospitable people—without immediately seeing geometrical 
diagrams at the very threshold or finding geometry present 
in their minds. Hence nearly all of them, being men of good 
will, bestow upon the students of these arts every possible 
benefit and service, since true knowledge and learning are 
never separated from goodness and kindness. 

In particular, I am wont to marvel at the kindness of two 



distinguished men toward me, since I readily recognize how 
slight is my scholarly equipment, measuring myself by my 
own abilities. One of them is the illustrious prelate whom I 
mentioned at the outset, 217 the Most Reverend Tiedemann 
Giese, bishop of Kulm. His Reverence mastered with complete 
devotion the set of virtues and doctrine, required of a bishop 
by Paul. He realized that it would be of no small importance 
to the glory of Christ if there existed a proper calendar of 
events in the Church and a correct theory and explanation of 
the motions. He did not cease urging my teacher, whose ac¬ 
complishments and insight he had known for many years, to 
take up this problem, until he persuaded him to do so. 

Since my teacher was social by nature and saw that the scien¬ 
tific world also stood in need of an improvement of the mo¬ 
tions, he readily yielded to the entreaties of his friend, the 
reverend prelate. He promised that he would draw up astro¬ 
nomical tables with new rules and that if his work had any 
value he would not keep it from the world, as was done by 
John Angelus, 24 * among others. But he had long been aware 
that in their own right the observations in a certain way re¬ 
quired hypotheses which would overturn the ideas concerning 
the order of the motions and spheres that had hitherto been 
discussed and promulgated and that were commonly accepted 
and believed to be true; moreover, the required hypotheses 
would contradict our senses. 

He therefore decided that he should imitate the Alfonsine 
Tables rather than Ptolemy and compose tables with accurate 
rules but no proofs. In that way he would provoke no dispute 
among philosophers; common mathematicians would have a 
correct calculus of the motions; but true scholars, upon whom 
Jupiter had looked with unusually favorable eyes, would easily 
arrive, from the numbers set forth, at the principles and sources 
from which everything was deduced. Just as heretofore learned 
men had to work out the true hypothesis of the motion of the 

“’Page 109. 

“For Angelus see Gcsner, Bibliotheca universalis, pp. 38tv—383^ an 4 A 11 - 
gemeine deutsche Biografhie, I, 4.57, 



starry sphere from the Alfonsine doctrine, so the entire system 
would be crystal clear to learned men. The ordinary astron¬ 
omer, nevertheless, would not be deprived of the use of the 
tables, which he seeks and desires, apart from all theory. And 
the Pythagorean principle would be observed that philosophy 
must be pursued in such a way that its inner secrets are reserved 
for learned men, trained in mathematics, etc. 249 

Then His Reverence pointed out that such a work would 
be an incomplete gift to the world, unless my teacher set forth 
the'reasons for his tables and also included, in imitation of 
Ptolemy, the system or theory and the foundations and proofs 
upon which he relied to investigate the mean motions and 
prosthaphaereses and to establish epochs as initial points in the 
computation of time. The bishop further argued that such a 
procedure had produced great inconvenience and many errors 
in the Alfonsine Tables, since we were compelled to assume 
and to approve their ideas on the principle that, as the Pythag¬ 
oreans used to say, “The Master said so”—a principle which 
has absolutely no place in mathematics. 

Moreover, contended the bishop, since the required prin¬ 
ciples and hypotheses are diametrically opposed to the hypoth¬ 
eses of the ancients, among scholars there would be scarcely 
anyone who would hereafter examine the principles of the 
tables and publish them after the tables had gained recognition 
as being in agreement with the truth. There was no place in 
science, he asserted, for the practice frequently adopted in 
kingdoms, conferences, and public affairs, where for a time 
plans are kept secret until the subjects see the fruitful results 
and remove from doubt the hope that they will come to ap¬ 
prove the plans. 

So far as the philosophers are concerned, he continued, those 
of keener insight and greater information would carefully 
study Aristotle’s extensive discussion and would note that after 
convincing himself that he had established the immobility of 
the earth by many proofs Aristotle finally takes refuge in the 
following argument: 

aw At this point the text as printed i n deta Borusska bmks off. 



We have evidence for our view in what the mathematicians say about 
astronomy. For the phenomena observed as changes take place in the 
figures by which the arrangement of the stars is marked out occur as 
they would on the assumption that the earth is situated at the center . 250 

Accordingly the philosophers would then decide: 

If this concluding statement by Aristotle cannot be linked with his 
previous discussion, we shall be compelled, unless we are to waste the 
time and effort which we have invested, rather to assume the true basis 
of astronomy. Moreover, we must work out appropriate solutions for 
the remaining problems under discussion. By returning to the principles 
with greater care and e<jual assiduity, we must determine whether it 
has been proved that the cenler of the earth is also the center of the 
universe. If the earth were raised to the lunar sphere, would loose 
fragments of earth seek, not the center of the earth’s globe, but the 
center of the universe, inasmuch as they all fall at right angles to the 
surface of the earth’s globe? Again, since we see that the magnet by 
its natural motion turns north, would the motion of the daily rotation 
or the circular motions attiibuled to the earth necessarily be violent mo¬ 
tions? Further, can the three motions, away from the center, toward 
the center, and about the center, be in fact separated? We must analyze 
other views which Aristotle used as fundamental propositions with which 
to refute the opinions of the Timaeus and the Pythagoreans. 

They will ponder the foregoing questions and others of the 
same kind if they desire to look to the principal end of astron¬ 
omy and to the power and the efficacy of God and nature. 

But if it is to be the intention and decision of scholars every¬ 
where to hold fast to their own principles passionately and 
insistently, His Reverence warned, my teacher should not 
anticipate a fate more fortunate than that of Ptolemy, the 
king of this science. Averroes, who was in other respects a 
philosopher of the first rank, concluded that epicycles and ec¬ 
centrics could not possibly exist in the realm of nature and that 
Ptolemy did not know why the ancients had posited motions 
of rotation. His final judgment is: “The Ptolemaic astronomy 
is nothing, so far as existence is concerned ; but it is convenient 

*® De caelo 11,14 39733-6; the translation is from Thomas L. Heath, Grttk 
Astronomy (London, 1932), p. 91. 



for computing the nonexistent.” 281 As for the untutored, whom 
the Greeks call “those who do not know theory, music, phi¬ 
losophy, and geometry,” 252 their shouting should be ignored, 
since men of good will do not undertake any labors for their 
sake. 

By these and many other contentions, as I learned from 
friends familiar with the entire affair, the learned prelate won 
from my teacher a promise to permit scholars and posterity to 
pass judgment on his work. For this reason men of good will 
and students of mathematics will be deeply grateful with me 
to His Reverence, the bishop of Kulm, for presenting this 
achievement to the world. 

In addition, the benevolent prelate deeply loves these studies 
and cultivates them earnestly. He owns a bronze armillary 
sphere for observing equinoxes, like the two somewhat larger 
ones which Ptolemy says were at Alexandria 283 and which 
learned men from everywhere in Greece came to see. He has 
also arranged that a gnomon truly worthy of a prince should be 
brought to him from England. I have examined this instru¬ 
ment with the greatest pleasure, for it was made by an excellent 
workman who knew his mathematics. 

The second of my patrons is the esteemed and energetic 
John of Werden, burgrave of Neuenburg, etc., mayor of the 
famous city of Danzig. When he heard about my studies from 
certain friends, he did not disdain to greet me, undistinguished 
though I am, and to invite me to meet him before I left Prussia. 
When I so informed my teacher, he rejoiced for my sake and 
drew such a picture of the man that I realized I was being 
invited by Homer’s Achilles, as it were. For besides his distinc¬ 
tion in the arts of war and peace, with the favor of the muses 
he also cultivates music. By its sweet harmony he refreshes 
and inspires his spirit to undergo and to endure the burdens 

*** Averroes, Commentary on Aristotle's Meta f hysics t Book xii, summa ii, cafut 
iv> No. 45. A Latin version of Averroes’s Commentary was printed (Padua, 1473) 
with th tMetafhysics in Latin translation (GW, 2,4193 8ee also 2, S3 7-40). 

Aulus Gellius Noctes Attkae 1.9.8. It is at this point that the text as printed 
in Acta Borussica is resumed. 



of office. He is worthy of having been made by Almighty and 
Most Merciful God a “shepherd of the people.” 254 Happy 
the state over which God has appointed such rulers! 

In the Phaedo 2a5 Socrates rejects the opinion of those who 
called the soul a “harmony.” And he did so rightly if by 
harmony they understood nothing but a mixture of the ele¬ 
ments in the body. But if they defined the soul as a harmony 
because in addition to the gods only the human mind under¬ 
stands harmony—just as it alone knows number, wherefore 
certain thinkers did not fear to call it a number-—and also 
because they knew that souls suffering from the deadliest 
diseases are sometimes healed by musical harmonies, then their 
opinion will not seem unfortunate, inasmuch as it is principally 
the soul of a heroic man that is called a harmony. Hence we 
might correctly call those states happy whose rulers have 
harmonious souls, that is, philosophical natures. Surely the 
Scythian had no such soul who preferred hearing a horse’s 
neighing to a talented musician whom others listened to in 
amazement. Would that all kings, princes, prelates, and other 
dignitaries of the realms had souls chosen from the vessel of 
harmonious souls. Then these excellent studies and those which 
are chiefly to be pursued for their own sake would doubtless 
achieve a worthy station. 

The foregoing, most distinguished sir, are the things which 
I thought I should for the present write to you regarding the 
hypotheses of my teacher, Prussia, and my patrons. Farewell, 
most learned sir, and do not disdain to guide my studies with 
your advice. For you know that we young men greatly need 
the counsel of older and wiser men. And you have not for¬ 
gotten that charming sentiment of the Greeks, “The opinions 
of older men are better.” 25 * 

From my library at Frauenburg 
September 23, 1539 

264 A familiar epithet of kings and chiefs in Homer, e.g., Iliad ii,*43. 

*** S6B-C, 92A-95A. 

256 This line, from a lost play of Euripedes, is preserved in Stobaeus, Flonl^gium 


CXV.2. 



a brief commentary on the hypotheses for the 

MOTIONS OF THE HEAVENLY BMIES 


OUR ANCESTORS assumed, I observe, a large number ofi 
celestial spheres for this reason especially, to explain the 
apparent motion of the planets by the principle of regular¬ 
ity. For they thought it altogether absurd that a heavenly 
body that is a perfect sphere, should not always move 
uniformly. 1 They saw that by connecting and combining 
regular motions in various ways they could make any body 
appear to move to any position. 

Callippus and Eudoxus, who endeavored to solve the prob¬ 
lem by the use of concentric spheres, were unable to account 
for all the planetary movements; they had to explain not 
merely the apparent revolutions of the planets but also the 
fact that these bodies appear to us sometimes to mount higher 
in the heavens, sometimes to descend} and this fact is incom¬ 
patible with the principle of concentricity. Therefore it seemed 
better to employ eccentrics and epicycles, a system which most 
scholars finally accepted. 

Yet the planetary theories of Ptolemy and most other as¬ 
tronomers, although consistent with the numerical data, 
seemed likewise to present no small difficulty. For these theo¬ 
ries were not adequate unless certain equants were also con¬ 
ceived} it then appeared that a planet moved with uniform 
velocity neither on its deferent nor about the center of its 
epicycle. Hence a system of this sort seemed neither sufficiently 
absolute nor sufficiently pleasing to the mind. 

Having become aware of these defects, I often considered 
whether there could perhaps be found a more reasonable ar¬ 
rangement of circles, from which every apparent inequality 
would be derived and in which everything would move uni- 

1 Perhaps this sentence should be translated: For they thought it altogether 
absurd that a heavenly body should not always move with uniform velocity in a 
perfect circle. 



formly about its proper center, as the rule of absolute motion 
requires. After 1 had addressed myself to this very difficult and 
almost insoluble problem, the suggestion at length came to me 
how it could be solved with fewer and much simpler construc¬ 
tions than were formerly used, if some assumptions (which are 
called axioms) were granted me. They follow in this order. 

A ssumptions 2 

1. There is no one center of all the celestial circles or 
spheres. 

2. The center of the earth is not the center of the universe, 
but only of gravity 3 and of the lunar sphere. 

3. All the spheres revolve about the sun as their mid-point, 
and therefore the sun is the center of the universe. 

4. The ratio of the earth’s distance from the sun to the 
height of the firmament is so much smaller than the ratio of 
the earth’s radius to its distance from the sun that the distance 
from the earth to the sun is imperceptible in comparison with 
the height of the firmament. 

5. Whatever motion appears in the firmament arises not 
from any motion of the firmament, but from the earth’s motion. 
The earth together with its circumjacent elements 4 performs 
a complete rotation on its fixed poles in a daily motion, while 
the firmament and highest heaven abide unchanged. 

6. What appear to us as motions of the sun arise not from 

* In his description of the Commentariolus Dreyer incorrectly states the num¬ 
ber of assumptions as six (.Planetary Systems, p. 317). The source of his mistake 
is probably the oversight in PI*, 191, which Prowe himself calls attention to and 
corrects (PII, 1*7 n). 

’“Now the element of earth is the heaviest; and all heavy objects are borne 
to the earth, tending toward its inmost center. In accordance with their nature, 
heavy objects are borne from all directions at right angles to the surface of the 
earth j and since the earth is spherical, they would come together at its center, 
were they not checked at its surface. For a straight line which is at right angles 
to the tangential plane at the point *f tangency leads to the center” (Th 19.28- 
30.3). 

* These are (4) the atmosphere and (£) the waters that lie upon the surface 
of the earth. See p. 63, below and in De rev.: a . . . not only does the earth so 
move together with the watery element that is joined with it, but also no small 
part of the air and whatever else is related in the same way to the earth” (Th 



its motion but from the motion of the earth and our sphere, 
with which we revolve about the sun like any other planet. 
The earth has, then, more than one motion. 

7. The apparent retrograde and direct motion of the planets 
arises not from their motion but from the earth’s. The motion 
of the earth alone, therefore, suffices to explain so many ap¬ 
parent inequalities in the heavens. 

Having set forth these assumptions, I shall endeavor briefly 
to show how uniformity of the motions can be saved in a sys¬ 
tematic way. However, I have thought it well, for the sake 
of brevity, to omit from this sketch mathematical demonstra¬ 
tions, reserving these for my larger work. 5 But in the explana¬ 
tion of the circles I shall set down here the lengths of the 
radii; and from these the reader who is not unacquainted with 
mathematics will readily perceive how closely this arrangement 
of circles agrees with the numerical data and observations. 

Accordingly, let no one suppose that I have gratuitously 
asserted, with the Pythagoreans, the motion of the earth; 
strong proof will be found in my exposition of the circles. For 
the principal arguments by which the natural philosophers 
attempt to establish the immobility of the earth rest for the 
most part on the appearances; it is particularly such arguments 
that collapse here, since I treat the earth’s immobility as due 
to an appearance. 

The Order of the Spheres 

The celestial spheres are arranged in the following order. 
The highest is the immovable sphere of the fixed stars, which 
contains and gives position to all things. Beneath it is Saturn, 
which Jupiter follows, then Mars. 6 Below Mars is the sphere 
on which we revolve; then Venus; last is Mercury. The lunar 
sphere revolves about the center of the earth and moves with 

9 From this reservation we may infer that when Copernicus wrote the Com- 
mentctriolus he had already planned De rev. or was at work: upon it. 

* S3 V:sub eo Saturnus ; huna sequitur Martins. In S, after Saksrnus, the words 
quem sequitur logins have been inserted above the line by a second hand. These 
readings provide a due to the relationship between S and V* aee the following 
note. 



the earth like an epicycle. In the same order also, one planet 
surpasses another in speed of revolution, according as they 
trace greater or smaller circles. Thus Saturn completes its rev¬ 
olution in thirty years, Jupiter in twelve, Mars in two and 
one-half, T and the earth in one year; Venus in nine months, 
Mercury i n three. 

* S: Sic quidem Safurnus anno 30, Jufiter n y Mars , tellus annua revolutione 
restituuntur } V: Sic quidem Satumus anno trigesimo, luff iter duodecimo , Mars y 
tellus annua revolutione restituitsir. The number for Mars has dropped out of 
both S and V, but it may be restored from a later section in the Commentariolus, 
where the sidereal period of Mars is given as twenty-nine months (p. 74, below). 
In Me rev , Copernicus reduced the period to two years, bringing it closer to the 
true value of 6 %7 days, or one year and ten and on^-half months (Th 39-6: 
Deinde Mars , qui biennio circuity the explanatory figure likewise has Mortis 
bima revolution confirmation from Rheticus on p, 14 6, below). 

In his edition of V, Curtze filled the lacuna by inserting, without any support¬ 
ing argument, \tertioi\ after Mars (MCV, I, 7.27). This erroneous reading was 
accepted by Prowe, who unwisely dropped the square brackets (PII, 188.13). 
Adolf Muller evidently accepted Prowess text UDquestioningly (ZE, XII, 360)5 
hence his translation of the Commentariolus assigned the grossly inaccurate value 
of three years to Mars* sidereal period (ZE, XII, 364). With no more warrant 
L. Birkenmajer brought Copernicus into close agreement with modem astronomy 5 
for his translation runs: “Mars revolves in not quite two years* 5 ( Mikolaj Kofer- 
nik Wybor fism y p. 9). It will be observed that none of these scholars noted the 
later passage in the Commentariolus from which the lacuna may be filled without 
hesitation. 

The omission of the number of years or months in Mars* sidereal period 
furnishes a clue to the relation between S and V. Since they share this omission, 
they are both derived from a copy of the Commentariolus in which the error had 

already appeared. Now it is most unlikely that the Com~ 
q mentariolus came from the hands of Copernicus with so 

glaring a defect in it. Let us assume C as the text issued 
by Copernicus. Between C, as the original text, and S and 
X V, as later copies, there intervenes X, one or more copies 

in which the omission occurred. The stemma here proposed 
/ may be represented by an inverted Y. The foregoing 

/ analysis is supported by the readings cited in the preceding 

S V note, where both S and V omit Jupiter from the list of 

the celestial spheres. Certainly no two independent scribes, 
copying from accurate texts, would both of them have omitted Jupiter and dropped 
the number for Mars. A study of the other variants makes it equally unlikely 
that S was copied from V, or V from S, 

In the preface to his edition of S, Lindhagen reports the opinion of paleograph¬ 
ers that S was written in Switzerland or northern Italy during the late sixteenth 
or early seventeenth century. Curtze thought that V was written in the late six¬ 
teenth century (MCV, I, 2). 



The Apparent Motions of the Sun 

The earth has three motions. First, it revolves annually in a 
great circle® about the sun in the order of the signs, always 
describing equal arcs in equal times; the distance from the 
center of the circle to the center of the sun is V25 of the radius 
of the circle. 9 The radius is assumed to have a length imper¬ 
ceptible in comparison with the height of the firmament; 10 
consequently the sun appears to revolve with this motion, as 
if the earth lay in the center of the universe. However, this 
appearance is caused by the motion not of the sun but of the 
earth, so that, for example, when the earth is in the sign of 
Capricornus, the sun is seen diametrically opposite in Cancer, 
and so on. On account of the previously mentioned distance of 
the sun from the center of the circle, this apparent motion of 
the sun is not uniform, the maximum inequality being 2%°. n 

9 This great circle is the or bis tnagnus discussed above (p. x6). 

9 Here Copernicus accepts Ptolemy^ view that the eccentricity was fixed (HI, 
233.11-1$). However, Ptolemy had put the eccentricity at ^4 (HI> 2.36.19-21)1 
Hence we may say that in the Commentariolus Copernicus retains a fixed eccen¬ 
tricity, but offers an improved determination of it. #n the other hand, in De rev , 
he finds that the eccentricity is (Th 211.23-25 j cf. p. 160, below). Conse¬ 
quently he there abandons the idea of a fixed eccentricity (Th 209.27-210.1), 
and holds that it varies between a maximum of %4 and a minimum of %i (Th 
219.31-220.65 209.11-13, 211.18)' 

10 See Assumption 4, above. 

11 Let the apparent motion of the sun (or real motion of the earth) toke place 
on the great circle (orbit magnui) AEP (Fig. 20). Let the motion be uniform 



Figure 20 Figure 21 


with respect to the center at C. Let the sun be at S. Let the apogee be at A, and 
the perigee at P. Assume that the earth star* from A and has reached any point E 
on the circumference. Then the line of sight ES will give the observed place of 
die sun, and Z ASE will measure the observed motion. But Z ACE will measure 



The line drawn from the sun through the center of the circle 
is invariably directed toward a point of the firmament about 
io° west of the more brilliant of the two bright stars in the 
head of Gemini; 13 therefore when the earth is opposite this 
point, and the center of the circle lies between them, the sun is 
seen at its greatest distance from the earth. 13 In this circle, then, 

the uniform or mean motion. Now the inequality to which Copernicus refers is 
the difference between the uniform and the observed motions; and it is measured 
by /_ CES. Tt is evident that when the earth (or the observed place of the sun) 
is at A or P, the inequality is aero. 

If we draw BD i. ACSP at S (Fig. 21), the inequality attains its maximum 
at B and D (Th 207.15-208.7; cf. HI, 220.12-16, 221.9-223. 3 >- It is obvious 
that the smaller the eccentricity C$ is, the smaller the maximum inequality will 
be. Now Ptolemy had put the maximum inequality at 2* 23' (HI, 238.22-239.1), 
corresponding to an eccentricity of (C$:AC—1:24_). Since in the Commentary 
olus Copernicus reduces the eccentricity to he diminishes the maximum in¬ 
equality to 2 0 1 o'. And in De rev . 7 where he further reduces the eccentricity to 
%1, the maximum inequality is i° 51' (Th 212.14-16). 

When he states in the Commentariolus that the maximum inequality, correspond¬ 
ing to an eccentricity of is 2%° {duo bus gradibus et sextante unius ), he is 
evidently writing a convenient fraction. For X 100,000 — 4,000; and by his 
Table of Chords, 4,000 subtends 2* 17%' (Th 44,20-21). For the equivalence 
of Copernicus’s Table of Chords with a modern table of sines see Armitage, 
CofemtcuSy pp. 171-73. 

^With what fixed star are we to identify c< the more brilliant of the two 
bright stars in the head of Gemini’* (Stella lucida quae est in cafite Gemelli 
sflendidior) ? Both Gemini 1 (Castor, t* Geminorum) and Gemini 2 (Pollux, p 
Geminorum) were described as being in the head of Gemini. They were usually 
differentiated as western and eastern (HII, 20.17-18, 21; 92.3-4; Th 132.29-32) ; 
thus in a later section of the Commentariolus , where Copernicus refers to ^the 
star which is described as being in the head of the eastern of the two Gemini” 
(s tel lam quae in cafite Geminorum orientalis dicitur ), he is speaking of Pollux 
(p. 78). But in the present passage he does not employ the customary desig¬ 
nation, and he relies on sflendidior to indicate whether he is referring to Castor 
or to Pollux. Now, in the catalogues these stars were both listed as of the 
the second magnitude; and it therefore seems impossible to decide the question 
by appealing to a difference in brilliancy. However, Pollux is distinguished by 
its color; and it is perhaps possible that Copernicus is using sflendidior as a 
color term. On this uncertain basis let us tentatively identify the star of our 
text with Pollux. 

15 If the preceding note is correct, then Copernicus is here locating the solar 
apogee about 10 0 west of Pollux. Now Ptolemy had put the longitude of the 
s*lar apogee at 65° 30' (HI, 237.9-11) and the longitude of Pollux at 86° 40' 
(HII, 93.4); hence the apogee was 21 0 10' west of Pollux. He held that the 



the earth revolves together with whatever else is included 
within the lunar sphere. 

The second motion, which is peculiar to the earth, is the 
daily rotation on the poles in the order of the signs, that is, 
from west to east. On account of this rotation the entire uni¬ 
verse appears to revolve with enormous speed. Thus does the 
earth rotate together with its circumjacent waters and encircling 
atmosphere. 14 

The third is the motion in declination. For the axis of the 
daily rotation is not parallel to the axis of the great circle, but 
is inclined to it at an angle that intercepts a portion of a circum- 

apogee was fixed in relation to the veinal equinox (HI, 232.18-233.16), that 
the equinoctial and solstitial points were constant (HI, 192,12-22), and that the 
hxed stars moved eastward i 4 in 1 »o years (HII, 15,15-17). Had Ptolemy been 
right, the apogee should have been found, at the time of Copernicus, about 
west of Pollux. -*■ 

Copernicus reverses Ptolemy’s explanation of precession; for he regard®.£fc# 
fixed stars as constant (Assumption 5) and attributes the precessional motion^!^ 
the equinoctial and solstitial points (p. 67, below). Hence, when in the present 
passage he asserts that the solar apogee is fixed, he means that it is fixed in rela¬ 
tion to the fixed stars; but its distance from the vernal equinox increases, because 
the equinoctial points move steadily westward. 

Furthermore, so long as the vernal equinox was regarded as constant, it had 
served as the point from which celestial longitude was measured (HII, 36.16-17). 
Hence if Copernicus is to utilise without error the work of the ancient astron¬ 
omers, he must first reconstruct the entire history of precession. In the next section 
of the Commentariolus he lays down two of the main propositions. But it is evi¬ 
dent that he has not yet completely formulated the theory which is outlined briefly 
in the Letter against Werner (pp. 99-101, below) and expounded fully in De 
rev. (Th 157-173; cf. pp. m-17, below). Moreover, since celestial longi¬ 
tude can no longer be reckoned from the vernal equinox, some fixed star must 
be selected in its stead. But Copernicus has apparently not yet made a choice; 
throughout the Commentariolus* when he states a celestial position, he gives it 
in terms of neighboring stars, never in terms of longitude reckoned from a fixed 
origin. Because he does not give us sufficient data to make the correction for 
precession, we cannot say with precision what he then believed the longitude of 
the solar apogee to be. 

In De rev . he chooses a fixed star from which to measure longitude (Th 114. 
22-33, 130,6-7); he determines the longitude of the solar apogee as 96° 40' 
(Th 211.20-21, 25-26) ; and he no longer regards the doctrine of a fixed apogee 
as tenable: “There now emerges the more difficult problem of the motion of the 
solar apse . . . which Ptolemy thought was fixed . . (Th 216.3-4)* 

u Cf. above, p. 5$, n. 4. 



ference in our time about 2 3 ^ 4 °. 15 Therefore, while the centre 
of the earth always remains in the plane of the ecliptic, that is, 

in the circumference of the great circle, the poles of the earth 
rotate, both of them describing small circles about centers equi¬ 
distant from the axis of the great circle. 1 * 5 The period of this 
motion is not quite a year and is nearly equal to the annual 
revolution on the great circle. But the axis of the great circle 
is invariably directed toward the points of the firmament which 
are called the poles of the ecliptic. In like manner the motion 
in declination, combined with the annual motion in their joint 
effect upon the poles of the daily rotation, would keep these 
poles constantly fixed at the same points of the heavens, if the 
periods of both motions were exactly equal. 11 Now with the 
long passage of time it has become clear that this inclination 
of the earth to the firmament changes. Hence it is the common 
opinion that the firmament has several motions in conformity 
with a law not yet sufficiently understood. But the motion of 

15 In De rev. Copernicus states that he and certain of his contemporaries have 
found this angle (which is equal to the obliquity of the ecliptic) to be not 
greater than 23* 29' (Th 76.29-77.1) > and again that “in our times it is found 
to be not greater than 23° ztiW” (Th 162*24-25)* Newcombs determination 
of the obliquity for 1900 was 23* 27' 8"*263 on the basis of an annual diminution 
of 0^.4684, the value for 154* would be 23 0 29' 57" ( American Efhemeris and 
Nautical Almanac for 1940, Washington, D. G, 1938, p. xx), 

18 Mulleins version is faulty. He translated: <( beschreiben die beiden Pole der 
Erdachse bei stets gleichbleibendem Abstand kleine Kreise um die Pole der Eklip- 
tik” (the two poles of the earth’s axis, always maintaining an equal distance, 
describe small circles about the poles of the ecliptic \ Z£, XII, 367). But Coper¬ 
nicus says plainly enough that it is the centers of the small circles that are equi¬ 
distant from the poles of the ecliptic: circulos utrobiqve farvos describentes In 
centris ab ax* orbit magm aequidistantibus ; hence the poles of the earth are not, 
as Muller thought, equidistant from the poles of the ecliptic. This blunder led 
Muller into another error, as we shall see below (p. 73, n. 45). 

17 This obviously requires the direction of the motion in declination to be 
opposite to the direction of the annual motion. The explicit statement appears in 
De rev. (where the annual revolution of the earth abtut the sun is termed “the 
annual motion of the center” or more briefly “the motion of the center”): “Then 
there follows the third motion of the earth, the motion in declination, which is 
also an annual revolution but which takes place in precedence, that is, in the 
direction opposite to that of the motion of the center. Since the two motions are 
nearly equal in period and opposite in direction. . ” (Th 31.22-253 cf. p. 148, 
below). 



the earth can explain all these changes in a less surprising way. 
I am not concerned to state what the path of the poles is. I am 
aware that, in lesser matters, a magnetized iron needle always 
points in the same direction. It has nevertheless seemed a better 
view to ascribe the changes to a sphere, whose motion governs 
the movements of the poles. This sphere must doubtless be 
sublunar. 

Equal Motion Should Be Measured Not by the Equinoxes 

but by the Fixed Stars 

Since the equinoxes and the other cardinal points of the 
universe shift considerably, whoever attempts to derive from 
them the equal length of the annual revolution necessarily 
falls into error. 18 Different determinations of this length were 
made in different ages on the basis of many observations. Hip¬ 
parchus computed it as 365% days, and Albategnius the Chal¬ 
dean as 365" 5" 46™, w that is, 13%"' or 13%“’ less than 
Ptolemy. 20 Hispalensis increased Albategnius’s estimate by the 

3 A This assertion is directed against the Ptolemaic doctrine that the length of 
the year must be measured by the solstices and equinoxes (HI, 192.12-22 ; cf, Th 
309.4-9), 

19 In De rev . Copernicus cites A.lbatcgnius’s estimate more fully as 
(Th 193.7-8), It is to this value that he adds i3% m (= i3 m 36 s ), in order to 
obtain the sum 3 65*14:^ 365*6 lx ) < ¥%r Albategnius’s determination see C. A. 

Nallino, Al-Battim sive Albatenii opus astronomicum (Pubblieazioni del Reale 
osservatorio di Brera In Milano> No. 40, 1899—1907), Pt T I, 42.17. It seems clear 
that Copernicus did not draw from a single source the historical statements made 
in this section. But it is altogether likely that they were in large part based up*n 
the Efito'me in Almagestum Ptolemaei (Venice, 1496), begun by George Peuf- 
bach and completed by Regiomontanus (for Rheticus’s use of this work, see 
below, p- 117, n. 35). For the Epitome (Bk. Ill, Prop. 2) gave Albategnius’s 
determination as or i3% 11 less than 365%*. 

30 When Copernicus wrote the Commentariolus> he was misinformed about 
the value accepted by Hipparchus and Ptolemy, for he put it at 365H days. But 
in De rev . he correctly states that they found the year less than 3 65%, days by 
■J^ooth of a day, or 365 d 5**55 m i2 s (Th 191.31-192.3, 192.21-23, 237.13-15; HI, 
207.24— 2*8.14). The Epitome ( loc . cit.) cited Hipparchus’s determination as 
365%^, but ^u*ted Ptolemy’s value correctly. It should be noted that a work con¬ 
temporary with the Commentariolus states: ‘‘Hipparchus thought that the year 
consisted of days. Although he says that it was a fraction less than the 

complete quarter, he ignored the fraction, since he judged it to be imperceptible’* 
(Augustinus Ricius, De motu octavae sphaerae^rmo^ 1513, fol. e6r; Paris, 152 j, 
p. 40 r). 



20th part of an hour, since he determined the tropical year as 

365* 5 h 49“ 21 

^Prowe (PIIj 191 n) and Muller (ZE, XII, 368, n„ 41* the reference to 
De rev. should be III, xiii, not III, liii) followed Curtze (MCV, I, *o n) in 
supposing that Hispalensis, i.e., from Hispalis ^ Seville, here means Isidore of 
Seville. In Copernicuses view precession attained its greatest rapidity in the time 
of Albategnius* thereafter diminution set in; “From these computations it is 
clear that in the 400 years before Ptolemy the precession of the equinoxes was 
less rapid than in the period from Ptolemy to Albategnius, and that in this 
same period it was more rapid than in the interval from Albategnius to our times” 
((Th 162.14-17* cf. p. 113, below)* Therefore the shortest length of the tropical 
year fell in the time of Albategnius* and the increase noted by Hispalensis must 
be associated with a later astronomer. This chronological consideration rules out 
Isidore immediately. Moreover, an examination of the astronomical portions of 
his extant works (j. P. Migne, Patrologia Latina , Vols. LXXXI“LXXXIV) shows 
that be gives 365 days as the length of both the tropical and sidereal years* 

Who, then, is Hispalensis? Jabir ibn Afia&? In 1534 Peter Apian’s Instru~ 
menium prims mobiles was published together with Gebri filii Affia Hispalensis 
. . . Libri IX de astronomic. A copy was given by Rheticus to Copernicus (MCV, 
I, 36), and hence it did not get into his hands before 1539 (PII, 377.11*12). 
But all our evidence points to 1533 as the very latest year in which the Com~ 
mentariolus could have been written. Moreover, Jabir ( of . cit. y pp. 38-39) 
simply repeats the Hipparchus-Ptolemy estimate of the length of the tropical 
year* Clearly he is not the Hispalensis to whom Copernicus refers. 

In his Stromata Copemicana (Cracow, 1924), p-353, Birkenmajer correctly identified 
Copernicus* “Hispalensis” with Alfonso de Cordoba Hispalensis. The latter, who 
usually called himself Alfonsus artium et medicinae doctor > corrected Abraham Zacuto *s 
Almanack peipetuum exactissime nuper emendatum omnium celi motuum cum additionibus 
in eo factis tenens c ample mentum (Venice, 1502). On fob asr a letter is addressed to 
him as Alfonso kispalcnsi de corduba artium et medicinae doctori , His correction of 
Zacuto’s Almanack peipetuum was published by Peter Liechtenstein at Venice on 
July u, 1502, while Copernicus was a student at the nearby University of Padua. 
Alfonso Hispalensis* statement concerning the length of the year occurs on fol. aiv, 
where he corrects a computation of Zacuto and says: . . . dbvidas per numerum 
dierum anni .365. et quartam minus undecim minutis kore . . . (divide by the number 
of days in a year, 365^ minus eleven minutes = 365 d 5 ft 49 ltl ). This direct statement 
was overlooked by Birkenmajer, who thought he found nearly the same length of 
the tropical year by implication in the tables (which, however, were due to Zacuto 
and not to Alfonso Hispalensis). Birkenmajer also misread the second word in the 
volume’s title, where “perpetuu3** = “perpetuum,” not “perpetuum et** (Adriano 
Cappelli, Lexicon abbre<viaturarum , 5th ed., Milan, 1954, p. XXXII). The Almanack 
peipetuum belonging t# the library of the Ermland cathedral chapter (ZE, V, 375) 
may or may not have been a copy of the Venice, 1502 edition. The copy of that edition 
in the library of Upsala University (Pehr Fabian Aurivillius, Catalogus libioium 
impressotum bibliothecae r. academiae Upsaliensis , Upsala, 1814, p. *002) lacks the 
page on which the entry Liber capit . Farm, would have appeared, had the volume 



Lest these differences should seem to have arisen from er¬ 
rors of observation, let me say that if anyone will study the 
details carefully, he will find that the discrepancy has always 
corresponded to the motion of the equinoxes. For when the 
cardinal points moved i° in too years, as they were found to 
be moving in the age of Ptolemy, 22 the length of the year was 
then what Ptolemy stated it to be. When however in the fol¬ 
lowing centuries they moved with greater rapidity, being op¬ 
posed to lesser motions, the year became shorterj and this 
decrease corresponded to the increase in precession. For the 
annual motion was completed in a shorter time on account of 
the more rapid recurrence of the equinoxes. Therefore the 
derivation of the equal length of the year from the fixed stars 
is more accurate. I used Spica Virginis 23 and found that the 
year has always been 365 days, 6 hours, and about 10 minutes, 24 
which is also the estimate of the ancient Egyptians. 25 The same 
method must be employed also with the other motions of the 


once belonged to the library of the Ermland chapter (Birkenmajer, Stromata , p. 300), 
Since “Hispalends” in the Commentarioius means the Almanack petpetutim of 
1502, it follows that Copernicus wrote the Commentarioius after July 15 of that year. 
If the entry . . . sexternus Theorice asserentis Terram movers SoUm <vero quiescere 
. . . (a manuscript of six leaves expounding the theory of an author who asserts 
that the earth moves while the sun stands still) in the catalogue of his books drawn 
up on May 1 , 1514, by Matthew of Miechow {1457-1523), professor at the university 
of Cracow, refers to the Commentarioius, then its date of composition is narrowed 
down to the dozen years between July 15, 1502 and May 1, 1514. 


22 HII, 15.6-16.2. ** Virgo 14 (HU, 102.16* Th 136.10), a Virginis. 

34 Copernicus’s estimate of the length of the sidereal year is stated more exactly 
in De rev . as 365 d 6 h 9 m 4o® (Th 195.29—196.2) j Cume misquotes the estimate 
as 365 d 6 b 8 m 4o 5 (MCV, I, 10 n), and Prowe repeals the misstatement (PH, 191 


n). Newcombs determination (1900) is 365^25636042 — 365 d 6 h 9 m 9*.54 

(^^^o^SnK^Js^app^efe^y tfu^'information from the Epitome. It stated 

(loc. cit.) that the value found by the ancient Egyptians was 365^ 4 - W 30 d 
(= 365 d 6 t n m ). The Latin translation of Albategnius, which was printed at 
Nuremberg in 1537, likewise ascribed to certain ancient Egyptian and Babylonian 
astronomers a year consisting of 365^ Wdi d — 365 d 6 b n m (Nallino, AU 
Battdt I, 40.28-29, 204-9 > c & below, p. 117, n. 34). So for as I am aware, no 
determination of the length of the year more precise than 365-J4 d has been dis¬ 
covered among the papyri or other documents surviving from ancient Egypt. 



planets, as is shown by their apsides, by the fixed laws of their 
motion in the firmament, and by heaven itself with true testi¬ 
mony. 

The Moon 

The moon seems to me to have four motions in addition to 
the annual revolution which has been mentioned. For it re¬ 
volves once a month on its deferent circle about the center of 
the earth in the order of the signs. 2 * The deferent carries the 
epicycle which is commonly called the epicycle of the first 
inequality or argument, but which I call the first or greater 
epicycle.* 7 In the upper portion of its circumference this greater 
epicycle revolves in the direction opposite to that of the def¬ 
erent, 28 and its period is a little more than a month. Attached 

30 The loss of a leaf from V creates a lacuna which begins at this point and 
ends near the close of the present section. For the intervening text we must rely 
on S alone. 

The meaning of anni is not clear to me, and I have omitted it from the 
translation, Muller rendered the passage as follows: “wir nennen ihn einfach den 
ersten, den Haupt- oder Jahres-Epicy kel” (but which I call the first, the chief, 
or annual epicycle* ZE, XII, 370). There are three objections to Miiller^s version 
of annu It is syntactically unsound* in Copernicuses system the first lunar epicycle 
has no connection with the year* Copernicus regularly employs in bis lunar theory 
the terms “first epicycle” and “greater epicycle,” but never “annual epicycle” or 
“epicycle of the year” (cf. Th 235.14-15, 257.7-8, 262.26, 277.22* 288.23). 

^When the motion of a circle, in the upper portion of its circumference, is 
in precedence, i.e., from east to west, in the lower portion it is in consequence, 
from w*et to east, and vice versa. “Now let abc (Fig. 22) be the epicycle . . . 



and let the motion of the epicycle be understood to be from c to b and from b to a, 
that is, in precedence in the upper portion and in consequence in the lower por¬ 
tion” (Th 251.26—252.11 cf. also Th 323.26-28, 325,21-23* PIT, 349,14-16). 
When the direction of a motion is stated without reference to the portion of the 
circumference, it is the upper circumference that is understood. 



to it is a second epicycle. The moon, finally, moving with this 
second epicycle, completes two revolutions a month in the 
direction opposite to that of the greater epicycle, so that when¬ 
ever the center of the greater epicycle crosses the line drawn 
from the center of the great circle through the center of the 
earth (I call this line the diameter of the great circle), the 
moon is nearest to the center of the greater epicycle. This 
occurs at new and full moon; but contrariwise at the quadra¬ 
tures, midway between new and full moon, 29 the moon is most 
remote from the center of the greater epicycle. The length of 
the radius 30 of the greater epicycle is to the radius of the def- 

Muller was evidently unfamiliar with this usage, for he detached in suferhre 

quidem fortione from contra molum or bis refiexus . He translated: “dabei fiihrt 
er auf seiner Aussenseite einen ferneren Epicykel mit sich” (as the first epicycle 
revolves, it carries with it on its surface another epicycle* ZE, XII, 370)► But 
Rheticus explicitly states: “As the first epicycle revolves uniformly about its own 

center, in its upper circumference it carries the center of the small second epicycle 

in precedence, in its lower circumference, in consequence” (p. 134, below). 

39 Here, too, Mitller blundered. Eor he translated in quadiaturis mediantibus 
iisdem by: “zur Zeit der mittleren ^uadraturen” (at the time of the mean quad¬ 
ratures* ZE, XII, 371), This version ignores iisdem and mistakes mediate (to 
halve) for medius (the technical astronomical term for “mean”). But Copernicus 
has not yet begun to discuss the lunar inequalities* all that he is stating here is 
the elementary fact (see p. 47, above) that the quadratures are midway between 
new and full moon ( iisdem ). 


^Although diametri, the reading of S, cannot be checked on account of the 
lacuna in V, it is certainly wrong and must be changed to semidiametru Compu¬ 
tational support for this emendation is adduced in n. 32. Additional support comes 
from a calculation jotted down by Copernicus in his copy of the Tables of Regio¬ 


montanus (see Curtze in Zeitschrift fur Mathematik und Physik > XIX £1874), 
454-5$). The note reads: Semidiametrus orbts lunae ad eficyclium a — *efi~ 

ig 

cyclus a ad b — (EH, an)* “Radius of deferent of moon to first epicycle 

4 


io:iMg> first epicycle to second epicycle 19:4.” Throughout this series of calcu¬ 
lations Copernicus is comparing radius with radius, never diameter with radius. 

While the note was properly used by Curtze to emend another false reading 
(parte for quarto) in this same sentence of $, he overlooked diametri. Curiously 
enough, in citing Curtze’s work Prowe speaks of the note as containing “values 
calculated by Copernicus for the radii of the planetary epicycles” (PH, 193 n)* 
yet he too failed to notice the discrepancy. Had Muller compared his computations 
(ZE, XII, 372, n. 51) for the Commentariolus with the lunar numerical ratios 
in De re<u ty he would surely have caught the copyists error. It should be observed 
that Rheticus compares diameter with diameter when he gives the ratio of the 
lunar epicycles (p. 134, below). 



erent as iM.s:iO; 31 and to the radius of the smaller epicycle 
as 4%:i. a2 

By reason of these arrangements the moon appears, at times 
rapidly, at times slowly, to descend and ascend} and to this 
first inequality the motion of the smaller epicycle adds two 
irregularities. 33 For it withdraws the moon from uniform mo¬ 
tion on the circumference of the greater epicycle, the maximum 
inequality being 12%° of a circumference of corresponding size 
or diameter} 34 and it brings the center of the greater epicycle 

n I have adopted this form for the sake of clarity and compactness. What 
Copernicus actually wrote may be literally translated as follows: <£ The length of 
the radius of the greater epicycle contains a tenth part of the radius of the deferent 
plus one-eighteenth of such tenth part.” This ratio may be numerically represented 
by the expression %o + %8 4 %0 : i or i : to. 

38 Literally; <c (The length of the radius of the greater epicycle) contains the 
radius of the smaller epicycle five times minus one-fourth of the smaller radius. n 
While Copernicus incorporated in De rev. the lunar theory sketched in this 
section, he altered the numerical components slightly (Th 25^,1 o-n). The ratio 
of first epicycle to deferent is given here as i%8 * 10, which may be written 
105 5:10,000 j in De rev. it has been changed to 1097:10,000, which may be 
written 1H0 : 10. The ratio of first epicycle to second epicycle appears there 
as 1097:237, which may be written 4.63:1 ^ it is given above as 4.75:1. 

88 Although the meaning of the passage is clear, the text is faulty and simply 
does not parse. We might have expected et frimae quidem diversitati dufliciter 
variationem motus efieycli minoris ingerit (cf. Th 257.20-21). The distance 
from the moon to the center of the earth varies, because the moon’s orbit around 
the earth is really an ellipse j and the rate of the moon’s apparent motion varies 
for the same reason. Copernicus uses the term << first inequality’ 5 to denote the 

variation in the moon’s distance from the center 
of the earth and employs the first epicycle to 
account for it. Both the term and the geometrical 
device were traditional (cf. HI, 300.16-301.1). 

** The inequality is measured by an arc o f the 
greater epicycle, or of a circle of equal dimen¬ 
sions. Let AB be the greater epicycle with center 
at C (Fig. 23). Choose any point E on the cir¬ 
cumference, and with E as center describe the 
second epicycle. Draw CM and CL tangent to 
the second epicycle. When the moon is at M or 
B L, the inequality attains its maximum. Now in the 

Figuae 23 Commentariolus CE:EM ^ 4.75 :i = 100,000: 

21,053. Then by the Table of Chords ZECM, 
which measures the maximum inequality, ~ 12 0 9' (Th 45.19-20). Hence the 
reading of S, 17 gradus et quadrantem , is certainly wrong, and must be corrected 
to 12 gradus et quadrantem. As in the case of the solar inequality (see above, 
p. 62, n. ri), Copernicus is writing a convenient fraction. 



at times nearer the moon, at times further from it, within the 
limits of the radius of the smaller epicycle. 35 Therefore, since 
the moon describes unequal circles about the center of the 
greater epicycle, the first inequality varies considerably. In 
conjunctions and oppositions to the sun its greatest value does 

not exceed 4 0 56', but in the quadratures it increases to 6°36' ™ 
Those who employ an eccentric circle to account for this varia¬ 
tion 37 improperly treat the motion on the eccentric as unequal, 38 

While the reading of S cannot be checked on account of the lacuna in V, the 
proposed emendation is confirmed by a comparison with De rev. We saw above 
(n. 32) that in the later work Copernicus diminished the ratio CE:EM, making 
it 1097:237 “ 4.63:1 “ 100,000:21,604. It is obvious that since CE has been 
shortened in relation to EM, /ECM must increase ; by the Table of Chords, 
it is 12 0 2$' (Th 45.21-22, 2532-259.4, 264.31), Hence any such value as 
17/4* for the maximum inequality in the Commentar talus must be rejected as a 
copyists error. 

46 Reading cum for eum (PII, 193,11). 

* The difference between the maximum in the quadratures and the maximum in 
conjunctions and oppositions is 6 Q 36' — 4 0 56' = i° 40'. According to Ptolemy, 
the difference was 2 0 40' (HI, 362.1-6). In De rev. it is 2* 44' (Th 262.23-32, 
265.10-11). Hence I suggest that the figure in our text should be changed from 
6° 36' to 7 0 36'. Again the reading of S cannot be checked on account of the 
lacuna in V. 

From the following table it can be seen how closely Copernicus adhered to 
the Ptolemaic determination of the lunar inequalities. The second column con¬ 
tains the maximum inequality in conjunctions and oppositions; the third column 
shows the greatest additional inequality in the quadratures? and the fourth column 
sums the second and third. 


Ptolemy .. .. .. $° o' 2 0 40' 7° 40' 

CommentarioUis . 4 0 56' 2 0 40' 7° 36' 

De revolution^ us . 4* 56* 2 0 44' 7° 40' 


Although Ptolemy’s table for the first lunar inequality gives 5 0 i' as the maxi¬ 
mum (HI, 337.21, 390.24), he generally uses the round number 5 0 in his cal¬ 
culations (HI, 338-2*—339.3, 362.1-6, 363.10-12, 364.20-22; cf. Th 257.26-29)* 

m Ptolemy is credited with having discovered the second inequality (HI, 294. 
9-14, 354.18—355.20); to account for it, he represented the center of the lunar 
epicycle as revolving on a circle eccentric to the earth (HI, 355.20-22; cf. Th 

232.1-3)- 

“This charge that the representation employed by Ptolemy and his successors 
violates the axiom of uniform motion is amplified in De rev.: ^For when they 
assert that the motion of the center of the epicycle is uniform with respect to 
the center of the earth, they must also admit that the motion is not uniform on the 
circle which it describes, namely, the eccentric’* (Th 233.11-13). Muller was 
apparently puarled by the words froeter ineftam in if so circulo motus inaequaH- 
totem and omit led them from his translation (ZE, XII, 373). 





and, in addition, fall into two manifest errors. For the conse¬ 
quence by mathematical analysis is that when the moon is in 
quadrature, and at the same time in the lowest part of the 
epicycle, it should appear nearly four times greater (if the 
entire disk were luminous) than when new and full, unless its 
magnitude increases and diminishes in no reasonable way. 3 * So 
too, because the size of the earth is sensible in comparison with 
its distance from the moon, the lunar parallax 40 should increase 
very greatly at the quadratures. But if anyone investigates 
these matters carefully, he will find that in both respects 
the quadratures differ very little from new and full moon, 
and accordingly will readily admit that my explanation is the 
truer. 

With these three motions in longitude, then, the moon passes 
through the points of its motion in latitude. 41 The axes of the 
epicycles are parallel to the axis of the deferent, and therefore 
the moon does not move out of the plane of the deferent. But 
the axis of the deferent is inclined to the axis of the great circle 

** Miiller translated the last clause: a es sei denn, man behauptete thorichter- 
weise ein wirkliches Wachsen und Abnehmen der Mondkugel” (unless they ab¬ 
surdly maintained that there is a real increase and decrease in the size of the 
moonj ZE, XII, 373), This version misses the point. The apparent size of the 
moon (as measured by its apparent diameter) varies, because the distance of 
the moon from the earth is not constant (see n* 33), The first of the “two manifest 
errors” produced by the eccentric is, not that it causes the apparent size of the 
moon to vary, but that it grossly exaggerates the variation (cf. Th 234.3*— 
* 35 - 8 )- 

40 Muller failed to recognize diversitas asfectus as the technical term for 
parallax (see p* 51, above). Hence he was unable to distinguish the second of 
the “two manifest errors,” and his translation (ZE, XII, 373) speaks only of 
the apparent variation in the size of the moon, “der scheinbare Unterschied in 
der Grosse.” Consequently, in the next sentence, where Copernicus refers to both 
(utrumque) disagreements with the observational data which are produced by 
the eccentric (1. exaggeration of the variation in the apparent size of the moonj 
2. exaggeration of the variation in the lunar parallax), Mltller does not know 
how to render utrumque , and falls back on “Grossenunterschied” (variation in 
size)* The explicit statement of Kheticus puts the matter beyond all question: 
“But experience has shown my teacher that the parallax and size of the moon, 
at any distance from the sun, differ little or not at all from those which occur 
at conjunction and opposition, so that clearly the traditional eccentric cannot be 
assigned to the moon” (p. 134, below)* 

41 Here the lacuna in V ends. 



or ecliptic^ 42 hence the moon moves out of the plane of the 
ecliptic. Its inclination is determined by the size of an angle 
which subtends 5° of the circumference of a circle. 43 The poles 
of the deferent revolve at an equal distance from the axis of 
the ecliptic, 44 in nearly the same manner as was explained 
regarding declination. 4 ’ But in the present case they move in 
the reverse order of the signs and much more slowly, the 
period of the revolution being nineteen years. 48 It is the com- 

43 Muller rendered axi rmgni orbis sive eclifticae by: “die Achse des grossten 
Kreises der Ekliptik” (the axis of the great circle of the ecliptic5 ZE, XII, 373). 
This faulty translation shoves that Muller did not quite grasp the meaning of 
orbis magnus^ which he interpreted (ZE, XII, 365, n. 25) as meaning “great 
circle” in the geometrical sense, i.e., a circle drawn on the surface of a sphere 
with its center in the center of the sphere. However, Copernicuses term for “great 
circle” in the geometrical sense (see above, p. 12, ». 26) is not orbis nsagnus 
but circuits* maximus (Th 57-66, passim). In the present passage orbis tnagnus 
bears its usual sense of the real annual revolution of the earth about the sun (see 
p. 16, above). The orbis magnus and the ecliptic lie in the same plane and have a 
common axis: “But the axis of the great circle is invariably directed toward the 
points of the firmament which are called the poles of the ecliptic” (p. 64, above). 

* This estimate of for the maximum latitude of the moon was derived 
from Ptolemy (HI, 388-11-389.7, 391-52* cf. Th 272,13-15, 274*8-9) and, 
subject to the correction mentioned in the following note, is retained in modern 
astronomy. 

44 Therefore the inclination of the moon’s orbit to the ecliptic would be con¬ 
stant, That this inclination in fact varies was discovered by Tycho Brahe* see 
Tychoith ‘Brahe opera omnia^ed. Preyer, II, 121-30, 413,13-21* IV, 42,27-43.225 
VI, 170.1-171,8* VII, 151-28-154,35* XI, 162-63* XII, 399-400* Dreyer’s re¬ 
marks on p. liv of the Introduction to Vol. I* and his Tycho Brahe (Edin¬ 
burgh, 1890), pp- 342-44. 

4l> See above, p. 64, n. 16. Muller missed the foroe of propemodum sicut> 
which he translated (ZE, XII, 373) by “ahnlich” (like) 5 whereas “almost like,” 
or something of the sort, is required. In the case of the moon, the poles of the 
deferent revolve at an equal distance from the axis of the ecliptic, tn aequsdis~ 
tantia axis eclipticae; but in the case of the motion in declination, the poles of 
the earth revolve on circles having centers equidistant from the axis of the ecliptic. 

This estimate of nineteen years for the period during which the lunar nodes 
perform their regression was also derived from Ptolemy. He measured the rate 
of regression by subtracting the moon’s mean motion in longitude from the mean 
motion in latitude (HI, 301,18-23, 356.4-9), the difference being about 3' a 
day (HI, 356,25-357.6, 358.6-11). By reference to his tables for the moon’s 
motion (HI, 282-293) we can determine the period required for the completion 
of the circuit as 18 years, 7 months, and 16 days. The discovery that the regres¬ 
sion of the nodes is not uniform was made by Tycho Brahe (see the references 
cited in n. 44, above). 



mon opinion that the motion takes place in a higher sphere, to 
which the poles are attached as they revolve in the manner 
described. Such a fabric of motions, then, does the moon seem 
to have. 

The Three Superior Planets 
Saturn—J upiter—Mars 

Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars have a similar system of motions, 
since their deferents completely enclose the great circle and 
revolve in the order of the signs about its center as their com¬ 
mon center. Saturn’s deferent revolves in 30 years, Jupiter’s 
in 12 years, and that of Mars in 29 monthsj 4T it is as though 
the size of the circles delayed the revolutions. For if the radius 
of the great circle is divided into 25 units, the radius of Mars’ 
deferent will be 38 48 units, Jupiter’s 1305I3, and Saturn’s 
23oH.° By “radius of the deferent” I mean the distance from 
the center of the deferent to the center of the first epicycle. 
Each deferent has two epicycles, 50 one of which carries the 

4T See above, p. 60, n. 7. 

^Although both $ and V read 30, I propose to substitute 38, for the reasons 
stated in n. 50, below. 

4a S: 230 et sextantem twins; V: 236 et sextantem twins . Pro we accepted V, 
but S is to be preferred, for the reasons given in n. 50, below. 

M tn the Commentariolns Copernicus employs for the planets what we have 
called the concentrobiepicyclic arrangement (s#e pp. 7, 37, above), consisting 
of two epicycles upon a deferent which is concentric with the great circle. In 
De this device is replaced, for the three superior planets, by an eccentrepicyclic 
arrangement, i.e., by a single epicycle upon an eccentric deferent (Th 325.16-21) j 
after indicating the geometric equivalence of the two devices (Th 325*11-16, 
327.6-13), Copernicus points to the variation in the eccentricity of the great 
circle as the reason for his choice of the eccentrepicyclic arrangement (Th 327.13- 
16). When he wrote the Commentorivlns , he regarded this eccentricity as con¬ 
stant (see above, p. 61, n. 9), 

Now if the two arrangements are to produce identical results, then, as Coperni¬ 
cus points out, the radius (R) of the concentric deferent ( Commentariobu ) must 
be equal to the radius (R) of the eccentric deferent {De w,), Let r denote the 
radius of the great circle. By a comparison o f the ratio R: r, as given here, with 
the values in De rev,, we may discover whether in shifting from the concentro- 
biepicydic to the eccentrepicyclic arrangement Copernicus altered the relative 
sizes of the deferent and great circle. In De rev,, for Saturn r = 1090 (Th 
341.29), for Jupiter r = 1916 (Th 353-15-16), and for Mars r zz 6580 (Th 
364.8-9), when in each case R — 1 0,000. 



other, in much the same way as was explained in the case of 
the moon, 51 but with a different arrangement. For the first 
epicycle revolves in the direction opposite to that of the defer¬ 
ent, the periods of both being equal. The second epicycle, car¬ 
rying the planet, revolves in the direction opposite to that of 
the first with twice the velocity. The result is that whenever 
the second epicycle is at its greatest or least distance from the 
center of the deferent, the planet is nearest to the center of the 
first epicycle; and when the second epicycle is at the mid¬ 
points, a quadrant’s distance from the two points just men- 



R;r 



De revolvttonibus 

Commentariolus 

Saturn ... 

10,000; 1090 — 229^: 25 

230^4 ?25 

Jupiter.... 

10,000:1916= 130^:25 

130^2:25 

Mars .., 

10,000:6580 = 18:25 

38:25 


The table enables us to deal with a variant reading in this passage. For R in 
the case of Saturn, S has 230%, while V gives 236% (Curtze’s collation [MCV, 
IV, 7] inaccurately assigns to Jupiter the reading of S for Saturn). Prowe ac¬ 
cepted the reading of V, but S is clearly preferable, as the following analysis 
will show. 

I have already referred (see p. 69, n, 30) to the series of notes made by 
Copernicus in his copy of the Tables of Regiomontanus. Curtze correctly pointed 
out that the ratios contained in these notes are identical with those adopted in 
the Commentariolus (MCV, IV 3 7 n) $ and he used the statement about the moon 
to emend a false reading in our text. However, he failed to make any further 
use of these entries. Now for the radius (not diameter, as MCV, I, 12 n. and 
PH, 195 n. have it 5 cf. PII, 211) of Saturn’s deferent, they give 230% (not 
130%, as PII, 195 n). Hence we are justified 121 preferring the reading of S to 
that of V. This judgment is confirmed by the fact that Tycho Brahe’s reference 
to the Commentariolus agrees with S (see his Of era omnia , ed. Dreyer, II, 
42 $.40—4*9.*). 

Moreover, these notes of Copernicus show that S and V agree on a false 
reading for R in the case of Mars. The statement in the Tables of Regiomon¬ 
tanus gives the radius of Mars’ deferent as approximately 3$ (Martis semidi- 
ametrus orbts 38 fere). Now a value of 30, which is the reading of both our 
MSS, would make the ratio R:r for Mars 30:25 =: 10,000:8333, at wide variance 
from the corresponding ratio in De rev, But reference to the table will show 
that the agreement between De rev . and the Commentariolus for both Saturn 
and Jupiter is quite close. Hence I have adopted 3S, the number written by 
Copernicus in his Tables of Regiomontanus, in place of 30, Writing o for S 
is not an uncommon error of copyists (cf. below, p. 82, n. 74). 

111 See the opening paragraph of the section on “The Moon.’’ 





tioned, 52 the planet is most remote from the center of the first 
epicycle. Through the combination of these motions of the 
deferent and epicycles, and by reason of the equality of their 
revolutions, the aforesaid withdrawals and approaches occupy 
absolutely fixed places in the firmament, and everywhere ex¬ 
hibit unchanging patterns of motion. Consequently the apsides 
are invariable; 58 for Saturn, near the star which is said to be on 

the elbow of Sagittarius; 54 for Jupiter, 8° east of the star which 

is called the end of the tail of Leo; 55 and for Mars, 6 V 4 * west 
of the heart of Leo. 56 

Muller rendered in quadrant bus autem mediantibus by: “zur Ze it der 
mittleren Quadraturen” (at the time of the mean quadratures5 ZE, XII, 374). 
With regard to mediantibus , this version repeats the blunder pointed out above in 
n. 29 on p. 695 and, in addition, it mistakes quadrans (quadrant, the fourth 
part of a circumference) for quadratwa (quadrature 5 cf, above, p„ 47, n. 163). 

* s This was Ptolemy’s view. He held that the planetary apsides were fated in 
relation to the sphere of the faced stars, since, as measured by the equinoxes and 
solstices, both the apsides and the faced stars moved in the same direction at the 
same slow rate (HII, 251.24^252.7, 252.11-18, 257.3-1*3 269.3-115 cf. Th 
308.20-24). 

“ The star is here described as quae super cubitum esse dicitur Sagittatoris . 
It is unquestionably to be identified with Sagittarius 19 in Ptolemy’s catalogue 
(HII, 114.10), for that star was described in the first printed translation of 
the Syntaxis into Latin (Venice, 1515, p. 84r) as quae esi super cubitum dextrum. 
In De rev . Copernicus uses instead the name In dextrv cubito (Th 139.14). 

65 This ster is Leo 27 in Ptolemy’s catalogue and in De rev . (HII, 100.75 
Th 135.12). Its Bayer name 1$ 0 Leonis. 

u This star is Leo 8 (HII, 98.65 Th 134.23-24), It was called Basiliscus or 
Regulus, and its Bayer name is <t Leonis, 

Ptolemy had put the apogee of Saturn at 23 0 of Scorpio5 of Jupiter, at n* 
of Virgoj and of Mars, at 25 0 30' of Cancer (HII, 412.12-17, 380.22^381.4, 
345,12-20), In his catalogue of the fixed stars these places are, respectively, 
31 0 50' west of Sagittarius 19, 16 0 30' east of Leo 27, and 7 0 west of Leo 8. 
From them Copernicus’s determinations differ, respectively, by 31 0 50' eastward, 
8° 30' westward, and eastward. Hence we may say that although in the 
Commentariolus Copernicus accepted Ptolemy’s doctrine of the fixity of the plane¬ 
tary apsides, he intended to put forward improved determinations of them. 

In, De rev. the places are again altered. But now they are all east of Ptolemy’s 
determinations; for Saturn’s apogee is 17° 49’ west of Sagittarius 195 Jupiter’s, 
21 0 10' east of Leo 275 and Mars’, 3° 50' east of Leo 8 (Th 338.15-18, 350.15- 
16, 360.3-5), Hence Copernicus abandons the idea of the fixed apogee and enun¬ 
ciates the discovery that the longitude of the planetary apogees increases: ^More¬ 
over, the position of the higher apse of [Saturn’s] eccentric has in the meantime 
advanced 13 d 58' in the sphere of the fixed stars. Ptolemy believed that this posi- 


The radius of the great circle was divided above into 25 
units. Measured by these units, the sizes of the epicycles are 
as follows. In Saturn the radius of the first epicycle consists of 
19 units, 41 minutes; the radius of the second epicycle, 6 units, 
34 minutes. In Jupiter the first epicycle has a radius of 10 units, 
6 minutes; the second, 3 units, 22 minutes. In Mars the first 
epicycle, 5 units, 34 minutes; the second, 1 unit, 51 minutes. 67 
Thus the radius of the first epicycle in each case is three times 
as great as that of the second. 58 

The inequality which the motion of the epicycles imposes 
upon the motion of the deferent is called the first inequality; 
it follows, as I have said, unchanging paths everywhere in the 
firmament. There is a second inequality, on account of which 
the planet seems from time to time to retrograde, and often to 
become stationary. This happens by reason of the motion, not 
of the planet, but of the earth changing its position in the great 
circle. For since the earth moves more rapidly than the planet, 
the line of sight directed toward the firmament regresses, and 
the earth more than neutralizes the motion of the planet. This 
regression is most notable when the earth is nearest to the 
planet, that is, when it comes between the sun and the planet 
at the evening rising of the planet. On the other hand, when 

tion, like the others, was fixed; but it is now clear that it moves about i° in 
100 years ** (Th 339.7-11> cf* Th 351.2-5, 359*33^360.73 and Dreyer, Planetary 
Systems, p. 338)* 

** I resume the comparison instituted above in n. 50 on p. 74. A s Copernicus 
points out (Th 327.7-8), the radius (E) of the first epicycle (Commentartolus) 
must be equal to the eccentricity (E) of the eccentric (De rev.'). Now in De rev. 
for Saturn E rz $54 (Th 330.18), for Jupiter E ^ 687 (Th 343.23-28), and 


for Mars E = 1460 (Th 358.28) ; we already have the values of r, 

r:E 

De revohstionibus Commenksriolui 

Saturn .. 1090: 854 = 25:i9 p 35 m 25:19^41® 

Jupiter . 1916: 687 = 25: 8P5S m 25:10? 6 m 

Mars . 6580:1460 = 25: 5 p 33 m 25: 5 p 34 m 


“ Hence the radius of the second epicycle in the Commentartolus is equal to 
the radius of the single epicycle in De rev., since both = % E (Th 325.19-20)* 
An exception will be noted in the case of Mars, where Copernicus reduces the 
eccentricity from 1,500 (Th 354-29-355.2) to 1,460, but leaves the radius ol 
the epicycle at 500 (Th 358.24-31, 360.7-11, 362.26-28). 






the planet is setting in the evening or rising in the morning, 
the earth makes the observed motion greater than the actual. 
But when the line of sight is moving in the direction opposite 
to that of the planets and at an equal rate, the planets appear 
to be stationary, since the opposed motions neutralize each 
other j this commonly occurs when the angle at the earth be¬ 
tween the sun and the planet is I20 0 . 59 In all these cases, the 
lower the deferent on which the planet moves, the greater is 
the inequality. Hence it is smaller in Saturn than in Jupiter, 
and again greatest in Mars, in accordance with the ratio of the 
radius of the great circle to the radii of the deferents. The 
inequality attains its maximum for each planet when the line 
of sight to the planet is tangent to the circumference of the 
great circle. In this manner do these three planets move. 

In latitude they have a twofold deviation. While the cir¬ 
cumferences of the epicycles remain in a single plane with their 
deferent, they are inclined to the ecliptic. This inclination is gov¬ 
erned by the inclination of their axes, which do not revolve, as 
in the case of the moon, 60 but are directed always toward the 
same region of the heavens. Therefore the intersections of the 
deferent and ecliptic (these points of intersection are called the 
nodes) occupy eternal places in the firmament. 61 Thus the node 
where the planet begins its ascent toward the north is, for 

Saturn, 8%* east of the star which is described as being in the 
head of the eastern of the two Gemini; 63 for Jupiter, 4 0 west of 

Pliny Natural History 11.15(12).59: “In the trine aspect, that is, at 
120* from the sun, the three superior planets have their morning stations, which 
ate called the first stations * . . and again at 120*, approaching from the other 
direction, they have their evening stations, which are called the second stations”* 
c t also ii, 16(13).69-71. It has been shown that Copernicus read carefully a copy 
of the Rome, 1473 edition of Pliny’s Natural History (L, A. Birkenmajer, 
Stromata Cofemicana, Cracow, 1924, pp, 327-34) * and also a copy of the Venice, 
1487 edition (MCV, I, 40-41). 

^See the closing paragraph of the section on “The Moon.” 

Copernicus derived from Ptolemy the view that the nodes, like the apsides, 
are fixed (HII, 530.8-11* cf. Karl Manitius, Des Claudius Ptolemaus Handbuch 
der Jstronomie, Leipzig, 1912-13, II, 424). But in De rev. f having discovered 
the motion of the apsides, Copernicus holds that this motion :s shared by the 
nodes (Th 413.7-15, 415^0-25). 

Gemini 2 (HII, 92.4* Th 132.31-32), Pollux, p Geminorum* cf. above, 
p. 62, n. 12. 



the same star} and for Mars, 6Y2 0 west of Vergiliae. 63 When 
the planet is at this point and its diametric opposite, it has no 
latitude. But the greatest latitude, which occurs at a quadrant’s 
distance from the nodes, 64 is subject to a large inequality. For 
the inclined axes and circles seem to rest upon the nodes, as 
though swinging from them. The inclination becomes greatest 
when the earth is nearest to the planet, that is, at the evening 
rising of the planet} at that time the inclination of the axis is, 
for Saturn 2%°, Jupiter i%°, and Mars i%°. 85 On the other 
hand, near the time of the evening setting and morning rising, 
when the earth is at its greatest distance from the planet, the 
inclination is smaller,*® for Saturn and Jupiter by K»°, and for 

** Taurus 30 (HII, 90.2; Th 132,5-6), Authorities differ about the identifica¬ 
tion of Taurus 30; see Christian H. T* Peters and Edward B. Knobel, Ptolemy's 
Catalogue of Stars (Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication No* B6> 
I 9 , s)» P* I1 5* 

* Ptolemy had put the points of greatest northern latitude for Saturn and 
Jupiter at o* of Libra, and for Mars at 30° of Cancer (HII, 526.6-11* cf. Th 
4.13,7-11). If we compare these places with his determinations of the apogees (see 
above, p. 76* n. 56), we find that for Saturn the point of greatest northern 
latitude is 53 0 west of the apogee; for Jupiter, 19* east; and for Mars, 4* 30' 
east. Ptolemy slates these differences of position in round numbers as 50 9 west, 
20 0 east, and o* (HII, 587.5-9$ cf. Manitius, Ptoletndus Handbuch , II, 425, n. 
ai)> 

In the present passage Copernicus gives the places of the ascending nodes. By 
adding 90° to these places, we obtain the poinls of greatest northern latitude. 
They turn out to be, for Saturn, 79 0 40' west of the apogee; for Jupiter, 20° 10' 
east; and for Mars, o* 20' west. In the CommentarioluSy then, Copernicus not 
only adheres to the Ptolemaic ideas of the fixed apogee and the fixed node, but 
he also retains Ptolemy’s distance between apogee and node for Jupiter and Mars, 
although increasing the distance by 30 0 for Saturn. 

In De rev.> although the apogee moves, the distance between apogee and node 
remains constant, since the node shares the motion of the apogee. Copernicus finds 
the points of greatest northern latitude, for Saturn at 7° of Scorpio; for Jupiter 
at 27 0 of Libra; and for Mars at 27 0 of Leo (Th 413.11-13). If we compare 
these places with his determinations of the apogees (see above, p. 76, n. 56), 
we find that for Saturn the point of greatest northern latitude is 23° 21' west 
of the apogee; for Jupiter, 48° east; and for Mars, 27 0 20' east. 

*8: dextante; V; sextants. Prowe, followed by Mliller (ZE, XII, 377), 
adopted the reading of V; but sextants is clearly impossible, for the following 
sentence of the text slates that the inclination diminishes in the case of Mars 
by j%\ 

*The Inclination is greatest when the planet is in opposition, smallest when 
the planet is in conjunction; and the greatest difference between maximum and 



Mars by i%°. Thus this inequality is most notable in the 
greatest latitudes, and it becomes smaller as the planet ap¬ 
proaches the node, so that it increases and decreases equally 
with the latitude. 

The motion of the earth in the great circle also causes the 
observed latitudes to change, its nearness or distance increasing 
or diminishing the angle of the observed latitude, as mathe¬ 
matical analysis demands. This motion in Jibration occurs along 
a straight line, but a motion of this sort can be derived from two 
circles. These are concentric, and one of them, as it revolves, 
carries with it the inclined poles of the other. The lower circle 
revolves in the direction opposite to that of the upper, and 
with twice the velocity. As it revolves, it carries with it the 
poles of the circle which serves as deferent to the epicycles. 
The poles of the deferent are inclined to the poles of the circle 


minimum occurs at the points of greatest latitude (Th 415.9-14). The following 
table compares the maximum and minimum angles of inclination as given here 
with those in De (Th 421,22-25 j 421.31—422.1 $ 422.7-8, 10-11 )* 

Angles of 

Inclination Commentariolus De r&vok/tiontbus 


Saturn . Greatest 2 0 4c 7 2 0 44' 

Least 2 0 15' 2y 16' 

Jupiter.. Greatest i° 40' i° 42' 

Least i° 15' x° 18' 

Mars . ...... Greatest i° 50' i° 51' 

Least o° ro' 0° 9' 


From the table we see that the main inclinations and their limits of variation 
are as follows; 


Commentariolus De revolutionibus 

Saturn . 2 C 27W ± 12&' 2 0 30' ± 14' 

Jupiter. r ° Z7 W ± ! 2 H' 10 3 °' + 12' 

Mars . i° + 50' i° ± 51' 


In Ptolemy’s treatment of the latitudes, for the three superior planets the angle 
at which the eccentric deferent was inclined to the ecliptic was constant (HIT, 
529.3-9)- His values were: for Saturn 2 0 30', for Jupiter z° 30', and for Mars 
1 9 (HII, 540.13-14, 542.5-9). But the epicycle was inclined to the eccentric at 
a varying angle (HII, 529.12-^530.8). It will be observed that in Copernicus’s 
theory the epicycles and deferent are coplanarj hence the angle at which the 
deferent is inclined to the ecliptic cannot be fixed, hut must vary (Th 413.1-3, 
29-3i). 









halfway 87 above at an angle equal to the inclination of these 
poles to the poles of the highest circle . 68 So much for Saturn, 
Jupiter, and Mars and the spheres which enclose the earth. 

Venus 

There remain for consideration the motions which are in¬ 
cluded within the great circle, that is, the motions of Venus 
and Mercury. Venus has a system of circles like the system of 
the superior planets , 89 but the arrangement of the motions is 
different. The deferent revolves in nine months, as was said 
above, 7 * and the greater epicycle also revolves in nine months. 
By their composite motion the smaller epicycle is everywhere 
brought back to the same path in the firmament, and the higher 
apse is at the point where I said the sun reverses its course . 71 
The period of the smaller epicycle is not equal to that of the 
deferent and greater epicycle , 72 but has a constant relation to 

S: mediate; V: mediate . Before S was known, Curtze emended V to imme¬ 
diate , which Prowe prints. But S is undoubtedly correct* 

99 Since motion in a straight line would violate the principle of circularity, 
Copernicus is at pains to prove that a rectilinear motion may be produced by 
a combination of two circular ones. A less concise account of this geometric device, 
employed in connection with the theory of precession, as well as an explanation 
of the term “libration,” will be found in the Narratio frima (pp. 153-54, Wlowj 
cf. Th 165.18—169.22). 

90 In De rev. Copernicus replaces the concentrobiepicydic arrangement for 
Venus by an eccentreccentric arrangement, i.e,, by two eccentrics (Th 368.23-29). 
The larger, outer eccentric which carries the planet has for its center a point 
which revolves on the smaller eccentric (Th 3 68.3 0^369.6). 

w Page 60. 

71 In placing the apogee of Venus at the solar apogee Copernicus retains the 
Ptolemaic idea of the fixed apse, but he offers an improved determination. For 
Ptolemy had put the apogee of Venus at 25° of Taurus (HII, 300.15-16 > cf. 
Th 365.2*-25; 366.3-7, 17-20), and the solar apogee at 5 0 30' of Gemini (see 
above, p. 62, n. 13). Hence for him the apogee of Venus was 10* 30' west of 
the solar apogee. Now we have already seen that in the CommentarioUtt Coperni¬ 
cus advances the solar apogee io', as measured by the fixed stars, over 

Ptolemy’s determination. Hence he advances the apogee of Venus 21° 40', again 
as measured by the fixed stars, over Ptolemy’s determination. 

M This is the difference between the arrangement of the motions, on the one 
hand, for the three superior planets, and on the other hand, for Venus. In the 
former case the period of the smaller epicycle is one-half the period of the 
deferent and greater epicycle (see the opening paragraph of the section on <( The 



the motion of the great circle. For one revolution of the latter 
the smaller epicycle completes two. The result is that whenever 
the earth is in the diameter drawn through the apse, the planet 
is nearest to the center of the greater epicycle; and it is most 
remote, when the earth, being in the diameter perpendicular 
to the diameter through the apse, is at a quadrant’s distance 
from the positions just mentioned. The smaller epicycle of the 
moon moves in very much the same way with relation to the 
sun. 73 The ratio of the radius of the great circle to the radius 
of the deferent of Venus is 25 .18; 74 the greater epicycle has a 
value of % of a unit, and the smaller %. TS 

Three Superior Planets”). Muller completely missed the distinction. His trans¬ 
lation runs: “Die Umlaufszeit dieses kleineren Epicykels ist verschieden von der 
der oben genannten Kreise* so entsteht liingst der Ekliptik eine ungleichformige 
Bewegung. Vollftihren jene einen Umlauf, so fuhrt der kleinere einen doppelten 
aus” (The period of this smaller epicycle is different from that of the above- 
mentioned circles [i.e., deferent and greater epicycle] 5 thus there appears along 
the ecliptic an unequal motion. While those circles [i.e., deferent and greater 
epicycle] complete one revolution, the smaller epicycle completes two* ZE, XII, 
378)- The source of Muller’s difficulty seems to have been the unusual expression 
Minor autem efkyclus im-pares cum iUis revolutiones habens , motui orbis magni 
'imfaritatem reservavit. This may be literally translated as follows: “The smaller 
epicycle, having revolutions unequal with those of the deferent and greater epi¬ 
cycle, has reserved the inequality for the motion of the great circle.” The next 
sentence in the text makes Copernicus’s meaning clear beyond dispute. The revo¬ 
lution of the smaller epicycle takes half the time required by the motion on the 
great circle. 

18 See the opening paragraph of the section on “The Moon.” 

T4 S has the false reading 10, instead of 18 (Lindhagen reproduces this page 
of the MS). I call attention to the copyist’s error of writing o for 8, in con¬ 
nection with the emendation proposed in the last paragraph of n. 50 (p. 75, 
above), 

96 To discover whether in shifting from the concentrobiepicyclic arrangement 
in the Commentariolus to the eccentreccentric arrangement in De rev . Copernicus 
altered the relative si*e$ of the circles, we may make the following comparisons. 
The radius (R) of the concentric deferent ( Commentariolus ) corresponds to 
the radius (R) of the outer eccentric ( De rev .). Similarly, the radius (E) of 
the first epicycle ( Commentariolus ) corresponds to the eccentricity (E) of the 
outer eccentric ( De rev,') * and since the eccentricity varies, we take its mean 
value. Let r denote the radius of the great circle. Now in De rev . R — 7 i 93 > 
r~ 10,000, and E = 3i2 (Th 367,13-14, 368.12-22, 371.11). Then in De rev, 
r:R zz 10,000:7193 = 25 :17.9s, while in the Commentariolus r:R = 25:18* 
in De rev . r:E — 10,000:312 = 25:0.78, while in the Commentariolus r:E = 




Venus seems at times to retrograde, particularly when it is 
nearest to the earth, like the superior planets, but for the oppo¬ 
site reason. For the regression of the superior planets happens 
because the motion of the earth is more rapid than theirs, but 
with Venus, because it is slower; and because the superior 
planets enclose the great circle, whereas Venus is enclosed 
within it. Hence Venus is never in opposition to the sun, since 
the earth cannot come between them, but it moves within fixed 
distances on either side of the sun. These distances are deter¬ 
mined by tangents to the circumference drawn from the center 
of the earth, and never exceed 48° in our observations. 79 Here 
ends the treatment of Venus’ motion in longitude. 

Its latitude also changes for a twofold reason. For the axis 

of the deferent is inclined at an angle of 214°, 77 the node 
whence the planet turns north being in the apse. However, the 
deviation which arises from this inclination, although in itself 
it is one and the same, appears twofold to us. 78 For when the 
earth is on the line drawn through the nodes of Venus, the 
deviations on the one side are seen above, and on.the opposite 

25 The radius of the second epicycle % E, a ratio which is applied in 

the Commentariolus to all the planets. In De rev. the radius of the smaller eccen¬ 
tric, being- one-third of the mean eccentricity of the outer eccentric (Th 368,18- 
22), als* — % E. Hence the second epicycle ( Commentariolus ) corresponds to 
the smaller eccentric ( De rev .). 

Despite dodrantem in the text, Muller’s translation makes E == % (ZE, XII, 
378). He was evidently confused by a misprint in Prowe’s footnote (PH, 198). 
Vet in that same footnote, five lines below the misprint, the correct value of % 
appears (cf, PII, 211 and MCV, I, 14-15 n). 

* Th is value of 48° for the greatest elongation of Venus was derived from 
Ptolemy (HII, 522.14), and is accepted by modern astronomy. 

77 Muller wrote 2* (ZE, XII, 379). He was evidently unfamiliar with s, as 
the abbreviation of sentmis, “one-half” (cf. Th 71.23, 167.4, 425.25). For in 
his note on the matter he misinterpreted s . as the abbreviation of scrufula , “min¬ 
utes” (this word was not assigned to the masculine gender, as Muller thought). 
Had he consulted Curtze’s collation of $ and V, his difficulty would have been 
obviated. For Curtze, confronted by a variant reading (MCV, IV, 8), showed 
that 2^>° is supported by De rev. (Th 424,23-24). Moreover, in Ptolemy’s treat¬ 
ment of the latitude of Venus, there are two inclinations of the epicycle, and each 
is given as (HII, 535.15-18, 536.8-11). 

w S, V: duplex non ostenditur. Mfiller correctly emended to duplex nobis 
ostenditur (ZE, XII, 379, n. 72). 



side below j these are called the reflexions. 75 When the earth 
is at a quadrant’s distance 80 from the nodes, the same natural 
inclinations of the deferent appear, but they are called the 
declinations. In all the other positions of the earth, both lati¬ 
tudes mingle and are combined, each in turn exceeding the 
other} by their likeness and difference they are mutually in¬ 
creased and eliminated. 

The inclination of the axis is affected by a motion in libration 
that swings, not on the nodes as in the case of the superior 
planets, 81 but on certain other movable points. These points 
perform annual revolutions with reference to the planet. 
Whenever the earth is opposite the apse of Venus, at that time 
the amount of the libration attains its maximum for this planet, 
no matter where the planet may then be on the deferent. As a 
consequence, if the planet is then in the apse or diametrically 
opposite to it, it will not completely lack latitude, even though 
it is then in the nodes. From this point the amount of the 
libration decreases, until the earth has moved through a quad¬ 
rant of a circle from the aforesaid position, and, by reason of 
the likeness of their motions, the point of maximum deviation 82 
has moved an equal distance from the planet. Here no trace 
of the deviation is found.* 3 Thereafter the descent of the devia¬ 
tion continues. 84 The initial point drops from north to south, 

**An alternative name was obliquation: "They call this deviation of the planet 
the obliquation, bat some call it the reflexion** (Th 418.22-23)* In De rev. 
Copernicus generally uses obliquation, but in the Narratio frtma Rheticus favors 
reflexion. 

** Muller’s translation: "in den Quadrature^* (in the quadratures* ZE* XII, 
379) again confuses quadrantibui with quadrature (cf. above, p. 75, n. 52)* 
An inferior planet cannot come to quadrature (see above, p. 50) j Copernicus has 
just stated that the greatest elongation of Venus is 48®, 

84 See the penultimate paragraph of the section on "The Three Superior 
Planets.** 

“Muller correctly emended maxim* ($, V) to maximae (ZE, XII, 380, n. 75). 

“ Since the deviation vanishes when the earth is 90* from the apse-line of the 
planet, the deviation has no effect upon the declinations, but only upon the re- 
flexions. Copernicus employs the deviation "because the angle of inclination . ♦ . 
is found to be greater in the obliquation [reflexion] than in the declination** 
(Th 418.27-29)- 

V: continuato. Prowess continuatio is a misprint (PII, 200.3). 


constantly increasing its distance from the planet in accordance 
with the distance of the earth from the apse. Thereby the 
planet is brought to the part of the circumference which pre¬ 
viously was south. Now, however, by the law of opposition, 
it becomes north and remains so until the limit of the libration 
is again reached upon the completion of the circle. Here the 
deviation becomes equal to the initial deviation and once more 
attains its maximum. Thus the second semicircle is traversed in 
the same way as the first. Consequently this latitude, which is 
usually called the deviation, never becomes a south latitude. 
In the present instance, also, it seems reasonable that these 
phenomena should be produced by two concentric circles with 
oblique axes, as I explained in the case of the superior planets. 85 

Mercury 

Of all the orbits in the heavens the most remarkable is that 
of Mercury, which traverses almost untraceable paths, so that 
it cannot be easily studied. A further difficulty is the fact that 
the planet, following a course generally invisible in the rays of 
the sun, can be observed for a very few days only. Yet Mercury 
too will be understood, if the problem is attacked with more 
than ordinary ability. 

Mercury, like Venus, has two epicycles which revolve on 
the deferent.® 8 The periods of the greater epicycle and deferent 
are equal, as in the case of Venus. The apse is located 14.V2 0 
east of Spica Virginis. 87 The smaller epicycle revolves with 
twice the velocity of the earth. But by contrast with Venus, 
whenever the earth is above the apse or diametrically opposite 

“For a fuller account of Copernicus's theory for the latitudes of Venus see 
pp. 180-85, below. 

“In De rev . Copernicus replaces the concentrobiepicyclic arrangement for Mer¬ 
cury by an eccentreccentric arrangement (Th 377.*-3). 

97 Since Ptolemy had put the apogee of Mercury at io° of Libra {HII, 264.12- 
14, 271.2-4^ cf. Th 380.6-7), and Spica at 26* 40' of Virgo (HII, 103.16)* the 
apse was 13* 20'east of Spica Virginis. Hence in the CorwnintarioUu Copernicus 
retains the idea of the fixed apse and modifies position slightly. But in De rev. 
he puts the apse 41 0 30' east of Spica (Th t36.ro, 389.5-6, 393.5-8), and extends 
to Mercury the principle that the longitude of the planetary apogees increases 
(Th 393.16-19, *7-*9J cf. n. 56 on pp. 76-77, above). 



to it, the planet is most remote from the center of the greater 
epicycle; and it is nearest, whenever the earth is at a quadrant’s 
distance 88 from the points just mentioned. I have said 89 that 
the deferent of Mercury revolves in three months, that is, in 
S8 days. Of the 25 units into which I have divided the radius 
of the great circle, the radius of the deferent of Mercury con¬ 
tains 9%. The first epicycle contains 1 unit, 41 minutes; the 
second epicycle is Vz as great, that is, about 34 minutes. 90 

But in the present case this combination of circles is not suffi¬ 
cient, though it is for the other planets. For when the earth 
passes through the above-mentioned positions with respect to 
the apse the planet appears to move in a much smaller path 91 
than is required by the system of circles described above; and 
in a much greater path,* 1 when the earth is at a quadrant’s 
distance 92 from the positions just mentioned. Since no other 
inequality in longitude is observed to result from this, it may 
be reasonably explained by a certain approach of the planet to 
and withdrawal from the center of the deferent 9 along a 

88 Again Muller erroneously translates by “in the quadratures” (ZE, XII, 381). 
Mercury, like Venus, cannot come to quadrature (c£. above, p. 84, n. 80)* 
w Page 60, above* 

80 The analysis made above (p. 82, n. 75) for Venus is equally applicable 
here. In De rev . R (mean value) = 3,763, r = 10,000, and E (mean value) — 
736 (Th 382.9-10, 382.27-383.2) v Then in De rev . r;R ~ 10,000:3763 ~ 25: 
9.41, while in the Commentariolus r;R — 25:9.40; in De rev . r:E “ 10,000:736 
^ 25:1.84, while in the Commentariolus r:E 25:1.68. The radius of the second 
epicycle ( Commentariolus ) =: ?4 E. But the radius of the smaller eccentric (De 
rev.) ^ % E, only where E denotes the •ccentricity of the outer eccentric (Tb 
377.11-15), as set down in conformity with the general planetary theory used in 
De rev . As in the case of Mars (see above, p. 77, n. 58), Copernicus modifies 
the ratio* the radius of the smaller eccentric “212 (Th 382.8-9), or % E, where 
E denotes the mean eccentricity of the outer eccentric. 

** Muller translates longe minori affaret ambitu sidus moveri by: “so acheint 
der Planet sich viel langsamer zu bewegen” (the planet appears to move much 
more slowly) ; and longe etiam maiore by: “viel schneller” (much more swiftly; 
ZE, XII, 381). However, Copernicus is concerned here with the variations, not 
in Mercury's velocity, but in its distance from the center of the great circle. 

93 Failing to recognize that quadratura is used here and again near the close 
of this paragraph in the aense of “quadrant” (sae above, p. 47, n. 163), Miller 
inaccurately translates by “in the quadratures” (ZE, XII, 3 8 i, 382). 

**$: a cenieo or bis; V: centri or bis. Pro we accepted V, although $ is certainly 
correct. 



straight line. This motion must be produced by two small 
circles stationed about the center of the greater epicycle, their 
axes being parallel to the axis of the deferent. The center of the 
greater epicycle, or of the whole epicyclic structure, lies on the 
circumference of the small circle that is situated between this 
center and the outer small circle. The distance from this center 
to the center of the inner circle is exactly 94 equal to the distance 
from the latter center to the center of the outer circle.® This dis¬ 
tance has been found to be 14V2 minutes 98 of one unit of the 

* S, V: asse. For this sound reading Curtze incorrectly substituted axe (MCV, 
I, l 7 'S)y which Prowe accepted (PII, 201,10), By ignoring the rules of syntax 
Muller contrived to incorporate axe in his translation, 

“ Let the dotted circumference (Fig. 24) represent the inner small circle with 



A 

Figure 24 


its center at B; and the unbroken circumference, the outer small circle with ite 
center at C. The center of the greater epicycle is at A; and AB = BC, 

“ S; mlnui. 14 et medio 1 V: mtnuilbus 24 ei medio . Prowe accepted V, al¬ 
though S is cerlainly correct* as the closing words of this paragraph show. Again 
Copernicus's notations in his copy of the Tables of Regiomontanus aid us. For 
the entry concerning Mercury gives values for the deferent and epicycles that 
agree with those in our text. Then it adds that the inequality of the diameter is 
29 minutes (dtversiias dlamettl 0.29). Now Curtze, Prowe, and Muller quoted 
the entry in their notes (MCV, I, 16 n; PII, 201 n; ZE, XII, 381, n. 78). All 
three called attention to the agreement between the entry and our text with ref¬ 
erence to the deferent and epicycles. But they failed to see that the “approach and 
withdrawal” of our text is identical with the “inequality of the diameter” in the 
entry; and that the value of 29 minutes given in both places establishes the cor¬ 
rectness of S as against V. 

This value varies but slightly from Ptolemy's. In his system, the inequality is 
produced by a small circle upon which the center of the eccentric revolves (HII, 
252.26-253.6, 256,15-22; cf, Th 376.17-24). If we compare the radius of the 
small circle with the sum of the radii of the eccentric and epicycle (HII, 279*15- 



2 5 by which I have measured the relative sizes of all the circles. 
The motion of the outer small circle performs two revolutions 
in a tropical year, 97 while the inner one completes four in the 
same time with twice the velocity in the opposite direction. By 
this composite motion the centers of the greater epicycle are 
carried along a straight line, just as I explained with regard 
to the librations in latitude. 98 Therefore, in the aforementioned 
positions of the earth with respect to the apse, the center of 
the greater epicycle is nearest to the center of the deferent; 
and it is most remote, when the earth is at a quadrant’s dis¬ 
tance 92 from these positions. When the earth is at the mid¬ 
points, that is, 45 ° from the points just mentioned, the center 
of the greater epicycle joins the center of the outer 09 small 
circle, and both centers coincide. 100 The amount of this with- 

1 8), we get the ratio 1:27%, while in the Commentariolus the corresponding 
ratio is 1 : 24 (29™ * 9^24^ + 1D411& 4. 34“), 

In De rev\ Copernicus represents the inequality by adding an epicycle to the 
outer eccentric (Th 377.4-8, 18-23) j so that, if we include this refinement, his 
arrangement for Mercury in De rev . is bieccentrepicyclic rather than eccentrec- 
centric (Th 377.23-26). But he does not alter the amount of the inequality. For 
he puts the diameter of the epicycle at 380, where r = 10,000 (Th 382.23-27, 
384.9-14). Then the amount of the inequality is 190 (r = to,ooo), or 28% min- 
utes, where r ~ 2 5, 

^ Muller failed to recognize annus vtrUns as the term for “tropical year” 
(see p, 46, above) * 

See the closing paragraph of the section on ? *The Three Superior Plane*.” 

99 MUller omitted exter farts from his translation (£E, XII, 382). 

1W> Figure 25 may serve to clarify this motion in libration. In the initial posi¬ 
tion, the earth is at El on the produced apse-line, the center of the greater epicycle 
is at A, the center of the inner small circle is at Bi, and the center of the outer 
small circle is at C. While the earth moves 45 0 from Ei to E$, the outer circle 
rotates through a quadrant, thereby moving the center of the inner circle from 
Bi to B2. But during this interval, the inner circle rotates through a semicircle, 
thereby bringing the center of the epicycle to C. As the earth moves 45 0 from 
Ea to E3, the center of the inner circle reaches B 3 , and the center of the epicycle 
come* to D. As the earth moves from Es to E4, the center of the inner circle goes 
to B4, and the center of the epicycle to C. When the earth arrives at Es, the 
center of the inner circle returns to Bi, and the center of the epicycle to A. While 
the earth completes the remaining semicircle E5-E6-E7-E8-E1, the small circles 
repeat their previous motion. Therefore, whenever the earth is on the produced 
apse-line (El or Es), the center of the greater epicycle is nearest (A) to the 
center of the deferent. When the earth is at a quadrant’s distance from the apse- 



drawal and approach is 29 minutes 98 of one of the above- 
mentioned units. This, then, is the motion of Mercury in longi¬ 
tude. 

Its motion in latitude is exactly like that of Venus, but always 
in the opposite hemisphere. For where Venus is in north lati¬ 
tude, Mercury is in south. Its deferent is inclined to the ecliptic 

at an angle of 7 0 . 101 The deviation, which is always south, never 

line (E3 or E7), the center of the epicycle is most remote (D) from the center 
of the deferent. When the earth is at E2, E 4 , Ee> or Es, the center of the epicycle 
coincides with C> the center of the outer small circle, 

A 




& 


7 






X* 

Fiona e 25 

101 In T)e rev. the angle is given as 6° 15' for the declinations, and 7* for the 
reflexions (Th 424,23-27, 431.4-9) • These were PtoIemy^s values (HII, 536,20- 

22 , 575 . 9 -ti). 




exceeds %°. 102 For the rest, what was said about the latitudes 
of Venus may be underst ood here also, to avoid repetition. 

Then Mercury runs on seven circles in all; Venus on five; 
the earth on three, and round it the moon on four; finally 
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn on five each. Altogether, therefore, 
thirty-four circles suffice to explain the entire structure of the 
universe and the entire ballet of the planets. 

**This was the traditional estimate (Th 433.20-25) ; hut in & e Copernicus 
puts it at 51' *± 18' (Th 435.4-8$ 440-41)« Muller rendered this sentence by: 
^doch libersteigt die Ablenkung nach Suden nie den 2 wolf ten Teil eines Grades” 
(the southward deviation never exceeds M2% £E, XII, 3$2). This version omits 
temfer, and puts dodtantem — M2. For M2 Copernicus wrote the usual word 
uncia (Th 159.28), 


Book One 


INTRODUCTION 

Among the many various literary and artistic pursuits which invigorate men’s 
5 minds, the strongest affection and utmost zeal should, I think, promote the studies 
concerned with the most beautiful objects, most deserving to be known. This 
is the nature of the discipline which deals with the universe’s divine revolutions, 
the asters’ motions, sizes, distances, risings and settings, as well as the causes 
of the other phenomena in the sky, and which, in short, explains its whole ap- 
10 pearance. What indeed is more beautiful than heaven, which of course contains all 
things of beauty? This is proclaimed by its very names [in Latin], caelum and 
tnundus, the latter denoting purity and ornament, the former a carving. On account 
of heaven’s transcendent perfection most philosophers have called it a visible god. 
If then the value of the arts is judged by the subject matter which they treat, 
is that art will be by far the foremost which is labeled astronomy by some, astrology 
by others, but by many of the ancients, the consummation of mathematics. Un¬ 
questionably the summit of the liberal arts and most worthy of a free man, it is 
supported by almost all the branches of mathematics. Arithmetic, geometry, optics, 
surveying, mechanics and whatever others there are all contribute to it. 

2° Although all the good arts serve to draw man’s mind away from vices and 
lead it toward better things, this function can be more fully performed by this 
art, which also provides extraordinary intellectual pleasure. For when a man is 
occupied with things which he sees established in the finest order and directed by 
divine management, will not the unremitting contemplation of them and a certain 
25 familiarity with them stimulate him to the best and to admiration for the Maker 
of everything, in whom are all happiness and every good ? For would not the godly 
Psalmist [92:4] in vain declare that he was made glad through the work of the 
Lord and rejoiced in the works of His hands, were we not drawn to the con¬ 
templation of the highest good by this means, as though by a chariot? 
so The great benefit and adornment which this art confers on the commonwealth 
(not to mention the countless advantages to individuals) are most excellently 
observed by Plato. In the Laws, Book VII, he thinks that it should be cultivated 
chiefly because by dividing time into groups of days as months and years, it would 
keep the state alert and attentive to the festivals and sacrifices. Whoever denies 
as its necessity for the teacher of any branch of higher learning is thinking foolishly, 
according to Plato. In his opinion it is highly unlikely that anyone lacking the 
requisite knowledge of the sun, moon, and other heavenly bodies can become and 
be called godlike. 

However, this divine rather than human science, which investigates the loftiest 
40 subjects, is not free from perplexities. The main reason is that its principles and 
assumptions, called “hypotheses” by the Greeks, have been a source of disa¬ 
greement, as we see, among most of those who undertook to deal with this subject, 
and so they did not rely on the same ideas. An additional reason is that the motion 


7 



REVOLUTIONS 


of the planets and the revolution of the stars could not be measured with 
numerical precision and completely understood except with the passage of time 
and the aid of many earlier observations, through which this knowledge was 
transmitted to posterity from hand to hand, so to say. To be sure, Claudius 
Ptolemy of Alexandria, who far excels the rest by his wonderful skill and industry, 5 
brought this entire art almost to perfection with the help of observations extending 
over a period of more than four hundred years, so that there no longer seemed 
to be any gap which he had not closed. Nevertheless very many things, as we per¬ 
ceive, do not agree with the conclusions which ought to follow from his system, 
and besides certain other motions have been discovered which were not yet 10 
known to him. Hence Plutarch too, in discussing the sun’s tropical year, says 
that so far the motion of the heavenly bodies has eluded the skill of the astrono¬ 
mers. For, to use the year itself as an example, it is well known, I think, how 
different the opinions concerning it have always been, so that many have abandoned 
all hope that an exact determination of it could be found. The situation is the is 
same with regard to other heavenly bodies. 

Nevertheless, to avoid giving the impression that this difficulty is an excuse 
for indolence, by the gracq of God, without whom we can accomplish nothing, 

I shall attempt a broader inquiry into these matters. For, the number of aids 
we have to assist our enterprise grows with the interval of time extending from 20 
the originators of this art to us. Their discoveries may be compared with what 
I have newly found. I acknowledge, moreover, that I shall treat many topics differ¬ 
ently from my predecessors, and yet I shall do so thanks to them, for it was they 
who first opened the road to the investigation of these very questions. 

THE UNIVERSE IS SPHERICAL Chapter 1 25 

First of all, we must note that the universe is spherical. The reason is either 
that, of all forms, the sphere is the most perfect, needing no joint and being a com¬ 
plete whole, which can be neither increased nor diminished; or that it is the most 
capacious of figures, best suited to enclose and retain all things; or even that 
all the separate parts of the universe, I mean the sun, moon, planets and stars, 30 
are seen to be of this shape; or that wholes strive to be circumscribed by this 
boundary, as is apparent in drops of water and other fluid bodies when they 
seek to be self-contained. Hence no one will question the attribution of this form 
to the divine bodies. 

THE EARTH TOO IS SPHERICAL Chapter 2 35 

The earth also is spherical, since it presses upon its center from every direction. 
Yet it is not immediately recognized as a perfect sphere on account of the great 
height of the mountains and depth of the valleys. They scarcely alter the general 
sphericity of the earth, however, as is clear from the following considerations. 
For a traveler going from any place toward the north, that pole of the daily rota- 40 
tion gradually climbs higher, while the opposite pole drops down an equal amount. 
More stars in the north are seen not to set, while in the south certain stars are no 
longer seen to rise. Thus Italy does not see Canopus, which is visible in Egypt; 
and Italy does see the River’s last star, which is unfamiliar to our area in the colder 


8 



BOOK I CH. 2-3 


region. Such stars, conversely, move higher in the heavens for a traveller heading 
southward, while those which are high in our sky sink down. Meanwhile, moreover, 
the elevations of the poles have the same ratio everywhere to the portions of the 
earth that have been traversed. This happens on no other figure than the sphere. 

5 Hence the earth too is evidently enclosed between poles and is therefore spherical. 
Furthermore, evening eclipses of the sun and moon are not seen by easterners, nor 
morning eclipses by westerners, while those occurring in between are seen later 
by easterners but earlier by westerners. 

The waters press down into the same figure also, as sailors are aware, since 
10 land which is not seen from a ship is visible from the top of its mast. On the 
other hand, if a light is attached to the top of the mast, as the ship draws away 
from land, those who remain ashore see the light drop down gradually until it 
finally disappears, as though setting. Water, furthermore, being fluid by nature, 
manifestly always seeks the same lower levels as earth and pusehs up from the 
is shore no higher than its rise permits. Hence whatever land emerges out of the 
ocean is admittedly that much higher. 

HOW EARTH FORMS A SINGLE SPHERE Chapter 3 

WITH WATER 

Pouring forth its seas everywhere, then, the ocean envelops the earth and fills 
20 its deeper chasms. Both tend toward the same center because of their heaviness. 
Accordingly there had to be less water than land, to avoid having the water engulf 
the entire earth and to have the water recede from some portions of the land and 
from the many islands lying here and there, for the preservation of living creatures. 
For what are the inhabited countries and the mainland itself but an island larger 
25 than the others? 

We should not heed certain peripatetics who declared that the entire body 
of water is ten times greater than all the land. For, according to the conjecture 
which they accepted, in the transmutation of the elements as one unit of earth 
dissolves, it becomes ten units of water. They also assert that the earth bulges out 
30 to some extent as it does because it is not of equal weight everywhere on account 
of its cavities, its center of gravity being different from its center of magnitude. 
But they err through ignorance of the art of geometry. For they do not realize 
that the water cannot be even seven times greater and still leave any part of the 
land dry, unless earth as a whole vacated the center of gravity and yielded that 
35 position to water, as if the latter were heavier than itself. For, spheres are to 
each other as the cubes of their diameters. Therefore, if earth were the eighth 
part to seven parts of water, earth’s diameter could not be greater than the distance 
from [their joint] center to the circumference of the waters. So far are they 
from being as much as ten times greater [than the land]. 

40 Moreover, there is no difference between the earth’s centers of gravity and 
magnitude. This can be established by the fact that from the ocean inward the 
curvature of the land does not mount steadily in a continuous rise. If it did, it 
would keep the sea water out completely and in no way permit the inland seas 
and such vast gulfs to intrude. Furthermore, the depth of the abyss would never 
45 stop increasing from the shore of the ocean outward, so that no island or reef 
or any form of land would be encountered by sailors on the longer voyages. But 


9 



REVOLUTIONS 


it is well known that almost in the middle of the inhabited lands barely fifteen 
furlongs remain between the eastern Mediterranean and the Red Sea. On the 
other hand, in his Geography Ptolemy extended the habitable area halfway around 
the world. Beyond that meridian, where he left unknown land, the modems have 
added Cathay and territory as vast as sixty degrees of longitude, so that now the 5 
earth is inhabited over a greater stretch of longitude than is left for the ocean. 

To these regions, moreover, should be added the islands discovered in our time 
under the rulers of Spain and Portugal, and especially America, named after the 
ship’s captain who found it. On account of its still undisclosed size it is thought 
to be a second group of inhabited countries. There are also many other islands, 10 
heretofore unknown. So little reason have we to marvel at the existence of antipodes 
or antichthones. Indeed, geometrical reasoning about the location of America 
compels us to believe that it is diametrically opposite the Ganges district of India. 

From all these facts, finally, I think it is clear that land and water together press 
upon a single center of gravity; that the earth has no other center of magnitude; 15 
that, since earth is heavier, its gaps are filled with water; and that consequently 
there is little water in comparison with land, even though more water perhaps 
appears on the surface. 

The earth together with its surrounding waters must in fact have such a shape 
as its shadow reveals, for it eclipses the moon with the arc of a perfect circle. There- 20 
fore the earth is not flat, as Empedocles and Anaximenes thought; nor drum¬ 
shaped, as Leucippus; nor bowl-shaped, as Heraclitus; nor hollow in another 
way, as Democritus; nor again cylindrical, as Anaximander; nor does its lower 
side extend infinitely downward, the thickness diminishing toward the bottom, 
as Xenophanes taught; but it is perfectly round, as the philosophers hold. 25 

THE MOTION OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES Chapter 4 
IS UNIFORM, ETERNAL, AND CIRCULAR OR 
COMPOUNDED OF CIRCULAR MOTIONS 

I shall now recall to mind that the motion of the heavenly bodies is circular, 
since the motion appropriate to a sphere is rotation in a circle. By this very act so 
the sphere expresses its form as the simplest body, wherein neither beginning nor 
end can be found, nor can the one be distinguished from the other, while the sphere 
itself traverses the same points to return upon itself. 

In connection with the numerous [celestial] spheres, however, there are many 
motions. The most conspicuous of all is the daily rotation, which the Greeks 35 
call nuchthemeron, that is, the interval of a day and a night. The entire universe, 
with the exception of the earth, is conceived as whirling from east to west in this 
rotation. It is recognized as the common measure of all motions, since we even 
compute time itself chiefly by the number of days. 

Secondly, we see other revolutions as advancing in the opposite direction, that 40 
is, from west to east; I refer to those of the sun, moon, and five planets. The sun 
thus regulates the year for us, and the moon the month, which are also very 
familiar periods of time. In like manner each of the other five planets completes 
its own orbit. 

Yet [these motions] differ in many ways [from the daily rotation or first 46 
motion]. In the first place, they do not swing around the same poles as the first 


10 



BOOK I CH. 4-5 


motion, but run obliquely through the zodiac. Secondly, these bodies are not 
seen moving uniformly in their orbits, since the sun and moon are observed to 
be sometimes slow, at other times faster in their course. Moreover, we see the 
other five planets also retrograde at times, and stationary at either end [of the 
a regression]. And whereas the sun always advances along its own direct path, they 
wander in various ways, straying sometimes to the south and sometimes to the 
north; that is why they are called “planets” [wanderers]. Furthermore, they are at 
times nearer to the earth, when they are said to be in perigee; at other times they 
are farther away, when they are said to be in apogee. 

10 We must acknowledge, nevertheless, that their motions are circular or com¬ 
pounded of several circles, because these nonuniformities recur regularly according 
to a constant law. This could not happen unless the motions were circular, since 
only the circle can bring back the past. Thus, for example, by a composite motion 
of circles the sun restores to us the inequality of days and nights as well as the 
is four seasons of the year. Several motions are discerned herein, because a simple 
heavenly body cannot be moved by a single sphere nonuniformly. For this nonuni¬ 
formity would have to be caused either by an inconstancy, whether imposed 
from without or generated from within, in the moving force or by an alteration 
in the revolving body. From either alternative, however, the intellect shrinks. 
20 It is improper to conceive any such defect in objects constituted in the best 
order. 

It stands to reason, therefore, that their uniform motions appear nonuniform 
to us. The cause may be either that their circles have poles different [from the 
earth’s] or that the earth is not at the center of the circles on which they revolve. 
25 To us who watch the course of these planets from the earth, it happens that our 
eye does not keep the same distance from every part of their orbits, but on account 
of their varying distances these bodies seem larger when nearer than when farther 
away (as has been proved in optics). Likewise, in equal arcs of their orbits their 
motions will appear unequal in equal times on account of the observer’s varying 
80 distance. Hence I deem it above all necessary that we should carefully scrutinize 
the relation of the earth to the heavens lest, in our desire to examine the loftiest 
objects, we remain ignorant of things nearest to us, and by the same error attribute 
to the celestial bodies what belongs to the earth. 

DOES CIRCULAR MOTION SUIT THE EARTH? Chapter 5 
88 WHAT IS ITS POSITION? 

Now that the earth too has been shown to have the form of a sphere, we must 
in my opinion see whether also in this case the form entails the motion, and what 
place in the universe is occupied by the earth. Without the answers to these 
questions it is impossible to find the correct explanation of what is seen in the 
40 heavens. To be sure, there is general agreement among the authorities that the 
earth is at rest in the middle of the universe. They hold the contrary view to be 
inconceivable or downright silly. Nevertheless, if we examine the matter more 
carefully, we shall see that this problem has not yet been solved, and is therefore 
by no means to be disregarded. 

45 Every observed change of place is caused by a motion of either the observed 
object or the observer or, of course, by an unequal displacement of each. For 


11 



REVOLUTIONS 


when things move with equal speed in the same direction, the motion is not 
perceived, as between the observed object and the observer, I mean. It is the 
earth, however, from which the celestial ballet is beheld in its repeated perform¬ 
ances before our eyes. Therefore, if any motion is ascribed to the earth, in all things 
outside it the same motion will appear, but in the opposite direction, as though s 
they were moving past it. Such in particular is the daily rotation, since it seems 
to involve the entire universe except the earth and what is around it. However, 
if you grant that the heavens have no part in this motion but that the earth rotates 
from west to east, upon earnest consideration you will find that this is the actual 
situation concerning the apparent rising and setting of the sun, moon, stars and w 
planets. Moreover since the heavens, which enclose and provide the setting for 
everything, constitute the space common to all things, it is not at first blush clear 
why motion should not be attributed rather to the enclosed than to the enclosing, 
to the thing located in space rather than to the framework of space. This opinion 
was indeed maintained by Heraclides and Ecphantus, the Pythagoreans, and by w 
Hicetas of Syracuse, according to Cicero. They rotated the earth in the middle 
of the universe, for they ascribed the setting of the stars to the earth’s interposition, 
and their rising to its withdrawal. 

If we assume its daily rotation, another and no less important question follows 
concerning the earth’s position. To be sure, heretofore there has been virtually 20 
unanimous acceptance of the belief that the middle of the universe is the earth. 
Anyone who denies that the earth occupies the middle or center of the universe 
may nevertheless assert that its distance [therefrom] is insignificant in comparison 
with [the distance of] the sphere of the fixed stars, but perceptible and noteworthy 
in relation to the spheres of the sun and the other planets. He may deem this to *5 
be the reason why their motions appear nonuniform, as conforming to a center 
other than the center of the earth. Perhaps he can [thereby] produce a not inept 
explanation of the apparent nonuniform motion. For the fact that the same planets 
are observed nearer to the earth and farther away necessarily proves that the 
center of the earth is not the center of their circles. It is less clear whether the 30 
approach and withdrawal are executed by the earth or the planets. 

It will occasion no surprise if, in addition to the daily rotation, some other 
motion is assigned to the earth. That the earth rotates, that it also travels with 
several motions, and that it is one of the heavenly bodies are said to have been the 
opinions of Philolaus the Pythagorean. He was no ordinary astronomer, 38 
inasmuch as Plato did not delay going to Italy for the sake of visiting him, as 
Plato’s biographers report. 

But many have thought it possible to prove by geometrical reasoning that the 
earth is in the middle of the universe; that being like a point in relation to the 
immense heavens, it serves as their center; and that it is motionless because, when 40 
the universe moves, the center remains unmoved, and the things nearest to the 
center are carried most slowly. 


12 



BOOK ICH. 6 


THE IMMENSITY OF THE HEAVENS Chapter 6 

COMPARED TO THE SIZE OF THE EARTH 

The massive bulk of the earth does indeed shrink to insignificance in compari¬ 
son with the size of the heavens. This can be ascertained from the fact that the 
5 boundary circles (for that is the translation of the Greek term horizons ) bisect the 
entire sphere of the heavens. This could not happen if the earth’s size or distance 
from the universe’s center were noteworthy in comparison with the heavens. 
For, a circle that bisects a sphere passes through its center, and is the greatest 
circle that can be described on it. 

io Thus, let circle ABCD be a horizon, and let the earth, from which we do our 
observing, be E, the center of the horizon, which separates what is seen from what 
is not seen. Now, through a dioptra or horoscopic instrument or water level 
placed at E, let the first point of the Crab be sighted rising at point C, and at 
that instant the first point of the Goat is perceived to be setting at A. Then A , E, 
is and G are on a straight line through the dipptra. This line is evidently a diameter 
of the ecliptic, since six visible signs form a semicircle, and E, the [line’s] center, 
is identical with the horizon’s center. Again, let the signs shift their position 
until the first point of the Goat rises at B. At that time the Crab will also be 
observed setting at D. BED will be a straight line and a diameter of the ecliptic. 
20 But, as we have already seen, AEC also is a diameter of the same circle. Its center, 
obviously, is the intersection [of the diameters]. A horizon, then, in this way 
always bisects the ecliptic, which is a great circle of the sphere. But on a sphere, 
if a circle bisects any great circle, the bisecting circle is itself a great circle. Con¬ 
sequently a horizon is one of the great circles, and its center is clearly identical 
as with the center of the ecliptic. 

Yet a line drawn from the earth’s surface [to a point in the firmament] must 
be distinct from the line drawn from the earth’s center [to the same point]. Nev¬ 
ertheless, because these lines are immense in relation to the earth, they become 
like parallel lines [III, 15 ]. Because their terminus is enormously remote they ap- 
30 pear to be a single line. For in comparison with their length the space enclosed by 
them becomes imperceptible, as is demonstrated in optics. This reasoning certainly 
makes it quite clear that the heavens are immense by comparison with the earth 
and present the aspect of an infinite magnitude, while on the testimony of the 
senses the earth is related to the heavens as a point to a body, and a finite to an 
35 infinite magnitude. 

But no other conclusion seems to have been established. For it does not 
follow that the earth must be at rest in the middle of the universe. Indeed, a rota¬ 
tion in twenty-four hours of the enormously vast universe should astonish us 
even more than a rotation of its least part, which is the earth. For, the argument 
*0 that the center is motionless, and what is nearest the center moves the least, does 
not prove that the earth is at rest in the middle of the universe. 

To take a similar case, suppose you say that the heavens rotate but the poles 
are stationary, and what is closest to the poles moves the least. The Little Bear, 
for example, being very close to the pole, is observed to move much more slowly 
45 than the Eagle or the Little Dog because it describes a smaller circle. Yet all these 
constellations belong to a single sphere. A sphere’s movement, vanishing at its 
axis, does not permit an equal motion of all its parts. Nevertheless these are brought 


13 



REVOLUTIONS 


round in equal times, though not over equal spaces, by the rotation of the whole 
sphere. The upshot of the argument, then, is the claim that the earth as a part 
of the celestial sphere shares in the same nature and movement so that, being 
close to the center, it has a slight motion. Therefore, being a body and not the 
center, it too will describe arcs like those of a celestial circle, though smaller, 5 
in the same time. The falsity of this contention is clearer than daylight. For it 
would always have to be noon in one place, and always midnight in another, so 
that the daily risings and settings could not take place, since the motion of the 
whole and the part would be one and inseparable. 

But things separated by the diversity of their situations are subject to a very 10 
different relation: those enclosed in a smaller orbit revolve faster than those 
traversing a bigger circle. Thus Saturn, the highest of the planets, revolves in 
thirty years; the moon, undoubtedly the nearest to the earth, completes its course 
in a month; and to close the series, it will be thought, the earth rotates in the period 
of a day and a night. Accordingly the same question about the daily rotation is 
emerges again. On the other hand, likewise still undetermined is the earth’s 
position, which has been made even less certain by what was said above. For that 
proof establishes no conclusion other than the heavens’ unlimited size in relation 
to the earth. Yet how far this immensity extends is not at all clear. At the opposite 
extreme are the very tiny indivisible bodies called “atoms”. Being imperceptible, 20 
they do not immediately constitute a visible body when they are taken two or 
a few at a time. But they can be multiplied to such an extent that in the end there 
are enough of them to combine in a perceptible magnitude. The same may be said 
also about the position of the earth. Although it is not in the center of the universe, 
nevertheless its distance therefrom is still insignificant, especially in relation to 25 
the sphere of the fixed stars. 


WHY THE ANCIENTS THOUGHT THAT THE Chapter 7 
EARTH REMAINED AT REST IN THE MIDDLE 
OF THE UNIVERSE AS ITS CENTER 

Accordingly, the ancient philosophers sought to establish that the earth remains so 
at rest in the middle of the universe by certain other arguments. As their main 
reason, however, they adduce heaviness and lightness. Earth is in fact the heaviest 
element, and everything that has weight is borne toward it in an effort to reach 
its inmost center. The earth being spherical, by their own nature heavy objects 
are carried to it from all directions at right angles to its surface. Hence, if they were 35 
not checked at its surface, they would collide at its center, since a straight line 
perpendicular to a horizontal plane at its point of tangency with a sphere leads 
to the [sphere’s] center. But things brought to the middle, it seems to follow, come 
to rest at the middle. All the more, then, will the entire earth be at rest in the 
middle, and as the recipient of every falling body it will remain motionless thanks 40 
to its weight. 

In like manner, the ancient philosophers analyze motion and its nature in 
a further attempt to confirm their conclusion. Thus, according to Aristotle, the 
motion of a single simple body is simple; of the simple motions, one is straight 
and the other is circular; of the straight motions, one is upward and the other is 45 


14 



BOOK I CH. 7-8 


downward. Hence every simple motion is either toward the middle, that is, 
downward; or away from the middle, that is, upward; or around the middle, 
that is, circular. To be carried downward, that is, to seek the middle, is a property 
only of earth and water, which are considered heavy; on the other hand, air and 
5 fire, which are endowed with lightness, move upward and away from the middle. 
To these four elements it seems reasonable to assign rectilinear motion, but to 
the heavenly bodies, circular motion around the middle. This is what Aristotle 
says [Heavens, I, 2 ; II, 14 ]. 

Therefore, remarks Ptolemy of Alexandria [Syntaxis, I, 7 ], if the earth were 
io to move, merely in a daily rotation, the opposite of what was said above would 
have to occur, since a motion would have to be exceedingly violent and its speed 
unsurpassable to carry the entire circumference of the earth around in twenty-four 
hours. But things which undergo an abrupt rotation seem utterly unsuited to gather 
[bodies to themselves], and seem more likely, if they have been produced by com- 
i 5 bination, to fly apart unless they are held together by some bond. The earth would 
long ago have burst asunder, he says, and dropped out of the skies (a quite prepos¬ 
terous notion); and, what is more, living creatures and any other loose weights 
would by no means remain unshaken. Nor would objects falling in a straight 
line descend perpendicularly to their appointed place, which would meantime 
so have been withdrawn by so rapid a movement. Moreover, clouds and anything 
else floating in the air would be seen drifting always westward. 

THE INADEQUACY OF THE PREVIOUS Chapter 8 

ARGUMENTS AND A REFUTATION OF THEM 

For these and similar reasons forsooth the ancients insist that the earth remains 
25 at rest in the middle of the universe, and that this is its status beyond any doubt. 
Yet if anyone believes that the earth rotates, surely he will hold that its motion 
is natural, not violent. But what is in accordance with nature produces effects 
contrary to those resulting from violence, since things to which force or violence 
is applied must disintegrate and cannot long endure. On the other hand, that 
30 which is brought into existence by nature is well-ordered and preserved in its 
best state. Ptolemy has no cause, then, to fear that the earth and everything earthly 
will be disrupted by a rotation created through nature’s handiwork, which is 
quite different from what art or human intelligence can accomplish. 

But why does he not feel this apprehension even more for the universe, whose 
35 motion must be the swifter, the bigger the heavens are than the earth? Or have 
the heavens become immense because the indescribable violence of their motion 
drives them away from the center ? Would they also fall apart if they came to 
a halt? Were this reasoning sound, surely the size of the heavens would likewise 
grow to infinity. For the higher they are driven by the power of their motion, 
40 the faster that motion will be, since the circumference of which it must make the 
circuit in the period of twenty-four hours is constantly expanding; and, in turn, 
as the velocity of the motion mounts, the vastness of the heavens is enlarged. In 
this way the speed will increase the size, and the size the speed, to infinity. Yet 
according to the familiar axiom of physics that the infinite cannot be traversed 
45 or moved in any way, the heavens will therefore necessarily remain stationary. 

But beyond the heavens there is said to be no body, no space, no void, abso- 


15 



REVOLUTIONS 


lutely nothing, so that there is nowhere the heavens can go. In that case it is really 
astonishing if something can be held in check by nothing. If the heavens are infi¬ 
nite, however, and finite at their inner concavity only, there will perhaps be more 
reason to believe that beyond the heavens there is nothing. For, every single thing, 
no matter what size it attains, will be inside them, but the heavens will abide mo- 5 
tionless. For, the chief contention by which it is sought to prove that the universe 
is finite is its motion. Let us therefore leave the question whether the universe 
is finite or infinite to be discussed by the natural philosophers. 

We regard it as a certainty that the earth, enclosed between poles, is bounded 
by a spherical surface. Why then do we still hesitate to grant it the motion appro- 10 
priate by nature to its form rather than attribute a movement to the entire universe, 
whose limit is unknown and unknowable ? Why should we not admit, with regard 
to the daily rotation, that the appearance is in the heavens and the reality in the 
earth? This situation closely resembles what Vergil’s Aeneas says: 

Forth from the harbor we sail, and the land and the cities slip backward is 
[Aeneid, III, 72 ]. 

For when a ship is floating calmly along, the sailors see its motion mirrored in 
everything outside, while on the other hand they suppose that they are stationary, 
together with everything on board. In the same way, the motion of the earth can 
unquestionably produce the impression that the entire universe is rotating. 20 

Then what about the clouds and the other things that hang in the air in any 
manner whatsoever, or the bodies that fall down, and conversely those that rise 
aloft ? We would only say that not merely the earth and the watery element joined 
with it have this motion, but also no small part of the air and whatever is linked 
in the same way to the earth. The reason may be either that the nearby air, mingling 25 
with earthy or watery matter, conforms to the same nature as the earth, or that 
the air’s motion, acquired from the earth by proximity, shares without resistance 
in its unceasing rotation. No less astonishingly, on the other hand, is the celestial 
movement declared to be accompanied by the uppermost belt of air. This is indi¬ 
cated by those bodies that appear suddenly, I mean, those that the Greeks 30 
called “comets” and “bearded stars”. Like the other heavenly bodies, they rise 
and set. They are thought to be generated in that region. That part of the air, 
we can maintain, is unaffected by the earth’s motion on account of its great distance 
from the earth. The air closest to the earth will accordingly seem to be still. And 
so will the things suspended in it, unless they are tossed to and fro, as indeed they 35 
are, by the wind or some other disturbance. For what else is the wind in the air 
but the wave in the sea? 

We must in fact avow that the motion of falling and rising bodies in the 
framework of the universe is twofold, being in every case a compound of straight 
and circular. For, things that sink of their own weight, being predominantly 40 
earthy, undoubtedly retain the same nature as the whole of which they are parts. 
Nor is the explanation different in the case of those things, which, being fiery, 
are driven forcibly upward. For also fire here on the earth feeds mainly on earthy 
matter, and flame is defined as nothing but blazing smoke. Now it is a property 
of fire to expand what it enters. It does this with such great force that it cannot 45 
be prevented in any way by any device from bursting through restraints and 
completing its work. But the motion of expansion is directed from the center to 


16 



BOOK I CH. 8-9 


the circumference. Therefore, if any part of the earth is set afire, it is carried from 
the middle upwards. Hence the statement that the motion of a simple body is 
simple holds true in particular for circular motion, as long as the simple body 
abides in its natural place and with its whole. For when it is in place, it has none 
5 but circular motion, which remains wholly within itself like a body at rest. Recti¬ 
linear motion, however, affects things which leave their natural place or are 
thrust out of it or quit it in any manner whatsoever. Yet nothing is so incompatible 
with the orderly arrangement of the universe and the design of the totality as 
something out of place. Therefore rectilinear motion occurs only to things that 
10 are not in proper condition and are not in complete accord with their nature, when 
they are separated from their whole and forsake its unity. 

Furthermore, bodies that are carried upward and downward, even when 
deprived of circular motion, do not execute a simple, constant, and uniform motion. 
For they cannot be governed by their lightness or by the impetus of their weight. 
15 Whatever falls moves slowly at first, but increases its speed as it drops. On the 
other hand, we see this earthly fire (for we behold no other), after it has been lifted 
up high, slacken all at once, thereby revealing the reason to be the violence 
applied to the earthy matter. Circular motion, however, always rolls along uniformly, 
since it has an unfailing cause. But rectilinear motion has a cause that quickly 
20 stops functioning. For when rectilinear motion brings bodies to their own place, 
they cease to be heavy or light, and their motion ends. Hence, since circular 
motion belongs to wholes, but parts have rectilinear motion in addition, we can 
say that “circular” subsists with “rectilinear” as “being alive” with “being sick”. 
Surely Aristotle’s division of simple motion into three types, away from the 
25 middle, toward the middle, and around the middle, will be construed merely as 
a logical exercise. In like manner we distinguish line, point, and surface, even 
though one cannot exist without another, and none of them without body. 

As a quality, moreover, immobility is deemed nobler and more divine than 
change and instability, which are therefore better suited to the earth than to the 
so universe. Besides, it would seem quite absurd to attribute motion to the frame¬ 
work of space or that which encloses the whole of space, and not, more appro¬ 
priately, to that which is enclosed and occupies some space, namely, the earth. 
Last of all, the planets obviously approach closer to the earth and recede farther 
from it. Then the motion of a single body around the middle, which is thought 
36 to be the center of the earth, will be both away from the middle and also toward 
it. Motion around the middle, consequently, must be interpreted in a more general 
way, the sufficient condition being that each such motion encircle its own center. 
You see, then, that all these arguments make it more likely that the earth moves 
than that it is at rest. This is especially true of the daily rotation, as particularly 
40 appropriate to the earth. This is enough, in my opinion, about the first part of 
the question. 

CAN SEVERAL MOTIONS BE ATTRIBUTED Chapter 9 
TO THE EARTH? THE CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE 

Accordingly, since nothing prevents the earth from moving, I suggest that 
46 we should now consider also whether several motions suit it, so that it can be 
regarded as one of the planets. For, it is not the center of all the revolutions. This 


17 



REVOLUTIONS 


is indicated by the planets’ apparent nonuniform motion and their varying distances 
from the earth. These phenomena cannot be explained by circles concentric with 
the earth. Therefore, since there are many centers, it will not be by accident that 
the further question arises whether the center of the universe is identical with 
the center of terrestrial gravity or with some other point. For my part I believe 5 
that gravity is nothing but a certain natural desire, which the divine providence 
of the Creator of all things has implanted in parts, to gather as a unity and a whole 
by combining in the form of a globe. This impulse is present, we may suppose, 
also in the sun, the moon, and the other brilliant planets, so that through its 
operation they remain in that spherical shape which they display. Nevertheless, 10 
they swing round their circuits in divers ways. If, then, the earth too moves in 
other ways, for example, about a center, its additional motions must likewise be 
reflected in many bodies outside it. Among these motions we find the yearly revolu¬ 
tion. For if this is transformed from a solar to a terrestrial movement, with the 
sun acknowledged to be at rest, the risings and settings which bring the zodiacal 15 
signs and fixed stars into view morning and evening will appear in the same way. 
The stations of the planets, moreover, as well as their retrogradations and [resump¬ 
tions of] forward motion will be recognized as being, not movements of the 
planets, but a motion of the earth, which the planets borrow for their own appear¬ 
ances. Lastly, it will be realized that the sun occupies the middle of the universe. 20 
All these facts are disclosed to us by the principle governing the order in which 
the planets follow one another, and by the harmony of the entire universe, if 
only we look at the matter, as the saying goes, with both eyes. 


THE ORDER OF THE HEAVENLY SPHERES Chapter 10 

Of all things visible, the highest is the heaven of the fixed stars. This, I see, as 
is doubted by nobody. But the ancient philosophers wanted to arrange the planets 
in accordance with the duration of the revolutions. Their principle assumes that 
of objects moving equally fast, those farther away seem to travel more slowly, 
as is proved in Euclid’s Optics. The moon revolves in the shortest period of time 
because, in their opinion, it runs on the smallest circle as the nearest to the earth. 30 
The highest planet, on the other hand, is Saturn, which completes the biggest 
circuit in the longest time. Below it is Jupiter, followed by Mars. 

With regard to Venus and Mercury, however, differences of opinion are found. 
For, these planets do not pass through every elongation from the sun, as the other 
planets do. Hence Venus and Mercury are located above the sun by some authori- 35 
ties* like Plato’s Timaeus [38 D], but below the sun by others, like Ptolemy [SyM- 
taxis, IX, 1 ] and many of the modems. Al-Bitruji places Venus above the 
sun, and Mercury below it. 

According to Plato’s followers, all the planets, being dark bodies otherwise, 
shine because they receive sunlight. If they were below the sun, therefore, they 40 
would undergo no great elongation from it, and hence they would be seen halved 
or at any rate less than fully round. For, the light which they receive would be 
reflected mostly upward, that is, toward the sun, as we see in the new or dying 
moon. In addition, they argue, the sun must sometimes be eclipsed by the inter¬ 
position of these planets, and its light cut off in proportion to their size. Since this 45 


18 



BOOK I CH. 10 


is never observed, these planets do not pass beneath the sun at all, according to 
those who follow Plato. 

On the other hand, those who locate Venus and Mercury below the sun base 
their reasoning on the wide space which they notice between the sun and the moon, 
s For the moon’s greatest distance from the earth is 64 1 / 6 earth-radii. This is con¬ 
tained, according to them, about 18 times in the sun’s least distance from the 
earth, which is 1160 earth-radii. Therefore between the sun and the moon there 
are 1096 earth-radii 1160 — 64 1 / e ]. Consequently, to avoid having so vast a space 

remain empty, they announce that the same numbers almost exactly fill up the 
10 apsidal distances, by which they compute the thickness of those spheres. Thus 
the moon’s apogee is followed by Mercury’s perigee. Mercury’s apogee is suc¬ 
ceeded by the perigee of Venus, whose apogee, finally, almost reaches the sun’s 
perigee. For between the apsides of Mercury they calculate about 177 1 / a earth- 
radii. Then the remaining space is very nearly filled by Venus’ interval of 910 
is earth-radii. 

Therefore they do not admit that these heavenly bodies have any opacity 
like the moon’s. On the contrary, these shine either with their own light or with 
the sunlight absorbed throughout their bodies. Moreover, they do not eclipse the 
sun, because it rarely happens that they interfere with our view of the sun, since 
20 they generally deviate in latitude. Besides, they are tiny bodies in comparison 
with the sun. Venus, although bigger than Mercury, can occult barely a hundredth 
of the sun. So says Al-Battani of Raqqa, who thinks that the sun’s diameter is 
ten times larger [than Venus’], and therefore so minute a speck is not easily de¬ 
scried in the most brilliant light. Yet in his Paraphrase of Ptolemy, Ibn Rushd 
25 reports having seen something blackish when he found a conjunction of the sun 
and Mercury indicated in the tables. And thus these two planets are judged to be 
moving below the sun’s sphere. 

But this reasoning also is weak and unreliable. This is obvious from the fact 
that there are 38 earth-radii to the moon’s perigee, according to Ptolemy [Sjyn- 
30 taxis, V, 13 ], but more than 49 according to a more accurate determination, as 
will be made clear below. Yet so great a space contains, as we know, nothing 
but air and, if you please, also what is called “the element of fire”. Moreover, 
the diameter of Venus’ epicycle which carries it 45 ° more or less to either side 
of the sun, must be six times longer than the line drawn from the earth’s cen- 
35 ter to Venus’ perigee, as will be demonstrated in the proper place [V, 21 ]. In 
this entire space which would be taken up by that huge epicycle of Venus and 
which, moreover, is so much bigger than what would accommodate the earth, 
air, aether, moon, and Mercury, what will they say is contained if Venus re¬ 
volved around a motionless earth? 

40 Ptolemy [Syntaxis, IX, 1 ] argues also that the sun must move in the middle 
between the planets which show every elongation from it and those which do 
not. This argument carries no conviction because its error is revealed by the 
fact that the moon too shows every elongation from the sun. 

Now there are those who locate Venus and then Mercury below the sun, or 
45 separate these planets [from the sun] in some other sequence. What reason will 
they adduce to explain why Venus and Mercury do not likewise traverse separate 
orbits divergent from the sun, like the other planets, without violating the arrange¬ 
ment [of the planets] in accordance with their [relative] swiftness and slowness? 


19 



REVOLUTIONS 


Then one of two alternatives will have to be true. Either the earth is not the 
center to which the order of the planets and spheres is referred, or there really 
is no principle of arrangement nor any apparent reason why the highest place 
belongs to Saturn rather than to Jupiter or any other planet. 

In my judgement, therefore, we should not in the least disregard what was s 
familiar to Martianus Capella, the author of an encyclopedia, and to certain 
other Latin writers. For according to them, Venus and Mercury revolve around 
the sun as their center. This is the reason, in their opinion, why these planets 
diverge no farther from the sun than is permitted by the curvature of their revolu¬ 
tions. For they do not encircle the earth, like the other planets, but “have opposite 10 
circles”. Then what else do these authors mean but that the center of their spheres 
is near the sun ? Thus Mercury’s sphere will surely be enclosed within Venus’, 
which by common consent is more than twice as big, and inside that wide region 
it will occupy a space adequate for itself. If anyone seizes this opportunity to link 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars also to that center, provided he understands their 16 
spheres to be so large that together with Venus and Mercury the earth too is 
enclosed inside and encircled, he will not be mistaken, as is shown by the regular 
pattern of their motions. 

For [these outer planets] are always closest to the earth, as is well known, 
about the time of their evening rising, that is, when they are in opposition to the 20 
sun, with the earth between them and the sun. On the other hand, they are at 
their farthest from the earth at the time of their evening setting, when they 
become invisible in the vicinity of the sun, namely, when we have the sun between 
them and the earth. These facts are enough to show that their center belongs 
more to the sun, and is identical with the center around which Venus and Mercury 25 
likewise execute their revolutions. 

But since all these planets are related to a single center, the space remaining 
between Venus’ convex sphere and Mars’ concave sphere must be set apart as 
also a sphere or spherical shell, both of whose surfaces are concentric with those 
spheres. This [intercalated sphere] receives the earth together with its attendant, 30 
the moon, and whatever is contained within the moon’s sphere. Mainly for the 
reason that in this space we find quite an appropriate and adequate place for 
the moon, we can by no means detach it from the earth, since it is incontrovert- 
ibly nearest to the earth. 

Hence I feel no shame in asserting that this whole region engirdled by the 35 
moon, and the center of the earth, traverse this grand circle amid the rest of the 
planets in an annual revolution around the sun. Near the sun is the center of the 
universe. Moreover, since the sun remains stationary, whatever appears as a motion 
of the sun is really due rather to the motion of the earth. In comparison with any 
other spheres of the planets, the distance from the earth to the sun has a magnitude 40 
which is quite appreciable in proportion to those dimensions. But the size of the 
universe is so great that the distance earth-sun is imperceptible in relation to the 
sphere of the fixed stars. This should be admitted, I believe, in preference to 
perplexing the mind with an almost infinite multitude of spheres, as must be done 
by those who kept the earth in the middle of the universe. On the contrary, we 45 
should rather heed the wisdom of nature. Just as it especially avoids producing 
anything superfluous or useless, so it frequently prefers to endow a single thing 
with many effects. 


20 



BO OK I CB. 10 



All these statements are difficult and almost inconceivable, being of course 
opposed to the beliefs of many people. Yet, as we proceed, with God’s help I shall 
make them clearer than sunlight, at any rate to those who are not unacquainted 
with the science of astronomy. Consequently, with the first principle remaining 
5 intact, for nobody will propound a more suitable principle than that the size of the 
spheres is measured by the length of the time, the order of the spheres is the 
following, beginning with the highest. 

The first and the highest of all is the sphere of the fixed stars, which contains 
itself and everything, and is therefore immovable. It is unquestionably the place 
10 of the universe, to which the motion and position of all the other heavenly bodies 
are compared. Some people think that it also shifts in some way. A different 
explanation of why this appears to be so will be adduced in my discussion of the 
earth’s motion [I, 11 ]. 

[The sphere of the fixed stars] is followed by the first of the planets, Saturn, 
is which completes its circuit in 30 years. After Saturn, Jupiter accomplishes its 
revolution in 12 years. Then Mars revolves in 2 years. The annual revolution takes 
the series’ fourth place, which contains the earth, as I said [earlier in I, 10 ], 
together with the lunar sphere as an epicycle. In the fifth place Venus returns 


21 



REVOLUTIONS 


in 9 months. Lastly, the sixth place is held by Mercury, which revolves in 
a period of 80 days. 

At rest, however, in the middle of everything is the sun. For in this most 
beautiful temple, who would place this lamp in another or better position than 
that from which it can light up the whole thing at the same time ? For, the sun is 5 
not inappropriately called by some people the lantern of the universe, its mind 
by others, and its ruler by still others. [Hermes] the Thrice Greatest labels it 
a visible god, and Sophocles’ Electra, the all-seeing. Thus indeed, as though 
seated on a royal throne, the sun governs the family of planets revolving around 
it. Moreover, the earth is not deprived of the moon’s attendance. On the contrary, 10 
as Aristotle says in a work on animals, the moon has the closest kinship with the 
earth. Meanwhile the earth has intercourse with the sun, and is impregnated 
for its yearly parturition. 

In this arrangement, therefore, we discover a marvelous symmetry of the uni¬ 
verse, and an established harmonious linkage between the motion of the spheres is 
and their size, such as can be found in no other way. For this permits a not inatten¬ 
tive student to perceive why the forward and backward arcs appear greater in 
Jupiter than in Saturn and smaller than in Mars, and on the other hand greater 
in Venus than in Mercury. This reversal in direction appears more frequently 
in Saturn than in Jupiter, and also more rarely in Mars and Venus than in Mercury. 20 
Moreover, when Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars rise at sunset, they are nearer to the 
earth than when they set in the evening or appear at a later hour. But Mars in 
particular, when it shines all night, seems to equal Jupiter in size, being distin¬ 
guished only by its reddish color. Yet in the other configurations it is found barely 
among the stars of the second magnitude, being recognized by those who track it 25 
with assiduous observations. All these phenomena proceed from the same cause, 
which is in the earth’s motion. 

Yet none of these phenomena appears in the fixed stars. This proves their 
immense height, which makes even the sphere of the annual motion, or its reflec¬ 
tion, vanish from before our eyes. For, every visible object has some measure of 30 
distance beyond which it is no longer seen, as is demonstrated in optics. From 
Saturn, the highest of the planets, to the sphere of the fixed stars there is an 
additional gap of the largest size. This is shown by the twinkling lights of the 
stars. By this token in particular they are distinguished from the planets, for 
there had to be a very great difference between what moves and what does not 35 
move. So vast, without any question, is the divine handiwork of the most excellent 
Almighty. 

PROOF OF THE EARTH’S TRIPLE MOTION Chapter 11 

In so many and such important ways, then, do the planets bear witness to the 
earth’s mobility. I shall now give a summary of this motion, insofar as the phenom- 40 
ena are explained by it as a principle. As a whole, it must be admitted to be 
a threefold motion. 

The first motion, named nuchthemeron by the Greeks, as I said [ 1 , 4 ], is the ro¬ 
tation which is the characteristic of a day plus a night. This turns around the earth’s 
axis from west to east, just as the universe is deemed to be carried in the opposite 45 
direction. It describes the equator, which some people call the “circle of equal 


22 



BOOK I CM. II 


days”, in imitation of the designation used by the Greeks, whose term for it is 
tsemerinos. 

The second is the yearly motion of the center, which traces the ecliptic around 
the sun. Its direction is likewise from west to east, that is, in the order of the zo- 
5 diacal signs. It travels between Venus and Mars, as I mentioned [ 1 , 10 ], together 
with its associates. Because of it, the sun seems to move through the zodiac 
in a similar motion. Thus, for example, when the earth’s center is passing through 
the Goat, the sun appears to be traversing the Crab; with the earth in the 
Water Bearer, the sun seems to be in the Lion, and so on, as I remarked. 

10 To this circle, which goes through the middle of the signs, and to its plane, 
the equator and the earth’s axis must be understood to have a variable inclination. 
For if they stayed at a constant angle, and were affected exclusively by the motion 
of the center, no inequality of days and nights would be observed. On the contrary, 
it would always be either the longest or shortest day or the day of equal daylight 
is and darkness, or summer or winter, or whatever the character of the season, it 
would remain identical and unchanged. 

The third motion in inclination is consequently required. This also is a yearly 
revolution, but it occurs in the reverse order of the signs, that is, in the direction 
opposite to that of the motion of the center. These two motions are opposite in 
20 direction and nearly equal in period. The result is that the earth’s axis and equator, 
the largest of the parallels of latitude on it, face almost the same portion of the 
heavens, just as if they remained motionless. Meanwhile the sun seems to move 
through the obliquity of the ecliptic with the motion of the earth’s center, as 
though this were the center of the universe. Only remember that, in relation to 
25 the sphere of the fixed stars, the distance between the sun and the earth vanishes 
from our sight forthwith. 

Since these are matters which crave to be set before our eyes rather than spoken 
of, let us describe a circle ABCD, which the annual revolution of the earth’s 
center has traced in the plane of the ecliptic. Near its center let the sun be E. 
30 I shall divide this circle into four parts by drawing the diameters AEC and BED. 
Let A represent the first point of the Crab, B of the Balance, C of the Goat, and D 
of the Ram. Now let us assume that the earth’s center is originally at A. About A 
I shall draw the terrestrial equator FGHI. This is not in the same plane [as the 
ecliptic], except that the diameter GAI is the intersection of the circles, I mean, 
35 of the equator and the ecliptic. Draw also the diameter FAH perpendicular to GAI, 
F being the limit of the [equator’s] greatest inclination to the south, and H to 
the north. Under the conditions thus set forth, the earth’s inhabitants will see 
the sun near the center E undergo the winter solstice in the Goat. This occurs 
because the greatest northward inclination, H, is turned toward the sun. For, 
40 the inclination of the equator to the line AE, through the agency of the daily rota¬ 
tion, traces the winter solstice parallel to the equator at an interval subtended by 
EAH, the angle of the obliquity. 

Now let the earth’s center start out in the order of the signs, and let F, the 
limit of maximum inclination, travel along an equal arc in the reverse order of 
45 the signs, until at B both have traversed a quadrant of their circles. In the interim 
the angle EAI always remains equal to AEB, on account of the equality of their 
revolutions; and the diameters always stay parallel to each other, FAH to FBH, 
and GAI to GBI, and the equator to the equator. In the immensity of the heavens, 


23 



REVOLUTIONS 



for the reason already frequently mentioned, the same phenomena appear. There¬ 
fore from B , the first point of the Balance, E will seem to be in the Ram. 
The intersection of the circles will coincide with the single line GBIE, from which 
[the plane of the axis] will not be permitted by the daily rotation to deviate. On 
the contrary, the [axis’] inclination will lie entirely in the lateral plane. Accordingly s 
the sun will be seen in the spring equinox. Let the earth’s center proceed under 
the assumed conditions, and when it has completed a semicircle at C, the sun 
will appear to enter the Crab. But F, the southernmost inclination of the equator, 
will be turned toward the sun. This will be made to appear in the north, undergoing 
the summer solstice as measured by the angle of the obliquity, ECF. Again, 10 
when F turns away in the third quadrant of the circle, the intersection GI will 
once more fall on the line ED. From here the sun will be seen in the Balance 
undergoing the autumn equinox. Then as H by the same process gradually faces 
the sun, it will bring about a repetition of the initial situation, with which I began 
my survey. 1S 

Alternatively, let AEC be in the same way a diameter of the plane under discus¬ 
sion [the ecliptic] as well as the intersection of that plane with a circle perpendicular 
thereto. On AEC , around A and C, that is, in the Crab and the Goat, draw a circle 
of the earth in each case through the poles. Let this [meridian] be DGF1 , the 
earth’s axis DF, the north pole D, the south pole F, and GI the diameter of the 20 
equator. Now when F is turned toward the sun, which is near E, the equator’s 
northward inclination being measured by the angle IAE, then the axial rotation 
will describe, parallel to the equator and to the south of it, at a distance LI and with 
diameter KL, the tropic of Capricorn as seen in the sun. Or, to speak more accu¬ 
rately, the axial rotation, as viewed from AE, generates a conic surface, having its 25 
vertex in the center of the earth, and its base in a circle parallel to the equator. 
Also at the opposite point, C, everything works out in like manner, but is reversed. 

It is clear therefore how the two motions, I mean, the motion of the center and 


24 


BOOK I CH. 11 




the motion in inclination, by their combined effect make the earth’s axis remain 
in the same direction and in very much the same position, and make all these 
phenomena appear as though they were motions of the sun. 

I said, however, that the annual revolutions of the center and of inclination 
s are nearly equal. For if they were exactly equal, the equinoctial and solstitial 
points as well as the entire obliquity of the ecliptic would have to show no shift 
at all with reference to the sphere of the fixed stars. But since there is a slight 
variation, it was discovered only as it grew larger with the passage of time. From 
Ptolemy to us the precession of the equinoxes amounts to almost 21 °. For this 
io reason some people believed that the sphere of the fixed stars also moves, and 
accordingly they adopted a surmounting ninth sphere. This having proved inade¬ 
quate, more recent writers now add on a tenth sphere. Yet they do not in the least 
attain their goal, which I hope to reach by the earth’s motion. This I shall use as 
a principle and hypothesis in the demonstration of the other [motions]. 

15 [Here Copernicus originally planned to include a little more than two handwritten pages 
which he later deleted from his autograph. This deleted material, which was not printed 
in the first four editions of the Revolutions (1543, 1566, 1617, 1854), but was incorporated in those 
published after the recovery of Copernicus’ autograph (1873, 1949, 1972), reads as follows]. 

The motion of the sun and moon can be demonstrated, I admit, also with an earth that is sta- 
20 tionary. This is, however, less suitable for the remaining planets. Philolaus believed in the earth’s 
motion for these and similar reasons. This is plausible because Aristarchus of Samos too held the 
same view according to some people, who were not motivated by the argumentation put forward 
by Aristotle and rejected by him [Heavens, II, 13-14], But only a keen mind and persevering 
study could understand these subjects. They were therefore unfamiliar to most philosophers at 
25 that time, and Plato does not conceal the fact that there were then only a few who mastered the 
theory of the heavenly motions. Even if these were known to Philolaus or any Pythagorean, they 
nevertheless were probably not transmitted to posterity. For it was the Pythagoreans’ practice not 
to commit the secrets of philosophy to writing nor divulge them to everybody, but to entrust 
them only to faithful friends and kinsmen, and pass them on from hand to hand. As evidence 
30 of this custom there is extant a letter from Lysis to Hipparchus. Because of its remarkable opin¬ 
ions and in order to make clear what value was attached to philosophy among themselves, I have 
decided to insert it here and to end this first Book with it. This, then, is a copy of the letter, which 
I translate from Greek as follows. 

From Lysis to Hipparchus, greetings. 

35 I would never have believed that after Pythagoras’ death his followers’ brotherhood would be 
dissolved. But now that we have unexpectedly been scattered hither and yon, as if our ship had 
been wrecked, it is still an act of piety to recall his godlike teachings and refrain from communicating 
the treasures of philosophy to those who have not even dreamed about the purification of the soul. 
For it is indecent to divulge to everybody what we achieved with such great effort, just as the 
40 Eleusinian goddesses’ secrets may not be revealed to the uninitiated. The perpetrators of either 
of these misdeeds would be condemned as equally wicked and impious. On the other hand, it is 
worth considering how much time we spent wiping out the stains which clung to our hearts until 
we became receptive to his teachings after the course of five years. Dyers, having cleaned their 
fabrics, then apply their tincture with a mordant in order to fix the color indissolubly and prevent 
45 it from fading away easily thereafter. That godlike man prepared the lovers of philosophy in the 
same way, to avoid being disappointed in the hope he had conceived for the talents of any one of 


25 



REVOLUTIONS 


them. He did not sell his precepts for a price, and the snares with which young minds are entangled 
by many of the sophists were not set out by him because they are devoid of value. On the contrary, 
divine and human doctrines were promulgated by him. 

Certain imitators of his teaching, however, perform at great length and out loud. Their instruc¬ 
tion of the young follows a confused and improper procedure, thereby making their auditors 5 
impertinent and brash. For they mix disorderly and tainted morals with philosophy’s lofty precepts. 
The result is like pouring pure fresh water into a deep well full of muck, since the muck is stirred 
up and the water is wasted. This is what happens to those who teach and are taught in this manner. 

For thick, dark woods obstruct the minds and hearts of those who were not correctly initiated, 
and completely damage the gentleness of their spirit and their reasonableness. These woods are 10 
infested with all sorts of vices, which by flourishing impede thought and prevent it from developing 
in any way. 

As breeders of the interlopers I shall name principally self-indulgence and greed, both of which 
are extremely fertile. For, self-indulgence gives rise to incest, drunkenness, rape, unnatural 
pleasures, and certain violent impulses which lead as far as death and destruction. In fact, passion is 
has inflamed some of these persons to so high a pitch that they spared neither their mothers nor 
their daughters. It has even carried them into conflict with their laws, country, government, and 
rulers. It has laid snares such that it brought them bound hand and foot to the final punishment. 
Greed, on the other hand, generates mayhem, murder, temple-robbery, poisoning, and other 
offspring of that sort. The lairs in those woods, where these urges lurk, must therefore be extirpated 20 
by fire and sword with all our might. When we have found the natural reason freed from these 
lusts, we shall then implant in it a most excellent and fruitful crop. 

You too, Hipparchus, learned these rules with no small zeal. But, my good man, little did you 
heed them after you had tasted Sicilian luxury, for the sake of which you should have abandoned 
nothing. Many people even say that you are teaching philosophy publicly. This practice was 2 s 
forbidden by Pythagoras, who willed his notes to his daughter Damo with an order not to turn them 
over to anybody outside the family. Although she could have sold them for a lot of money, she 
refused to do so, considering poverty and her father’s commands more precious than gold. They 
also say that when Damo died, she left the same obligation to her own daughter Bitale. Yet we of 
the male sex disobey our teacher and violate our oath. If, then, you mend your ways, I cherish you. 30 
But if you do not, as far as I am concerned, you are dead. 

[The foregoing letter, the true nature of which was not suspected by Copernicus, ended 
Book I as originally planned. According to that plan. Book II began immediately after the letter 
with some introductory material, which was subsequently deleted. This deleted material, which 
was not printed in the first four editions of the Revolutions, but was included in those published 3s 
after the recovery of Copernicus’ autograph, reads as follows]. 

For what I have undertaken to do, those propositions of natural philosophy which seemed 
indispensable as principles and hypotheses, namely, that the universe is spherical, immense, 
and similar to the infinite, and that the sphere of the fixed stars as the container of everything is 
stationary, whereas all the other heavenly bodies have a circular motion, have been briefly reviewed. 40 
I have also assumed that the earth moves in certain revolutions, on which, as the cornerstone, 

I strive to erect the entire science of the stars. 

[The rest of the material deleted here in the autograph was printed in the first four editions of 
the Revolutions as the following beginning of I, 12]. 

The proofs which I shall use in almost the entire work involve straight lines 45 
and arcs in plane and spherical triangles. Although much information about these 
topics is already available in Euclid’s Elements, nevertheless that treatise does not 
contain the answer to what is the principal question here, how the sides can be 
obtained from the angles, and the angles from the sides. 

[As the heading of 1,12, the first edition introduced “The Length of Straight Lines in a Circle”. 50 
This caption, for which there is no direct warrant in the autograph, was repeated in the next three 
editions of the Revolutions. 


26 



BOOK I CH. 12 


In the autograph, on the other hand, the material preceding the first chapter of Book II, 
as originally planned, continued as follows]. 

The measure of a subtended straight line is not the angle, nor is the angle measured by the line. 
On the contrary, the measure is the arc. Hence a method has been discovered whereby the lines 
6 subtending any arc are known. With the help of these lines, the arc corresponding to the angle 
may be obtained; and conversely the straight line intercepted by the angle may be obtained through 
the arc. It therefore seems not inappropriate for me to discuss these lines in the following Book, and 
also the sides and angles of both plane and spherical triangles, which were treated by Ptolemy 
in scattered examples. I should like to finish these topics once and for all here, thereby clarifying 
10 what I have to say later on. 


STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE Chapter 12 

[Book II, Chapter 1, according to Copernicus’ original plan] 

In accordance with the common practice of mathematicians, I have divided 
the circle into 360°. With regard to the diameter, however, [a division into] 
is 120 units was adopted by the ancients [for example, Ptolemy, Syntaxis , 1,10]. 
But later writers wanted to avoid the complication of fractions in multiplying 
and dividing the numbers for the lines [subtended in a circle], most of 
which are incommensurable as lengths, and often even when squared. Some 
of these later writers resorted to 1,200,000 units; others, 2,000,000; and still 
ao others established some other sensible diameter, after the Hindu symbols for 
numbers came into use. This numerical notation certainly surpasses every other, 
whether Greek or Latin, in lending itself to computations with exceptional speed. 
For this reason I too have accepted 200,000 units in a diameter as sufficient to 
be able to exclude any obvious error. For where quantities are not related to each 
26 other as one integer to another, it is enough to obtain an approximation. I shall 
explain this [subject] in six theorems and one problem, following Ptolemy closely. 

THEOREM I 

The diameter of a circle being given, the sides of the triangle, square, pentagon, 
hexagon, and decagon circumscribed by the circle are also given. 

30 For, the radius, as half of the diameter, is equal to the side of the hexagon. 
But the square on the side of the triangle is three times, and the square on the 
side of the square is twice, the square on the side of the hexagon, as is demonstrated 
in Euclid’s Elements. Therefore the side of the hexagon is given as 100,000 units 
long; the side of the square as 141,422; and the side of the triangle as 173,205. 
35 Now let the side of the hexagon be AB. Let it be divided at the point C in 
mean and extreme ratio, in accordance with Euclid, Book II, Problem 1, or VI, 10. 
Let the greater segment be CB, and let it be extended an equal length, BD. Then 
the whole line ABD also will be divided in extreme and mean ratio. As the smaller 
segment, the extension BD is the side of the decagon inscribed in the circle in 
40 which AB is the side of the hexagon, as is clear from Euclid, XIII, 5 and 9. 
Now BD will be obtained as follows. Bisect AB at E. From Euclid, XIII, 3, it 
is clear that the square of EBD equals five times the square of EB. But EB is 
given as 50,000 units long. Five times its square gives EBD as 111,803 units long. 
If EB’s 50,000 are subtracted, the remainder is BD’s 61,803 units, the side of the 
45 decagon which we were looking for. 


C E 


27 



REVOLUTIONS 


Furthermore, the side of the pentagon, the square on which is equal to the 
sum of the squares on the sides of the hexagon and decagon, is given as 117,557 
units. 

Therefore, when the diameter of a circle is given, the sides of the triangle, 
square, pentagon, hexagon, and decagon which can be inscribed in the circle are 3 
given. Q.E.D. 

COROLLARY 

Consequently it is clear that when the chord subtending any arc is given, the 
chord subtending the rest of the semicircle is also given. 

The angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle. Now in right triangles, w> 
the square on the diameter, that is, the side subtending the right angle, is equal 
to the squares on the sides forming the right angle. Now the side of the decagon, 
which subtends an arc of 36°, has been shown [Theorem I] to consist of 61,803 
units, of which the diameter contains 200,000. Hence the chord subtending the 
remaining 144° of the semicircle is also given as consisting of 190,211 units. 1 5 
And from the side of the pentagon which, with its 117,557 units of the diameter, 
subtends an arc of 72°, the straight line subtending the remaining 108° of the 
semicircle is obtained as 161,803 units. 

THEOREM II, PRELIMINARY [TO THEOREM III] 

If a quadrilateral is inscribed in a circle, the rectangular product of the diagonals 20 
is equal to the rectangular products of the opposite sides. 

For let the quadrilateral inscribed in a circle be ABCD. I say that the product 
of the diagonals ACxDB is equal to the products of ABxDC and ADxBC. 
For let us make the angle ABE equal to the angle at CBD. Then the whole angle 
ABD is equal to the whole angle EBC, angle EBD being taken as common to 25 
both. Moreover, the angles at ACB and BDA are equal to each other, since they 
intercept the same segment of the circle. Therefore the two similar triangles 
[BCE and BDA ] will have their sides proportional, BC : BD = EC : AD, and 
the product of EC xBD is equal to the product of BC xAD. But also the triangles 
ABE and CBD are similar, because the angles at ABE and CBD are equal by con- 30 
struction, and the angles BAC and BDC are equal because they intercept the same 
arc of the circle. Consequently, as before, AB : BD = AE : CD, and the product 
of ABxCD is equal to the product of AE xBD. But it has already been shown 
that the product of ADxBC is equal to the product of BDxEC. By addition, 
then, the product of BD xAC is equal to the products of AD xBC and AB x CD. 35 
This is what it was useful to prove. 

THEOREM III 

For it follows from the foregoing that if the straight lines subtending unequal 
arcs in a semicircle are given, the chord subtending the arc by which the larger 
arc exceeds the smaller is also given. 40 

Thus in the semicircle ABCD, with diameter AD, let the chords subtending 
unequal arcs be AB and AC. What we wish to find is the chord subtending BC. 
From what was said above [Theorem I, Corollary], the chords BD and CD, sub¬ 
tending the arcs remaining in the semicircle, are given. As a result, in the semicir¬ 
cle the quadrilateral ABCD is formed. Its diagonals AC and BD are given, to- 45 


28 



BOOK I CH. 12 


gether with the three sides, AB, AD, and CD. In this quadrilateral, as has been 
demonstrated already [Theorem II], the product of ACxBD is equal to the 
product oiABxCD and ADxBC. Therefore, if the product ABxCD is sub¬ 
tracted from the product ACxBD, the remainder is the product ADxBC. 
s Hence, if we divide by AD, so far as that is possible, we obtain a number for 
the chord BC, which we were seeking. 

From the foregoing, the sides of the pentagon and hexagon, for example, are 
given. Consequently the chord subtending 12°, the difference between them 
[72°-60°], is given in this way as 20,905 units of the diameter. 

io THEOREM IV 

If the chord subtending any arc is given, the chord subtending half of the arc 
is also given. 

Let us describe the circle ABC, and let its diameter be AC. Let BC be the 
given arc with its subtending chord. From the center E, let the line EE intersect 
is BC at right angles. Then, according to Euclid III, 3, EE will bisect BC at F, 
and when EE is extended, it will bisect the arc at D. Also draw the chords AB 
and BD. ABC and EFC are right triangles. Moreover, since they have angle ECF 
in common, they are similar triangles. Therefore, just as CF is half of BFC, so 
EF is half of AB. But AB, which subtends the remaining arc of the semicircle, 
20 is given [Theorem I, Corollary]. Hence EF is likewise given, and also DF, as 
the rest of the half diameter. Let the diameter be completed as DEG. Join BG. 
Then in the triangle BDG, from the right angle B the perpendicular BF falls on 
the base. Consequently the product of GD X DF is equal to the square of BD. 
Accordingly BD is given in length as subtending half of the arc BDC. 

25 Since the chord subtending 12° has already been given [Theorem III], the 
chord subtending 6° is also given as 10,467 units; 3°, as 5,235 units; 1 a / 2 °j as 
2,618 units; and 3 / 4 °, as 1,309 units. 

THEOREM V 

Furthermore, when the chords subtending two arcs are given, the chord 
30 subtending the whole arc consisting of the two arcs is also given. 

In a circle let the given chords be AB and BC. I say that the chord subtending 
the whole arc ABC is also given. For, draw the diameters AFD and BFE, and 
also the straight lines BD and CE. These chords are given by what precedes 
[Theorem I, Corollary], because AB and BC are given, and DE is equal to AB. 
35 Join CD, completing the quadrilateral BCDE. Its diagonals BD and CE, as well 
as three of its sides, BC, DE, and BE, are given. The remaining side, CD, will also 
be given by Theorem II. Therefore CA, as the chord subtending the rest of 
the semicircle, is given as the chord subtending the whole arc ABC. This is 
what we were looking for. 

40 Then thus far the straight lines subtending 3 °, 1 x / 2 °, and 3 / 4 ° have been found. 

With these intervals anyone can construct a table with very precise relationships. 
But when [it comes to] advancing by [a whole] degree and adding one to another, 
or by half a degree, or in some other way, there will be a not unfounded doubt 
about the chords subtending these arcs, since we lack the graphical relationships 
45 by which they would be demonstrated. Yet nothing prevents us from attaining 


29 



REVOLUTIONS 


this result by another method, without any perceptible error and by assuming 
a number which is very slightly inaccurate. Ptolemy too [Syntaxis, I, 10] looked 
for the chords subtending 1 ° and */ 2 °, after reminding us first [of the following]. 

THEOREM VI 

The ratio of a greater arc to a lesser arc is bigger than the ratio of the subtending s 
straight lines. 

In a circle, let the two unequal arcs, AB and BC, be contiguous, and let BC 
be the greater arc. I say that the ratio BC : AB is bigger than the ratio BC : AB 
of the chords forming the angle B. Let it be bisected by the line BD. Join AC. 
Let it intersect BD in the point E. Likewise join AD and CD. They are equal w 
because they subtend equal arcs. Now in the triangle ABC, the line which bisects 
the angle also intersects AC at E. Hence the ratio of the base’s segments EC : AE 
is equal to the ratio BC : AB. Since BC is greater than AB, EC also is greater 
than EA. Erect DF perpendicular to AC. DF will bisect AC at the point F, which 
must lie in the greater segment, EC. In every triangle the greater angle is opposite 15 
the greater side. Hence in triangle DEF, the side DE is greater than DF. AD 
is even greater than DE. Therefore an arc drawn with D as center, and with DE 
as radius, will intersect AD, and pass beyond DF. Let the arc intersect AD in H, 
and let it be extended to the straight line DFI. Then the sector EDI is greater 
than the triangle EDF. But the triangle DEA is greater than the sector DEH. 20 
Therefore the ratio of triangle DEF to triangle DEA is smaller than the ratio 
of sector DEI to sector DEH. But sectors are proportional to their arcs or central 
angles, whereas triangles which have the same vertex are proportional to their 
bases. Consequently the ratio of the angles EDF : ADE is bigger than the ratio 
of the bases EF : AE. Hence, by addition, the ratio of the angles FDA : ADE 2! > 
is bigger than the ratio AF : AE, and in the same way CD A : ADE is bigger than 
AC : AE. And by subtraction, CDE : EDA also is bigger than CE : EA. However, 
the angles CDE and EDA are to each other as the arcs CB : AB, but the bases 
CE : AE are as the chords BC : AB. Therefore the ratio of the arcs CB : AB 
is bigger than the ratio of the chords BC : AB. Q.E.D. 30 

PROBLEM 

An arc is always greater than the straight line subtending it, while a straight 
line is the shortest of the lines having the same end points. Yet this inequality, 

[in descending] from greater to lesser portions of a circle, approaches equality, 
so that in the end the straight and circular lines are extinguished simultaneously 35 
at their last point of contact on the circle. Prior to that, consequently, they must 
differ from each other by no perceptible distinction. 

For example, let arc AB be 3°, and arc AC 1 1 I 2 °. The chord subtending AB 
has been shown [Theorem IV] to consist of 5235 units, of which the diameter is 
assumed to have 200,000, and the chord subtending/IChas 2618 units. The axe AB 40 
is double the arc AC, whereas the chord AB is less than double the chord AC, 
which exceeds 2,617 by only one unit. But if we take AB as 1 1 I 2 ° and AC as 3 / 4 °, 
we shall have chord AB as 2618 units, and AC as 1309 units. Although AC ought 
to be greater than half of the chord AB, yet it seems not to differ from half, the 
ratios of the arcs and straight lines now appearing to be the same. Hence we see 45 
that we have reached the level where the difference between the straight and rircu- 


30 


BOOK I CH. 12 


lar lines becomes absolutely imperceptible, as though they had merged into a single 
line. Hence I have no hesitation in fitting the 1309 units of 3 / 4 ° in the same pro¬ 
portion to the chords subtending 1 ° and the other fractional parts thereof. Thus, 
by adding V 4 0 to 3 U°> we establish the chord subtending 1° as 1745 units; 1 1 2 °, 
5 as 872 V 2 units; and x / 3 °, as approximately 582 units. 

Yet I believe that it is enough if I put in the Table only half-lines subtending 
double the arcs. By this shortcut I shall compress in a quadrant what formerly had 
to be spread out over a semicircle. The main reason for doing so is that in demon¬ 
strations and calculations half-lines are used more frequently than wnole lines. 
i° I have drawn up a Table which progresses by sixths of a degree. It has three 
columns. In the first column are the degrees, or parts, of a circumference, and 
sixths of a degree. The second column contains the numerical value for the half-line 
subtending double the arc. The third column shows, for each degree, the difference 
intervening between these numerical values. These differences permit the inter- 
15 polation of the proportional amounts corresponding to individual minutes of de¬ 
grees. The Table, then, is as follows. 


31 



REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 
Degree 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 
Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

0 

10 

291 

291 


6 

10 

10742 

289 

0 

20 

582 



6 

20 

11031 


0 

30 

873 



6 

30 

11320 


0 

40 

1163 



6 

40 

11609 


0 

50 

1454 



6 

50 

11898 


1 

0 

1745 



7 

0 

12187 


1 

10 

2036 



7 

10 

12476 


1 

20 

2327 



7 

20 

12764 

288 

1 

30 

2617 



7 

30 

13053 


1 

40 

2908 



7 

40 

13341 


1 

50 

3199 



7 

50 

13629 


2 

0 

3490 



8 

0 

13917 


2 

10 

3781 



8 

10 

14205 


2 

20 

4071 



8 

20 

14493 


2 

30 

4362 



8 

30 

14781 


2 

40 

4653 



8 

40 

15069 


2 

50 

4943 

290 


8 

50 

15356 

287 

3 

0 

5234 



9 

0 

15643 


3 

10 

5524 



9 

10 

15931 


3 

20 

5814 



9 

20 

16218 


3 

30 

6105 



9 

30 

16505 


3 

40 

6395 



9 

40 

16792 


3 

50 

6685 



9 

50 

17078 


| 4 

0 

6975 



10 

0 

17365 


4 

10 

7265 



10 

10 

17651 

286 

4 

20 

7555 



10 

20 

17937 


4 

30 

7845 



10 

30 

18223 


4 

40 

8135 



10 

40 

18509 


4 

50 

8425 



10 

50 

18795 


5 

0 

8715 



11 

0 

19081 


5 

10 

9005 



11 

10 

19366 

285 

5 

20 

9295 



11 

20 

19652 


5 

30 

9585 



11 

30 

19937 


5 

40 

9874 



11 

40 

20222 


5 

50 

10164 

289 


11 

50 

20507 


! 6 

0 

10453 



12 

0 

20791 



32 




BOOK I CH. 12 


TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 
Subtending 
Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 

of a 
Degree 


■ 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 
Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

12 

10 

21076 

284 


18 

10 

31178 

276 

12 

20 

21360 



18 

20 

31454 


12 

30 

21644 



18 

30 

31730 


12 

40 

21928 



18 

40 



12 

50 

22212 



18 

50 

32282 

275 

13 

0 

22495 

283 


19 

0 

32557 


13 

10 

22778 



19 

10 

32832 . 


13 

20 

23062 



19 

20 

33106 


13 

30 

23344 



19 

30 

33381 

274 

13 

40 

23627 



19 

40 

33655 


13 

50 

23910 

282 


19 

50 

33929 


14 

0 

24192 



20 

0 

34202 


14 

10 

24474 



20 

10 

34475 

273 

14 

20 

24756 



20 

20 

34748 


14 

30 

25038 

281 


20 

30 

35021 


14 

40 

25319 



20 

40 

35293 

272 

14 

50 

25601 



20 

50 

35565 


15 

0 

25882 



21 

0 

35837 


15 

10 

26163 



21 

10 

36108 

271 

15 

20 

26443 

280 


21 

20 

36379 


15 

30 

26724 



21 

30 

36650 


15 

40 

27004 



21 

40 

36920 

270 

15 

50 

27284 



21 

50 

37190 


16 

0 

27564 

279 


22 

0 

37460 


16 

10 

27843 



22 

10 

37730 

269 

16 

20 

28122 



22 

20 

37999 


16 

30 

28401 



22 

30 

38268 


16 

40 

28680 



22 

40 

38537 

268 

16 

50 

28959 

278 


22 

50 

38805 


17 

0 

29237 



23 

0 

39073 


17 

10 

29515 



23 

10 

39341 

267 

17 

20 

29793 



23 

20 

39608 


17 

30 

30071 

277 


23 

30 

39875 


17 

40 

30348 



23 

40 

40141 

266 

17 

50 

30625 



23 

50 

40408 


18 

0 

30902 



24 

0 

40674 



33 




















REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 

Fractions 
of a 
Degree 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 

of a 
Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

24 

10 

40939 

265 


30 

10 

50252 

251 

24 

20 

41204 



30 

20 

50503 


24 

30 

41469 



30 

30 

50754 

250 

24 

40 

41734 

264 


30 

40 

51004 


24 

50 

41998 



30 

50 

51254 


25 

0 

42262 



31 

0 

51504 

249 

25 

10 

42525 

263 


31 

10 

51753 


25 

20 

42788 



31 

20 

52002 

248 

25 

30 

43051 



31 

30 

52250 


25 

40 

43313 

262 


31 

40 

52498 

247 

25 

50 

43575 



31 

50 

52745 


26 

0 

43837 



32 

0 

52992 

246 

26 

10 

44098 

261 


32 

10 

53238 


26 

20 

44359 



32 

20 

53484 


26 

30 

44620 

260 


32 

30 

53730 

245 

26 

40 

44880 



32 

40 

53975 


26 

50 

45140 



32 

50 

54220 

244 

27 

0 

45399 

259 


33 

0 

54464 


27 

10 

45658 



33 

10 

54708 

243 

27 

20 

45916 

258 


33 

20 

54951 


27 

30 

46175 



33 

30 

55194 

242 

27 

40 

46433 



33 

40 

55436 


27 

50 

46690 

257 


33 

50 

55678 

241 

28 

0 

46947 



34 

0 

55919 


28 

10 

47204 

256 


34 

10 

56160 

240 

28 

20 

47460 



34 

20 

56400 


28 

30 

47716 

255 


34 

30 

56641 

239 

28 

40 

47971 



34 

40 

56880 


28 

50 

48226 



34 

50 

57119 

238 

29 

0 

48481 

254 


35 

0 

57358 


29 

10 

48735 



35 

10 

57596 


29 

20 

48989 

253 


35 

20 

57833 

237 

29 

30 

49242 



35 

30 

58070 


29 

40 

49495 

252 


35 

40 

58307 

236 

29 

50 

49748 



35 

50 

58543 


30 

0 

50000 



36 

0 

58779 

235 


34 












BOOK I CH. 12 



TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 

of a 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 

Fractions 
of a 


Degree 

Minute 


Degree 


Degree 

Minute 


Degree 


36 

B 

59014 

235 


42 

10 

67129 

215 


36 


59248 

234 


42 

20 

67344 



36 

H 

59482 



42 

30 

67559 

214 

10 

36 

40 

59716 

233 


42 

40 

67773 



36 

50 

59949 



42 

50 

67987 

213 


37 

0 


232 


43 

0 

68200 

212 


37 

10 




43 

10 

68412 



37 

20 


231 


43 

20 

68624 

211 

15 

37 

30 




43 

30 

68835 



37 

40 




43 

40 

69046 

210 


37 

50 

61337 



43 

50 

69256 



38 

0 

61566 

229 


44 

0 

69466 

209 


38 

10 

61795 



44 

10 

69675 


20 

38 

20 




44 

20 

69883 

208 


38 

30 

62251 

228 


44 

30 

70091 

207 


38 

40 

62479 



44 

40 

70298 



38 

50 


227 


44 

50 

70505 

206 


39 

0 

62932 



45 

0 

70711 

205 

25 

39 

10 

63158 

226 


45 

10 

70916 



39 

20 

63383 



45 

20 

71121 

204 


39 

30 


225 


45 

30 

71325 



39 

40 

63832 



45 

40 

71529 

203 


39 

50 

64056 

224 


45 

50 

71732 

202 

30 

40 

0 

64279 

223 


46 

0 

71934 



40 

10 

64501 

222 


46 

10 

72136 

201 


40 

20 

64723 



46 

20 

72337 

200 


40 

30 

64945 

221 


46 

30 

72537 



40 

40 

65166 



46 

40 

72737 

199 

35 

40 

50 

65386 



46 

50 

72936 



41 

0 


219 


47 

0 

73135 

198 


41 

10 

65825 



47 

10 

73333 

197 


41 

20 

66044 

218 


47 

20 

73531 



41 

30 

66262 



47 

30 

73728 

196 

40 

41 

40 

66480 

217 


47 

40 

73924 

195 


41 

50 

66697 



47 

50 

74119 



42 

0 

66913 

216 


48 

0 

74314 

194 


35 





























REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 
Degree 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 

Fractions 
of a 
Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

48 

10 

74508 

194 


54 

10 

81072 

170 

48 

20 

74702 



54 

20 

81242 

169 

48 

30 

74896 



54 

30 

81411 


48 

40 

75088 

192 


54 

40 

81580 

168 

48 

50 

75280 

191 


54 

50 

81748 

167 

49 

0 

75471 

190 


55 

0 

81915 


49 

10 

75661 



55 

10 

82082 

166 

49 

20 

75851 

189 


55 

20 

82248 

165 

49 

30 

76040 



55 

30 

82413 

164 

49 

40 

76229 

188 


55 

40 

82577 


49 

50 

76417 

187 


55 

50 

82741 

163 

50 

0 

76604 



56 

0 

82904 

162 

50 

10 

76791 

186 


56 

10 

83066 


50 

20 

76977 



56 

20 

83228 

161 

50 

30 

77162 

185 


56 

30 

83389 

160 

50 

40 

77347 

184 


56 

40 

83549 

159 

50 

50 

77531 



56 

50 

83708 


51 

0 

77715 

183 


57 

0 

83867 

158 

51 

10 

77897 

182 


57 

10 

84025 

157 

51 

20 

78079 



57 

20 

84182 


51 

30 

78261 

181 


57 

30 

84339 

156 

51 

40 

78442 

180 


57 

40 

84495 

155 

51 

50 

78622 



57 

50 

84650 


52 

0 

78801 

179 


58 

0 

84805 

154 

52 

10 

78980 

178 


58 

10 

84959 

153 

52 

20 

79158 



58 

20 

85112 

152 

52 

30 

79335 

177 


58 

30 

85264 


52 

40 

79512 

176 


58 

40 

85415 

151 

52 

50 

79688 



58 

50 

85566 

150 

53 

0 

79864 

175 


59 

0 

85717 


53 

10 

80038 

174 


59 

10 

85866 

149 

53 

20 

80212 



59 

20 

86015 

148 

53 

30 

80386 

173 


59 

30 

86163 

147 

53 

40 

80558 

172 


59 

40 

86310 


53 

50 

80730 



59 

50 

86457 

146 

54 

0 

80902 

171 


60 

0 

86602 

145 


36 









BOOK I CH. 12 



TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 



Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 

Fractions 
of a 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 

of a 

5 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 


Degree 

Minute 

Degree 


60 

10 

86747 

144 


66 

10 

91472 

118 


60 

20 

86892 



66 

20 

91590 

117 


60 

30 

87036 

143 


66 

30 

91706 

116 

10 

60 

40 

87178 

142 


66 

40 

91822 

115 


60 

50 

87320 



66 

50 

91936 

114 


61 

0 

87462 

141 


67 

0 

92050 

113 


61 

10 

87603 

140 


67 

10 

92164 



61 

20 

87743 

139 


67 

20 

92276 

112 

16 

61 

30 

87882 



67 

30 

92388 

111 


61 

40 

88020 

138 


67 

40 

92499 

110 


61 

50 

88158 

137 


67 

50 

92609 

109 


62 

0 

88295 



68 

0 

92718 



62 

10 

88431 

136 


68 

10 

92827 

108 

20 

62 

20 

88566 

135 


68 

20 

92935 

107 


62 

30 

88701 

134 


68 

30 

93042 

106 


62 

40 

88835 



68 

40 

93148 

105 


62 

50 

88968 

133 


68 

50 

93253 



63 

0 

89101 

132 


69 

0 

93358 

104 

26 

63 

10 

89232 

131 


69 

10 

93462 

103 


63 

20 

89363 



69 

20 

93565 

102 


63 

30 

89493 

130 


69 

30 

93667 



63 

40 

89622 

129 


69 

40 

93769 

101 


63 

50 

89751 

128 


69 

50 

93870 

100 

30 

64 

0 

89879 



70 

0 

93969 

99 


64 

10 

90006 

127 


70 

10 

94068 

98 


64 

20 

90133 

126 


70 

20 

94167 



64 

30 

90258 



70 

30 

94264 

97 


64 

40 

90383 

125 


70 

40 

94361 

96 

35 

64 

50 

90507 

124 


70 

50 

94457 

95 


65 

0 

90631 

123 


71 

0 

94552 

94 


65 

10 

90753 

122 


71 

10 

94646 

93 


65 

20 

90875 

121 


71 

20 

94739 



65 

30 

90996 ! 



71 

30 

94832 

92 

40 

65 

40 

91116 

120 


71 

40 

94924 

91 


65 

50 

91235 

119 


71 

50 

95015 

90 


66 

0 

91354 

118 


72 

0 

95105 



37 








REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE STRAIGHT LINES SUBTENDED IN A CIRCLE 

Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 


Arcs 

Half-Chords 

Subtending 

Double 

Arcs 

Differ¬ 

ences 

for the 
Fractions 
of a 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 


Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

72 

D 

95195 

89 


78 

B 

97875 

59 

72 


95284 

88 


78 


97934 

58 

72 

n 

95372 

87 


78 

H 

97992 


72 

40 

95459 

86 


78 

40 

98050 

57 

72 

50 

95545 

85 


78 

50 

98107 

56 

73 

0 

95630 



79 

0 

98163 

55 

73 

10 

95715 

84 


79 

10 

98218 

54 

73 

20 

95799 

83 


79 

20 

98272 


73 

30 

95882 

82 


79 

30 

98325 

53 

73 

40 

95964 

81 


79 

40 

98378 

52 

73 

50 

96045 



79 

50 

98430 

51 

74 

0 

96126 

80 


80 

0 

98481 

50 

74 

10 

96206 

79 


80 

10 

98531 

49 

74 

20 

96285 

78 


80 

20 

98580 


74 

30 

96363 

77 


80 

30 

98629 

48 

74 

40 

96440 



80 

40 

98676 

47 

74 

50 

96517 

76 


80 

50 

98723 

46 | 

75 

0 

96592 

75 


81 

0 

98769 

45 

75 

10 

96667 

74 


81 

10 

98814 

44 

75 

20 

96742 

73 


81 

20 

98858 

43 

75 

30 

96815 

72 


81 

30 

98902 

42 

75 

40 

96887 



81 

40 

98944 


75 

50 

96959 

71 


81 

50 

98986 

41 

76 

0 

97030 

70 


82 

0 

99027 

40 

76 

10 

97099 

69 


82 

10 

99067 

39 

76 

20 

97169 

68 


82 

20 

99106 

38 

76 

30 

97237 



82 

30 

99144 


76 

40 

97304 

67 


82 

40 

99182 

37 

76 

50 

97371 

66 


82 

50 

99219 

36 

77 

0 

97437 

65 


83 

0 

99255 

35 

77 

10 

97502 

64 


83 

10 

99290 

34 

77 

20 

97566 

63 


83 

20 

99324 

33 

77 

30 

97630 



83 

30 

99357 


77 

40 

97692 

62 


83 

40 

99389 

32 

77 

50 

97754 

61 


83 

50 

99421 

31 

78 

0 

97815 

60 


84 

0 

99452 

30 


38 



































BOOK I CH. 12 






















REVOLUTIONS 


THE SIDES AND ANGLES OF PLANE Chapter 13 

RECTILINEAR TRIANGLES 

[Book II, Chapter 2, according to Copernicus’ original plan] 

I 

If the angles of a triangle are given, the sides are given. 5 

I say, let there be a triangle ABC. Grcumscribe a circle around it, in accordance 
with Euclid, Book IV, Problem 5. Then the arcs AB, BC, and CA will likewise 
be given, according to the system in which 360° are equal to two right angles. 
But when the arcs are given, the sides of the triangle inscribed in the circle are 
also given as chords, in the Table set forth above, in units whereof the diameter 10 
is assumed to have 200,000. 


II 

But if an angle and two sides of a triangle are given, the remaining side and the 
other angles will also be known. 

For, the given sides are either equal or unequal, while the given angle is either 15 
right or acute or obtuse, and the given sides either include or do not include the 
given angle. 


IIA 

First, in the triangle ABC let the two given sides, AB and AC, which include 
the given angle A, be equal. Then the other angles, which are at the base BC, 20 
since they are equal, are also given as halves of the remainder when A is subtracted 
from two right angles. And if originally an angle at the base is given, its equal 
is thereupon given; and from these, the remainder of two right angles is given. 
But when the angles of a triangle are given, the sides are given, and the base BC 
is given by the Table, in units whereof AB or AC as radius has 100,000, or the 25 
diameter 200,000. 


IIB 

But if BAC is a right angle included by sides which are given, the same result 
will follow. 

It is quite obvious that the squares on AB and^C are equal to the square on 30 
the base BC. Therefore BCis given in length, and so the sides are given in relation 
to one another. But the segment of the circle which encloses the right triangle is 
a semicircle, whose diameter is the base BC. Therefore, in units whereof BC 
has 200,000, AB and AC will be given as sides opposite the remaining angles 
B and C. Their place in the Table will accordingly make them known in degrees, as 
whereof 180 are equal to two right angles. The same result will follow if BC is 
given with either of the two sides which include the right angle. This is now quite 
obvious, in my judgement. 


IIC 

Now let the given angle ABC be acute, and let it also be included by the given « 
sides AB and BC. From the point A drop a perpendicular to BC, extended if 


40 



BOOK I CH. 13 


necessary, according as the perpendicular falls inside or outside the triangle. Let 
the perpendicular be AD. By means of it two right triangles ABD and ADC are 
established. In ABD the angles are given, because D is a right angle, and B is 
given by hypothesis. Therefore AD and BD, as sides opposite the angles A and 
5 B } are given by the Table in units whereof AB, as the diameter of a circle, has 
200,000. And on the same scale on which AB was given in length, AD and BD B 
are given in similar units, and so also is CD, by which BC exceeds BD. In the 
right triangle ADC, therefore, the sides AD and CD being given, the required 
side AC and the angle ACD are likewise given by the preceding proof. 

io IID 

The result will not be different if the angle B is obtuse. For from the point A, 
a perpendicular AD, dropped on the straight line BC extended, makes a triangle 
ABD, whose angles are given. For, ABD is given as the supplementary angle of 
ABC, and D is a right angle. Therefore BD and AD are given in units whereof AB 
is is 200,000. And since BA and BC have a given ratio to each other, therefore BC 
is given also in the same units as BD, and so is the whole of CBD. Likewise in the 
right triangle ADC, therefore, since the two sides AD and CD are given, the re¬ 
quired AC also is given, as well as the angle BAC, with the remainder ACB, 
which were required. 

20 HE 

Now let either one of the given sides be opposite the given angle B. Let [this 
opposite side] be AC and [the other given side] AB. Then AC is given by the Table 
in units whereof the diameter of the circle circumscribed around the triangle 
ABC has 200,000. Moreover, in accordance with the given ratio of AC to AB, 

25 AB is given in similar units. And by the Table the angle at ACB is given, together q 
with the remaining angle BAC. Through the latter, the chord CB also is given. 
When this ratio is given, [the length of the sides] is given in any units whatsoever. 




Ill 

If all the sides of a triangle are given, the angles are given. 

30 In the case of the equilateral triangle, the fact that each of its angles is one- 
third of two right angles is too well known to be mentioned. 

Also in the case of the isosceles triangle the situation is clear. For, the equal 
sides are to the third side as halves of the diameter are to the chord subtending 
the arc. Through the arc, the angle included by the equal sides is given by the 
35 Table in units whereof a central angle of 360° is equal to four right angles. Then 
the other angles, which are at the base, are also given as halves [of the remainder 
when the angle included by the equal sides is subtracted] from two right an¬ 
gles. 

It therefore now remains to give the proof for scalene triangles too. These 
40 will similarly be divided into right triangles. Then let ABC be a scalene triangle 
of given sides. On the longest side, for instance, BC, drop the perpendicular AD. 
But the square of AB, which is opposite an acute angle, as we are told by Euclid, 
II, 13, is less than the squares on the other two sides, the difference being twice 
the product BCxCD. For, C must be an acute angle; otherwise AB would be. 



41 



REVOLUTIONS 



contrary to the hypothesis, the longest side, as may be inferred from Euclid, 1,17, 
and the next two theorems. Therefore BD and DC are given; and in a situation 
to which we have already frequently returned, .<4 BZ) and ADC will be right triangles 
of given sides and angles. From these, the required angles of triangle ABC are 
also known. 5 

Alternatively, the next to the last theorem in Euclid, III, will demonstrate 
the same result, perhaps more conveniently. Let the shortest side be BC. With C as 
center, and with BC as radius, let us describe a circle which will intersect both of 
the remaining sides or either one of them. 

First let it intersect both, AB at the point E, and AC at D. Also extend the 10 
line ADC to the point F in order to complete the diameter DCF. From this con¬ 
struction it is clear, in accordance with that Euclidean theorem, that the product 
FA xAD is equal to the product BA xAE, since both products are equal to the 
square of the line drawn tangent to the circle from A. But the whole of AF is 
given, since all of its segments are given. CF and CD, as radii, are of course equal is 
to BC, and AD is the excess of CA over CD. Therefore the product BA xAE is 
also given. So is AE in length, together with the remainder BE, the chord subtend¬ 
ing the arc BE. By joining EC, we shall have BCE as an isosceles triangle of given 
sides. Therefore angle EBC is given. Hence in triangle/lBC the remaining angles 
C and A will also be known from what precedes. 20 

Now do not let the circle intersect AB, as in the second figure, where AB 
meets the curve of the circumference. Nevertheless BE will be given. Moreover, 
in the isosceles triangle BCE the angle CBE is given, and so also is its supplement 
ABC. By exactly the same process of reasoning as before, the remaining angles 
are given. 25 

What has been said, containing as it does a considerable part of surveying, 
may suffice for rectilinear triangles. Now let us turn to spherical triangles. 

SPHERICAL TRIANGLES Chapter 14 


[Book II, Chapter 3, according to Copernicus’ original plan] 

I here regard a convex triangle as the figure which is enclosed on a spherical 30 
surface by three arcs of great circles. But the size of an angle, as well as the differ¬ 
ence between angles, [is measured] on an arc of the great circle which is drawn with 
the [angle’s] point of intersection as its pole. This arc is intercepted by the 
quadrants enclosing the angle. For, the arc so intercepted is to the whole circum¬ 
ference as the angle at the intersection is to four right angles. These, as I said, 35 
contain 360 equal degrees. 

I 

If there are three arcs of great circles of a sphere, any two of which, when 
joined together, are longer than the third, clearly a spherical triangle can be formed 
from them. 40 

For, this statement about arcs is proved for angles by Euclid, XI, 23. Since the 
ratio of angles and arcs is the same, and great circles pass through the center of the 
sphere, evidently the three sectors of the circles, of which these are arcs, form 
a solid angle at the center of the sphere. The theorem is therefore obvious. 


42 



BOOK X CH. 14 


II 

Any arc of a triangle must be less than a semicircle. 

For, a semicircle does not form an angle at the center, but proceeds through 
it in a straight line. On the other hand, the two remaining angles, to which arcs 
5 belong, cannot enclose a solid angle at the center, and consequently not a spherical 
triangle. This was the reason, in my opinion, why Ptolemy, in expounding this 
class of triangles, especially in connection with the shape of the spherical sector, 
stipulates that the assumed arcs should not be greater than a semicircle 
[<Syntaxis , I, 13]. 

io III 

In right spherical triangles, the ratio of the chord subtending twice the side 
opposite the right angle to the chord subtending twice either one of the sides 
including the right angle is equal to the ratio of the diameter of the sphere to the 
chord subtending twice the angle included, on a great circle of the sphere, between 
15 the remaining side and the hypotenuse. 

For let there be a spherical triangle ABC, in which C is a right angle. I say ^ 
that the ratio of the chord subtending twice AB to the chord subtending twice 
BC is equal to the ratio of the diameter of the sphere to the chord subtending 
twice the angle BAC on a great circle. 

20 WithvI as pole, draw DE as the arc of a great circle. Complete the quadrants 
ABD and ACE. From F, the center of the sphere, draw the intersections of the 
circles: FA, of ABD and ACE; FE, of ACE and DE; FD, of ABD and DE; and 
also FC, of the circles AC and BC. Then draw BG perpendicular to FA, BI to 
FC, and DK to FE. Join GI. 

28 If a circle intersects another circle while passing through its poles, it intersects 
it at right angles. Therefore AED is a right angle. So is ACB by hypothesis. Hence 
both planes EDF and BCF are perpendicular to AEF. In this last-mentioned I 
plane at point K draw a straight line perpendicular to the intersection FKE. 
Then this perpendicular will form with KD another right angle, in accordance 
30 with the definition of planes perpendicular to each other. Consequently KD is 
perpendicular also to AEF, according to Euclid, XI, 4. In the same way BI is 
drawn perpendicular to the same plane, and therefore DK and BI are parallel 
to each other, according to Euclid, XI, 6. Likewise GB is parallel to FD, because 
FGB and GFD are right angles. According to Euclid’s Elements, XI, 10, angle 
35 FDK will be equal to GBI. But FKD is a right angle, and so is GIB according 
to the definition of a perpendicular line. The sides of similar triangles being pro¬ 
portional, DF is to BG as DK is to BI. But BI is half of the chord subtending 
twice the arc CB, since BI is perpendicular to the radius CF. In the same way 
BG is half of the chord subtending twice the side BA; DK is half of the chord 
40 subtending twice DE, or twice angle A; and DF is half of the diameter of the sphere. 
Clearly, therefore, the ratio of the chord subtending twice AB to the chord sub¬ 
tending twice BC is equal to the ratio of the diameter to the chord subtending 
twice the angle A, or twice the intercepted arc DE. The demonstration of this 
Theorem will prove to be useful. 

45 IV 

In any triangle having a right angle, if another angle and any side are given, 
the remaining angle and the remaining sides will also be given. 


43 



REVOLUTIONS 


For let the triangle ABC have angle A right, and either of the other angles, 
for instance, B, also given. But with regard to the given side, I make a threefold 
division. For either it is adjacent to the given angles, like AB; or only to the right 
angle, like AC; or it is opposite the right angle, like BC. 

Then first let AB be the given side. With C as pole, draw DE as the arc of 5 
a great circle. Complete the quadrants CAD and CBE. Produce AB and DE until 
they intersect at point F. Then F in turn will be the pole of CAD, since A and D 
are right angles. If great circles on a sphere intersect each other at right angles, 
they bisect each other, and pass through each other’s poles. Therefore ABF and 
DEF are quadrants. Since AB is given, BF, the remainder of the quadrant, is also 10 
given, and angle EBF is equal to its vertical angle ABC, which was given. But, 
according to the preceding Theorem, the ratio of the chord subtending twice BF 
to the chord subtending twice EF is equal to the ratio of the diameter of the sphere 
to the chord subtending twice the angle EBF. But three of these are given: the 
diameter of the sphere, twice BF, and twice the angle EBF, or their halves. There- 15 
fore, according to Euclid, VI, 15, half of the chord subtending twice EF is also 
given. By the Table, the arc EF is given. So is DE, the remainder of the quadrant, 
or the required angle C. 

In the same way, in turn, for the chords subtending twice the arcs, DE is 
to AB as EBC is to CB. But three are already given: DE, AB, and CBE as a quad- 20 
rant. Therefore the fourth, the chord subtending twice CB, is also given, and so 
is the required side CB. And for the chords subtending twice the arcs, CB is to 
CA as BF is to EF. For, both of these ratios are equal to the ratio of the diameter 
of the sphere to the chord subtending twice the angle CBA; and ratios equal 
to the same ratio are equal to each other. Therefore, since the three members BF, 2 s 
EF, and CB are given, the fourth member CA is given, and CA is the third side 
of the triangle ABC. 

Now, let AC be the side assumed as given, and let it be required to find sides 
AB and BC as well as the remaining angle C. Again, if we invert the argument, 
the ratio of the chord subtending twice CA to the chord subtending twice CB 30 
will be equal to the ratio of the chord subtending twice the angle ABC to the diam¬ 
eter. From this, the side CB is given, as well as AD and BE as remainders of 
the quadrants. Thus we shall again have the ratio of the chord subtending twice 
AD to the chord subtending twice BE equal to the ratio of the chord subtending 
twice ABF, and that is the diameter, to the chord subtending twice BF. Therefore as 
the arc BF is given, and its remainder is the side AB. By a process of reasoning 
similar to the preceding, from the chords subtending twice BC, AB, and FBE, 
the chord subtending twice DE, or the remaining angle C, is given. 

Furthermore, if BC is assumed, once more, as before, AC as well as the re¬ 
mainders AD and BE will be given. From them, through the subtending straight 40 
lines and the diameter, as has often been explained, the arc BF and the remaining 
side AB are given. Then, according to the previous Theorem, through BC, AB, 
and CBE, as given, the arc ED is obtained, that is to say, the remaining angle C, 
which we were looking for. 

And thus once more in triangle ABC, two angles A and B being given, of 45 
which A is a right angle, and one of the three sides being given, the third angle 
is given together with the two re maining sides. Q.E.D. 


44 



BOOK I CH. 14 


V 

If the angles of a triangle are given, one of them being a right angle, the sides 
are given. 

Keep the previous diagram. In it, because angle C is given, arc DE is given, 
5 and so is EF, as the remainder of the quadrant. BEF is a right angle, because 
BE is drawn from the pole of DEF. EBF is the vertical angle of a given angle. 
Therefore triangle BEF, having a right angle E, and another given angle B, 
and a given side EF, has its sides and angles given, in accordance with the pre¬ 
ceding Theorem. Therefore BF is given, and so is AB, the remainder of the 
10 quadrant. Likewise in the triangle ABC, the remaining sides AC and BC are shown, 
by what precedes, to be given. 

VI 

If on the same sphere two triangles each have a right angle and another 
corresponding angle and a corresponding side equal, whether that side be adjacent 
is to the equal angles or opposite either of the equal angles, the remaining cor¬ 
responding sides will also be equal, and so will the remaining angle. 

Let there be a hemisphere ABC. On it take two triangles ABD and CEF. Let A 
and C be right angles. Furthermore let angle ADB be equal to CEF, and let one 
side be equal to one side. First let the equal side be adjacent to the equal angles, 
20 that is, let AD = CE. I say that also side AB is equal to side CF, BD to EF, 
and the remaining angle ABD to the remaining angle CFE. For with their poles 
in B and F, draw GHI and IKL as quadrants of great circles. Complete ADI 
and CEI. These must intersect each other at the hemisphere’s pole in the point I, 
since A and C are right angles, and GHI and CEI are drawn through the poles of 
25 the circle ABC. Therefore, since AD and CE are assumed to be equal sides, the 
remaining arcs DI and IE will be equal, and so will IDH and IEK as vertical 
angles of angles assumed equal. H and K are right angles. Ratios equal to the same 
ratio are equal to each other. The ratio of the chord subtending twice ID to the 
chord subtending twice HI will be equal to the ratio of the chord subtending twice 
30 El to the chord subtending twice IK. For, each of these ratios, according to 
Theorem III, above, is equal to the ratio of the diameter of the sphere to the chord 
subtending twice the angle IDH, or the equal chord subtending twice IEK. The 
chord subtending twice the arc DI is equal to the chord subtending twice IE. 
Hence, according to Euclid’s Elements, V, 14, also in the case of twice IK and HI 
35 the chords will be equal. In equal circles, equal straight lines cut off equal arcs, 
and fractions multiplied by the same factor preserve the same ratio. Therefore, 
as simple arcs IH and IK will be equal. So will GH and KL, the remainders of 
the quadrants. Hence angles B and F are clearly equal. Therefore the ratios of 
the chord subtending twice AD to the chord subtending twice BD, and of the 
40 chord subtending twice CE to the chord subtending twice BD are equal to the 
ratio of the chord subtending twice EC to the chord subtending twice EF. For, 
both of these ratios are equal to the ratio of the chord subtending twice HG, 
or its equal KL, to the chord subtending twice BDH, that is, the diameter, 
according to the converse of Theorem III. AD is equal to CE. Therefore, according 
45 to Euclid’s Elements, V, 14, BD is equal to EF, on account of the straight lines 
subtending twice these arcs. 

With BD and EF equal, I shall prove in the same way that the remaining sides 


45 



REVOLUTIONS 


and angles are equal. And if AB and CF are in turn assumed to be the equal sides, 
the same conclusions will follow from the equality of the ratios. 

VII 

The same conclusion will now be proved also if there is no right angle, provided 
that the side adjacent to the equal angles is equal to the corresponding side. 5 

Thus in the two triangles ABD and CEF, let any two angles B and D be equal 
to the two corresponding angles E and F. Also let side BD, which is adjacent 
to the equal angles, be equal to side EF. I say that again the triangles have 
their sides and angles equal. 

For, once more, with B and F as poles, draw GH and KL as arcs of great 10 
circles. Let AB and GH, when extended, intersect each other at N, while EC 
and LK, when similarly extended, intersect each other at M. Then the two triangles 
HDN and EKM have angles HDN and KEM equal, as vertical angles of angles 
assumed to be equal. H and K are right angles because they pass through the poles. 
Moreover, sides DH and EK are equal. Therefore the triangles have their angles I5 
and sides equal, in accordance with the preceding Theorem. 

And once again, GH and KL are equal arcs, since angles B and F were assumed 
to be equal. Therefore the whole of GHN is equal to the whole of MKL, in accord¬ 
ance with the axiom about equals added to equals. Consequently here too the 
two triangles AGN and MCL have one side GN equal to one side ML, angle 20 
ANG equal to CML, and right angles G and L. For this reason these triangles 
also will have their sides and angles equal. When equals are subtracted from equals, 
the remainders will be equal, AD to CE, AB to CF, and angle BAD to the remaining 
angle ECF. Q.E.D. 

VIII 25 

Furthermore, if two triangles have two sides equal to the two corresponding 
sides, as well as an angle equal to an angle, whether it be the angle included by the 
equal sides, or an angle at the base, the base will also be equal to the base, and the 
remaining angles to the remaining angles. 

As in the preceding diagram, let side AB be equal to side CF, and AD to CE. 30 
First, let angle A, included by the equal sides, be equal to angle C. I say that also 
the base BD is equal to the base EF, angle B to F, and the remaining angle BDA 
to the remaining angle CEF. For we shall have two triangles, AGN and CLM, 
in which G and L are right angles; GAN ana MCL are equal as supplementary 
angles of BAD and ECF, which are equal; and GA is equal to LC. Therefore 35 
the triangles have their corresponding angles and sides equal. Hence, AD and CE 
being equal, the remainders DN and ME are also equal. But it has already been 
shown that angle DNH is equal to angle EMK. H and K being right angles, the 
two triangles DHN and EMK also will have their corresponding angles and sides 
equal. Hence, as remainders BD will also be equal to EF. and GH to KL. Their 40 
angles B and F are equal, and so are the remaining angles ADB and FEC. 

But instead of the sides AD and EC, let the bases BD and EF be assumed to 
be equal. With these bases opposite equal angles, but everything else remaining 
as before, the proof will proceed in the same way. For, GAN and MCL are equal, 
as supplements of equal angles. G and L are right angles. AG is equal to CL. Hence, 45 
in the same way as before, we shall have two triangles AGN and MCL with their 


46 



BOOK X CH. 14 


corresponding angles and sides equal. The same is true also for their sub-triangles, 
DHN and MEK. For, H and K are right angles; DNH is equal to KME; DH 
and EK are equal sides, as remainders of quadrants. From these equalities the same 
conclusions follow as those which I enunciated. 

5 IX 

On a sphere too, the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are equal to each 
other. 

Let ABC be a triangle with AB and AC, two of its sides, equal. I say that ABC 
and ACB , the angles at the base, are also equal. From the vertex A, draw a great 

10 circle intersecting the base at right angles, that is, passing through the poles 
[of the base]. Let the great circle be AD. In the two triangles ABD and ADC, 
then, side BA is equal to side AC; AD is common to both triangles; and the angles 
at D are right angles. It is therefore clear that, in accordance with the preceding 
Theorem, angles ABC and ACB are equal. Q.E.D. 

is COROLLARY 

Accordingly it follows that the arc drawn through the vertex of an isosceles 
triangle at right angles to the base will bisect the base and, at the same time, the 
angle included by the equal sides, and conversely, as is clear from this Theorem 
and the preceding one. 

20 X 

Any two triangles having their corresponding sides equal will also have their 
corresponding angles equal, each to each. 

For in both cases the three segments of great circles form pyramids, whose 
vertices are at the center of the sphere. But their bases are the plane triangles 

25 bounded by the straight lines subtending the arcs of the convex triangles. These 
pyramids are similar and equal, according to the definition of equal and similar 
solid figures. When two figures are similar, however, the rule is that, taken in any 
order, their corresponding angles are equal. Therefore these triangles will have 
their corresponding angles equal. In particular, those who define similar figures 

30 more generally want them to be whatever figures have similar configurations in 
which their corresponding angles are equal. From these considerations it is clear, 
I think, that on a sphere triangles having their corresponding sides equal are 
similar, as in the case of plane triangles. 

XI 

35 Every triangle having two sides and an angle given becomes a triangle of given 
angles and sides. 

For if the given sides are equal, the angles at the base will be equal. Drawing 
an arc from the vertex at right angles to the base will readily make clear what is 
required, in accordance with the Corollary of Theorem IX. 

40 But the given sides may be unequal, as in triangle ABC. Let its angle A be 
given, together with two sides. These either include or do not include the given 
angle. 

First, let it be included by the given sides, AB and AC. With C as pole, draw 
DEF as the arc of a great circle. Complete the quadrants CAD and CBE. Produce 


47 



REVOLUTIONS 


AB to intersect DE at point F. Thus also in the triangle ABF, the side .< 4.0 is given 
as the remainder when AC is subtracted from the quadrant. Moreover, angle 
BAD is given as the remainder when CAB is subtracted from two right angles. 
For, the ratio of the angles and their sizes are the same as those which result 
from the intersection of straight lines and planes. O is a right angle. Therefore, in 6 
accordance with Theorem IV, ADF will be a triangle of given angles and sides. 
Again, in triangle BEF, angle F has been found; E is right, because its sides 
pass through the poles; and side BF is also known as the quantity by which the 
whole of ABF exceeds AB. In accordance with the same theorem, therefore, 
BEF also will be a triangle of given angles and sides. Hence, through BE, BC 10 
is given as the remainder of the quadrant and a required side. Through EF, 
the remainder of the whole of DEF is given as DE, and this is the angle C. Through 
the angle EBF, its vertical angle ABC is given, and this was required. 

But if, instead of AB, CB, the side opposite the given angle, is assumed, the 
same result will follow. For, AD and BE are given as the remainders of the quad- 15 
rants. By the same argument the two triangles ADF and BEF, as before, have 
their angles and sides given. From them, the sides and angles of the subject triangle 
ABC are given, as was proposed. 

XII 

Furthermore, if any two angles and a side are given, the same results will 20 
follow. 

For, keeping the construction in the preceding diagram, in triangle ABC 
let the two angles ACB and BAC be given, as well as the side AC, which is adjacent 
to both angles. If, in addition, either of the given angles were a right angle, 
everything else could be deduced by reasoning in accordance with Theorem IV, 25 
above. However, I want this to be a different case, in which neither of the given 
angles is a right angle. Then AD will be the remainder of the quadrant CAD; 
angle BAD is the remainder when BAC is subtracted from two right angles; 
and D is a right angle. Therefore the angles and sides of triangle AFD are given, 
in accordance with Theorem IV, above. But since angle C is given, the arc DE 30 
is given, and so is the remainder EF. BEF is a right angle, and F is an angle 
common to both triangles. In the same way, in accordance with Theorem IV, 
above, BE and FB are given, and from them the required remaining sides AB and 
BC will be known. 

On the other hand, one of the given angles may be opposite the given side. 35 
For example, if angle ABC is given instead of ACB, while everything else remains 
upchanged, the same proof as before will make known the whole of ADF as 
a triangle of given angles and sides. The same is true for the sub-triangle BEF. 
For, angle F is common to both; EBF is the vertical angle of a given angle; and 
£ is a right angle. Therefore, as is proved above, all its sides are also given. From 40 
them, finally, the same conclusions follow as those which I enunciated. For, all 
these properties are always interconnected by an invariant mutual relationship, 
as befits the form of a sphere. 

XIII 

Finally, if all the sides of a triangle are given, the angles are given. 46 

Let all the sides of triangle ABC be given. I say that all the angles also are 


48 



BOOK I CH. 14 


found. For, the triangle will have sides which are either equal or not equal. Then, 
first, let AB and AC be equal. Obviously, the halves of the chords subtending twice 
AB and AC will also be equal. Let these half-chords be BE and CE. They will 
intersect each other in the point E, because they are equidistant from the center 
5 of the sphere on DE, the intersection of their circles. This is clear from Euclid, 
III, Definition 4 , and its converse. But according to Euclid, III, 3 , DEB is a right 
angle in plane ABD, and so is DEC in plane ACD. Therefore BEC is the angle of 
inclination of those planes, according to Euclid, XI, Definition 4 . We shall find 
angle BEC in the following way. For, it will be subtended by the straight line 
10 BC. Then we shall have the rectilinear triangle BEC. Its sides will be given 
through their arcs, which are given. Also the angles of BEC will be given, and we 
shall have the required angle BEC, that is, the spherical angle BAC, and the 
remaining angles, through what precedes. 

But the triangle may be scalene, as in the second diagram. Obviously, the 
35 halves of the chords subtending twice the sides will not intersect one another. 
For let arc AC be greater than AB, and let CF be half of the chord subtending 
twice AC. Then CF will pass below. But if the arc is smaller, the half-chord will 
be higher, according as these lines happen to be nearer to or farther away from 
the center, in accordance with Euclid, III, 15 . Then let FG be drawn parallel to 
20 BE. Let FG intersect BD, the intersection of the circles, in the point G. Join 
CG. Clearly, then, EFG is a right angle, being of course equal to AEB, and EFC 
is also a right angle, since CF is half of the chord subtending twice AC. Then 
CFG will be the angle of intersection of the circles AB and AC. Therefore we 
obtain CFG also. For DF is to FG as DE is to EB, since DFG and DEB are similar 
25 triangles. Hence FG is given in the same units as those in which FC is also given. 
But the same ratio holds also for DG to DB. DG also will be given in units whereof 
DC is 100 , 000 . What is more, angle GDC is given through arc BC. Therefore, 
in accordance with Theorem II on Plane Triangles, side GC is given in the same 
units as the remaining sides of the plane triangle GFC. Consequently, in accordance 
30 with the last Theorem on Plane Triangles, we shall have angle GFC, that is, the 
required spherical angle BAC, and then we shall obtain the remaining angles, in 
accordance with Theorem XI on Spherical Triangles. 

XIV 




If a given arc of a circle is divided anywhere so that the sum of both segments 
35 is less than a semicircle, the ratio of half the chord subtending twice one segment 
to half the chord subtending twice the other segment being given, the arcs of 
the segments will also be given. 

For let arc ABC be given, about D as center. Let ABC be divided at random 
in the point B, yet in such a way that the segments are less than a semicircle. 
40 Let the ratio of half the chord subtending twice AB to half of the chord subtending 
twice BC be given in some unit of length. I say that the arcs AB and BC are also 
given. 

For, draw the straight line AC, which will be intersected by the diameter at 
the point E. Now from the end-points A and C, drop perpendiculars to the diam- 
45 eter. Let these perpendiculars be AF and CG, which must be halves of the chords 
subtending twice AB and BC. Then in the right triangles AEF and CEG, the verti¬ 
cal angles at E are equal. Therefore the triangles have their corresponding angles 



49 



REVOLUTIONS 


equal. Being similar triangles, they have their sides opposite the equal angles 
proportional: as AF is to CG, AE is to EC. Hence we shall have AE and EC in the 
same units as those in which AF or GC was given. From AE and EC, the whole 
of AEC will be given in the same units. But AEC, as the chord subtending the 
arc ABC, is given in those units in which the radius DEB is given. In the same 5 
units, AK, as half of AC, and the remainder EK, are also given. Join DA and 
DK, which will also be given in the same units as DB. For, DK is half of the 
chord subtending the segment remaining when ABC is subtracted from a semi¬ 
circle. This remaining segment is included within angle DAK. Therefore angle 
ADK is given as including half of the arc ABC. But in the triangle EDK, since 10 
two sides are given, and EKD is a right angle, EDK will also be given. Hence 
the whole angle EDA will be given. It includes the arc AB, from which the re¬ 
mainder CB will also be obtained. This is what we wanted to prove. 

XV 

If all the angles of a triangle are given, even though none of them is a right 15 
angle, all the sides are given. 

Let there be the triangle ABC, with all of its angles given, but none of them 
a right angle. I say that all of its sides are also given. For, from any of the angles, 
for instance A, through the poles of BC draw the arc AD. This will intersect BC 
at right angles. AD will fall inside the triangle, unless one of the angles B or C 20 
at the base is obtuse, and the other acute. Should this be the case, the perpendic¬ 
ular would have to be drawn from the obtuse angle to the base. Complete the 
quadrants BAF, CAG, and DAE. Draw the arcs EF and EG with their poles 
in B and C. Therefore F and G will also be right angles. Then in the right triangles, 
the ratio of half the chord subtending twice AE to half the chord subtend- 25 
ing twice EF will be equal to the ratio of half the diameter of the sphere 
to half the chord subtending double the angle EAF; similarly in triangle AEG, 
with its right angle at G, the ratio of half the chord subtending twice AE 
to half of the chord subtending twice EG is equal to the ratio of half the diameter 
of the sphere to half of the chord subtending double the angle EAG. Then since 30 
these ratios are equal, the ratio of half the chord subtending twice EF to half of 
the chord subtending twice EG will be equal to the ratio of half the chord subtend¬ 
ing double the angle EAF to half of the chord subtending double the angle EAG. 
FE and EG are given arcs, being the remainders when angles B and C are subtracted 
from right angles. From FE and EG, then, we shall obtain the ratio of angles 35 
EAF and EAG, that is, of their vertical angles, BAD and CAD. But the whole of 
BAC is given. Therefore, in accordance with the preceding Theorem, angles 
BAD and CAD will also be given. Then, in accordance with Theorem V, we shall 
obtain sides AB, BD, AC, CD, and the whole of BC. 

For the present let this digression suffice for triangles, so far as they are nec- 40 
essary for our purpose. If they had to be discussed more fully, a special volume 
would have been required. 


50 



Book Two 


INTRODUCTION 

I have given a general account of the earth’s three motions, by which I promised 
5 to explain all the phenomena of the heavenly bodies [I, 11 ]. I shall do so next, to 
the best of my ability, by analyzing and investigating them, one by one. I shall begin, 
however, with the most familiar revolution of all, the period of a day and night. 
This, as I said [ 1 , 4 ], is called nuchthemeron by the Greeks. I have taken it as belong¬ 
ing particularly and directly to the earth’s globe, since the month, year, and other 
io intervals of time bearing many names proceed from this rotation, as number does 
from unity, time being the measure of motion. Hence with regard to the inequality 
of days and flights, the rising and setting of the sun and of the degrees of the zodiac 
and its signs, and that sort of consequence of this rotation, I shall make some few 
remarks, especially because many have written about these topics quite fully, 
is yet in harmony and agreement with my views. It makes no difference that they 
base their explanations on a motionless earth and rotating universe, while I take 
the opposite position and accompany them to the same goal. For, mutually 
interrelated phenomena, it so happens, show a reversible agreement. Yet I shall 
omit nothing essential. But let nobody be surprised if I still refer simply to the 
20 rising and setting of the sun and stars, and similar phenomena. On the contrary, 
it will be recognized that I use the customary terminology, which,can be accepted 
by everybody. Yet I always bear in mind that 

For us who are borne by the earth, the sun and the moon pass by, 

And the stars return on their rounds, and again they drop out of sight. 

25 THE CIRCLES AND THEIR NAMES Chapter 1 

The equator, as I said [ 1 , 11 ], is the largest of the parallels of latitude described 
around the poles of the daily rotation of the earth’s globe. The ecliptic, on the 
other hand, is a circle passing through the middle of the signs of the zodiac, and 
below the ecliptic the center of the earth circles in an annual revolution. But the 
30 ecliptic meets the equator obliquely, in agreement with the inclination of the 
earth’s axis to the ecliptic. Hence, as a result of the earth’s daily rotation, on 
either side of the equator a circle is described tangent to the ecliptic as the 
outermost limit of its obliquity. These two circles are called the “tropics”, be¬ 
cause in them seem to occur the sun’s tropes or reversals in direction, that is to 
35 say, in winter and summer. Hence the northern one is usually called the “sum¬ 
mer solstice”, and the other one in the south, the “winter solstice”, as was explain¬ 
ed above in the general account of the earth’s revolutions [I, 11 ]. 

Next comes the “horizon”, as it is called, which the Romans term the 
“boundary”, since it separates the part of the universe visible to us from the 
40 part which is hidden. [All the bodies that rise] seem to rise at the horizon, [and] 


51 



REVOLUTIONS 


all the bodies that set [seem to set at the horizon]. It has its center on the surface 
of the earth, and its pole at our zenith. But the earth is incommensurable with 
the immensity of the heavens. Even the entire space intervening, according to my 
conception, between the sun and the moon cannot be classed with the vastness 
of the heavens. Hence the horizon seems to bisect the heavens like a circle passing 5 
through the center of the universe, as I showed earlier [ 1 , 6 ]. But the horizon meets 
the equator obliquely. Hence the horizon too is tangent, on either side of the equa¬ 
tor, to a pair of parallels of latitude: in the north, [the circle limiting the stars which 
are] always visible, and in the south, those which are always hidden. The former 
is called the “arctic”, the latter the “antarctic”, by Proclus and most of the 10 
Greeks. The arctic and antarctic circles become larger or smaller in proportion 
to the obliquity of the horizon or the altitude of the pole of the equator. 

There remains the meridian, which passes through the poles of the horizon 
and also through the poles of the equator. Therefore the meridian is perpendicular 
to both of these circles. When the sun reaches the meridian, it indicates noon 15 
and midnight. But these two circles, I mean the horizon and the meridian, which 
have their centers on the surface of the earth, depend absolutely on the motion 
of the earth and our sight, wherever it may be. For everywhere the eye acts as the 
center of the sphere of all the bodies visible in every direction around it. Therefore, 
as is clearly proved by Eratosthenes, Posidonius, and the other writers on cos- 20 
mography and the earth’s size, all the circles assumed on the earth are also the 
basis of their counterparts in the heavens and of similar circles. These too are 
circles having special names, while others may be designated in countless ways. 

THE OBLIQUITY OF THE ECLIPTIC, Chapter 2 

THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE TROPICS, 25 

AND THE METHOD OF DETERMINING 
THESE QUANTITIES 

The ecliptic, then, crosses obliquely between the tropics and the equator. 
Hence it is now necessary, I believe, to investigate the distance between the tropics 
and, in that connection, the size of the angle at which the equator and ecliptic 30 
intersect each other. This [information] must of course be perceived by the senses 
and with the aid of instruments by which this very valuable result is obtained. 
Hence make a square out of wood, or preferably out of some more rigid material, 
[such as] stone or metal, lest perhaps the wood, yielding to a shift in the air, be 
able to mislead the observer. Let a surface of the square be perfectly smooth, 35 
and long enough for the subdivisions which have to be made, so that it would be 
five or six feet. For in proportion to its size, and with one of the comers as center, 
a quadrant of a circle is drawn. It is divided into 90 equal degrees. These are 
subdivided in like manner into 60 minutes, or whatever subdivisions the degrees 
can accommodate. Then a precisely lathed cylindrical pin is attached to the center. 40 
Placed perpendicular to the surface, the pin protrudes a little, perhaps as much 
as a finger’s breadth or less. 

After this instrument has been constructed in this way, it is useful to trace 
the meridian on a floor laid in the horizontal plane and leveled as carefully as 
possible by means of a hydroscope or water level, lest it sag in any direction. 45 
Now on this floor draw a circle, and at its center erect a pointer. Observing where 


52 



BOOK II CH. 2-3 


its shadow falls on the circumference of the circle at any time before noon, we 
shall mark that point. We shall make a similar observation in the afternoon, and 
bisect the arc of the circle lying between the two points already marked. By this 
method a straight line drawn from the center through the point of bisection will 
s certainly indicate south and north for us without any error. 

Then on this line as its base, the instrument’s plane surface is erected and 
attached perpendicularly, with its center turned southward. A plumb line dropped 
from the center meets the meridian line at right angles. The result of this proce¬ 
dure is of course that the surface of the instrument contains the meridian. 

10 Thereafter, on the days of the summer and winter solstices, the sun’s shadow 
at noon must be observed as it is cast at the center by that pin or cylinder. Anything 
may be used on the aforesaid arc of the quadrant to fix the place of the shadow 
with greater certainty. We shall note the midpoint of the shadow as accurately 
as possible in degrees and minutes. For if we do this, the arc found marked off 
15 between the two shadows, summer and winter, will show us the distance between 
the tropics and the entire obliquity of the ecliptic. By taking half of this, we shall 
have the distance of the tropics from the equator, while the size of the angle of 
inclination of the equator to the ecliptic will become clear. 

Now this interval between the aforementioned limits, north and south, is 
ao determined by Ptolemy, in degrees whereof the circle is 360°, as 47° 42'40" 
[Syntaxisj I, 12]. He also finds that before his time the observations of Hipparchus 
and Eratosthenes were in agreement. This determination is equivalent to 11 
units, whereof the entire circle is 83. Half of this interval, which is 23° 5T 
20", established the distance of the tropics from the equator, in degrees where- 
25 of the circle is 360°, and the angle of intersection with the ecliptic. Therefore 
Ptolemy thought that this was constant, and would always remain so. But from 
that time these values are found to have decreased continuously down to our own 
time. For, certain of our contemporaries and I have now discovered that the 
distance between the tropics is not more than approximately 46° 58', and the 
30 angle of intersection not more than 23° 29'. Hence it is now quite clear that the 
obliquity of the ecliptic also is variable. I shall say more about this subject below 
[III, 10], where I shall also show by a quite probable conjecture that the obliq¬ 
uity never was more than 23° 52', and never will be less than 23° 28'. 

THE ARCS AND ANGLES OF THE Chapter 3 

35 INTERSECTIONS OF THE EQUATOR, ECLIPTIC, 

AND MERIDIAN ; THE DERIVATION OF THE 
DECLINATION AND RIGHT ASCENSION 
FROM THESE ARCS AND ANGLES, 

AND THE COMPUTATION OF THEM 

40 Just as I said [II, 1 ] that the parts of the universe rise and set at the horizon, so I 
[now] say that the heavens are bisected at the meridian. This also traverses both the 
ecliptic and the equator in a period of 24 hours. It divides them, by cutting off 
arcs starting from their vernal or autumnal intersection. It in turn is divided by 
their interception of an arc [of the meridian]. Since they are all great circles, they 
45 form a spherical triangle. This is a right triangle, because there is a right angle 
where the meridian crosses the equator, through whose poles [the meridian passes,] 


53 



REVOLUTIONS 


by definition. The arc of the meridian in this triangle, or an arc so intercepted on 
any circle passing through the poles of the equator, is called the “declination” 
of the segment of the ecliptic. But the corresponding arc of the equator, which 
rises together with its associated arc on the ecliptic, is called the “right ascen¬ 
sion”. s 

All of this is easily shown in a convex triangle. For, let ABCD be the circle, 
generally called the “colure”, which passes through the poles of both the equator 
and the ecliptic. Let half of the ecliptic be AEC; half of the equator, BED ; the 
vernal equinox, fj; the summer solstice, A\ and the winter solstice, C. Assume 
that F is the pole of the daily rotation, and that on the ecliptic EG is an arc of, 10 
say, 30 °. Through its end, draw the quadrant FGH. Then in the triangle EGH, 
obviously side EG is given as 30°. Angle GEH is also given; at its minimum, 
in degrees whereof 360° = 4 right angles, it will be 23° 28', in agreement with 
the minimum declination AB. GHE is a right angle. Therefore, in accord¬ 
ance with Theorem IV on Spherical Triangles, EGH will be a triangle of given is 
angles and sides. The ratio of the chord subtending twice EG to the chord sub¬ 
tending twice GH, as has of course been shown [Theorem III on Spherical 
Triangles], is equal to the ratio of the chord subtending twice AGE, or of 
the diameter of the sphere, to the chord subtending twice AB. Their half¬ 
chords are similarly related. Half of the chord subtending twice AGE is ao 
100,000 as a radius; in the same units, the halves of the chords subtending twice 
AB and EG are 39,822 and 50,000. If four numbers are proportional, the product 
of the means is equal to the product of the extremes. Hence we shall have half 
of the chord subtending twice the arc GH as 19,911 units. This half-chord in the 
Table gives the arc GH as 11 ° 29', the declination corresponding to the segment 25 
EG. Therefore in the triangle AFG too, sides FG and AG, as remainders of 
quadrants, are given as 78° 31' and 60°, and FAG is a right angle. In the same 
way, the chords subtending twice FG, AG, FGH, and BH, or their half-chords 
will be proportional. Now, since three of these are given, the fourth, BH, will 
also be given as 62° 6'. This is the right ascension as taken from the summer 30 
solstice, or from the vernal equinox it will be HE, of 27° 54'. Similarly from the 
given sides FG of 78° 3T, AF of 66° 32', and a quadrant, we shall have angle 
AGF of approximately 69°23 1 / 2 '• Its vertical angle HGE is equal. We shall 
follow this example in all the other cases too. 

However, we must not disregard the fact that, at the points where the ecliptic 35 
is tangent to the tropics, the meridian intersects the ecliptic at right angles, since 
at those times the meridian passes through the poles of the ecliptic, as I said. 
But at the equinoctial points the meridian makes an angle which is as much smaller 
than a right angle as the ecliptic deviates from a right angle [in intersecting with 
the equator], so that now [the angle between the meridian and the ecliptic] is 40 
66° 32'. It should also be noticed that equal arcs of the ecliptic, as measured from 
the equinoctial or solstitial points, are accompanied by equal angles and sides of 
the triangles. Thus let us draw ABC as an arc of the equator, and the ecliptic 
DBE, intersecting each other in B. Let this be an equinoctial point. Let us take 
FB and BG as equal arcs. Through K and H, the poles of the daily rotation, draw 45 
two quadrants, KFL and HGM. Then there will be two triangles, FLB and BMG. 
Their sides BF and BG are equal; at B there are vertical angles; and at L and M, 
right angles. Therefore, in accordance with Theorem VI on Spherical Triangles, 


54 



BOOK II CH. 3 


the sides and angles of these triangles are equal. Thus the declinations FL and MG, 
as well as the right ascensions LB and BM, are equal, and the remaining angle F is 
equal to the remaining angle G. 

In the same way, the situation will be clear when the equal arcs are measured 
* from a solstitial point. Thus let AB and BC be equal arcs to either side of B, 
where the tropic is tangent to [the ecliptic]. For, draw the quadrants DA and DC 
from D, the pole of the equator, [and join DB ]. In like manner there will be two 
triangles, ABD and DBC. Their bases AB and BC are equal; BD is a side common 
to both; and there are right angles at B. In accordance with Theorem VIII on 
10 Spherical Triangles, these triangles will be shown to have their sides and angles 
equal. Hence it becomes clear that when these angles and arcs are tabulated for 
a single quadrant on the ecliptic, they will fit the remaining quadrants of the 
entire circle. 

I shall adduce an example of these relationships in the following description 
15 of the Tables. In the first column will be entered the degrees of the ecliptic; in the 
next place, the declinations corresponding to those degrees; and in the third 
place, the minutes by which the declinations occurring at the maximum obliquity 
of the ecliptic differ from, and exceed, these partial declinations; the greatest of 
these differences is 24'. I shall proceed in the same way in the Tables of [Right 
20 Ascensions and Meridian] Angles. For when the obliquity of the ecliptic varies, 
everything which accompanies it must vary. But in right ascension the variation is 
found to be extremely small, since it does not exceed 1 / 10 of a “time”, and in the 
course of an hour amounts to only V 150 [thereof]. For, the ancients use the term 
“times” for the degrees of the equator which rise together with the degrees of the 
25 ecliptic. Both of these circles have 360units,as I have often said [e. g.,1,12]. In order 
to distinguish between them, however, many have called the ecliptic’s units “de¬ 
grees”, but the equator’s “times”, a nomenclature which I too will follow hereafter. 
[As I was saying] although this variation is so tiny that it can properly be neglected, 
I did not mind adding it too. From these variations, then, the same results will 
so be clear in any other obliquity of the ecliptic if, in proportion to the excess of 
the ecliptic’s maximum obliquity over the minimum, to each entry the correspond¬ 
ing fractions are applied. Thus, for example, with the obliquity at 23° 34', if I wish 
to know how great a declination belongs to 30° of the ecliptic measured from the 
equinox, in the Table I find 11° 29', and under the differences IT, which would 
35 be added as a block when the obliquity of the ecliptic is at its maximum. This 
was, as I said, 23° 52'. But in the present instance it is assumed to be 23° 34', 
which is greater than the minimum by 6'. These 6' are one-fourth of the 24' by 
which the maximum obliquity exceeds [the minimum]. The fraction of 11' in 
a similar ratio is about 3'. When I add these 3' to 11° 29', I shall have 11° 32' as 
40 the declination at that time of 30° of the ecliptic as measured from the equinoctial 
point. In [meridian] angles and right ascensions we may proceed in the same 
way, except that in the latter case we must always add the differences, and in the 
former case always subtract them, in order to have everything come out more 
accurate in relation to time. 


55 



REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF DECLINATIONS [OF THE DEGREES OF THE ECLIPTIC] 



















































BOOK II CH. 3 















































REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF MERIDIAN ANGLES 

E- 



Dif- 


E- 



Dif- 


1 E " 

1 


Dif- 

clip- 

Angle 

fer- 


clip- 

| Angle 

fer- 


clip- 

Angle 

fer- 

tic 



ence 


tic 



ence 


tic 



ence 

De- 

De- 

Min- 

Min- 


De- 

De- 

Min- 

Min- 


De- 

De- 

Min- 

Min- 

gree 

gree 

ute 

ute 


gree 

gree 

ute 

ute 


gree 

gree 

ute 

ute 

1 

66 

32 

24 


31 

69 

35 

21 


61 

78 

7 

12 

2 

66 

33 

24 


32 

69 

48 

21 


62 

78 

29 

12 

3 

66 

34 

24 


33 

70 

0 

20 


63 

78 

51 

11 

4 

66 

35 

24 


34 

70 

13 

20 


64 

79 

14 

11 

5 

66 

37 

24 


35 

70 

26 

20 


65 

79 

36 

11 

6 

66 

39 

24 


36 

70 

39 

20 


66 

79 

59 

10 

7 

66 

42 

24 


37 

70 

53 

20 


67 

80 

22 

10 

8 

66 

44 

24 


38 

71 

7 

19 


68 

80 

45 

10 

9 

66 

47 

24 


39 

71 

22 

19 


69 

81 

9 

9 

10 

66 

51 

24 


40 

71 

36 

19 


70 

81 

33 

9 

11 

66 

55 

24 


41 

71 

52 

19 


71 

81 

58 

8 

12 

66 

59 

24 


42 

72 

8 

18 


72 

82 

22 

8 

13 

67 

4 

23 


43 

72 

24 

18 


73 

82 

46 

7 

14 

67 

10 

23 


44 

72 

39 

18 


74 

83 

11 

7 

15 

67 

15 

23 


45 

72 

55 

17 


75 

83 

35 

6 

16 

67 

21 

23 


46 

73 

11 

17 


76 

84 

0 

6 

17 

67 

27 

23 


47 

73 

28 

17 


77 

84 

25 

6 

18 

67 

34 

23 


48 

73 

47 

17 


78 

84 

50 

5 

19 

67 

41 

23 


49 

74 

6 

16 


79 

85 

15 

5 

20 

67 

49 

23 


50 

74 

24 

16 


80 

85 

40 

4 

21 

67 

56 

23 


51 

74 

42 

16 


81 

86 

5 

4 

22 

68 

4 

22 


52 

75 

1 

15 


82 

86 

30 

3 

23 

68 

13 

22 


53 

75 

21 

15 


83 

86 

55 

3 

24 

68 

22 

22 


54 

75 

40 

15 


84 

87 

19 

3 

25 

68 

32 

22 


55 

76 

1 

14 


85 

87 

53 

2 

26 

68 

41 

22 


56 

76 

21 

14 


86 

88 

17 

2 

27 

68 

51 

22 


57 

76 

42 

14 


87 

88 

41 

1 

28 

69 

2 

21 


58 

77 

3 

13 


88 

89 

6 

1 

29 

69 

13 

21 


59 

77 

24 

13 


89 

89 

33 

0 

30 

69 

24 

21 


60 

77 

45 

13 


90 

90 

0 

0 


58 

















BOOK II CH. 4-5 


FOR EVERY HEAVENLY BODY SITUATED Chapter 4 

OUTSIDE THE ECLIPTIC, PROVIDED THAT 
THE BODY’S LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE ARE KNOWN, 
THE METHOD OF DETERMINING ITS DECLINATION, 

3 ITS RIGHT ASCENSION, AND THE DEGREE OF THE 
ECLIPTIC WITH WHICH IT REACHES 
MID-HEAVEN 

The foregoing explanations concerned the ecliptic, equator, [meridian], 
and their intersections. In connection with the daily rotation, however, it is im- 
io portant to know not only those appearances in the ecliptic which reveal the causes 
of the phenomena of the sun alone. It is important to know also that a similar 
procedure will show the declination from the equator and the right ascension 
of those fixed stars and planets which are outside the ecliptic, provided, however, 
that their longitude and latitude are given, 
is Accordingly, draw the circle ABCD through the poles of the equator and 
ecliptic. Let AEC be a semicircle of the equator with its pole at F, and BED 
a semicircle of the ecliptic with its pole at G, and its intersection with the equator 
at point E. Now from the pole G, draw the arc GHKL through a star. Let the place 
of the star be given as point H, through which let the quadrant FHMN be drawn 
20 from the pole of the daily rotation. Clearly, then, the star at H crosses the meridian 
together with the two points M and N. The arc HMN is the star’s declination 
from the equator, and EN is the star’s right ascension on the sphere. These are 
the coordinates which we are looking for. 

Now in triangle KEL, side KE and angle KEL are given, and EKL is a right 
25 angle. Therefore, in accordance with Theorem IV on Spherical Triangles, sides 
KL and EL as well as the remaining angle KLE are given. Therefore the whole 
arc HKL is given. Consequently in triangle HLN, angle HLN is given, LNH is 
a right angle, and side HL is given. Hence, in accordance with the same Theorem 
IV on Spherical Triangles, the remaining sides HN, the star’s declination, and LN 
30 are given. [When LN is subtracted from EL], the remainder is NE, the right 
ascension, the arc through which the sphere turns from the equinox to the star. 

Alternatively, from the foregoing relationships you may take arc KE of the 
ecliptic as the right ascension of LE. Then LE in turn will be given by the Table 
of Right Ascensions. LK will be given as the declination corresponding to LE. 
36 Angle KLE will be given by the Table of Meridian Angles. From these quantities, 
the rest will be determined, as has already been shown. Then, through the right 
ascension EN, we obtain EM as the degree of the ecliptic at which the star reaches 
mid-heaven together with the point M. 

THE INTERSECTIONS OF THE HORIZON Chapter 5 

40 In the right sphere the horizon is a different circle from the horizon in the 
oblique sphere. For in the right sphere that circle is called the horizon to which 
the equator is perpendicular, or which passes through the poles of the equator. 
But in the oblique sphere the equator is inclined to the circle which we call the 
horizon. Therefore at the horizon in the right sphere all bodies rise and set, and 
45 the days are always equal to the nights. For, the horizon bisects all the parallels 


59 



REVOLUTIONS 


of latitude described by the daily rotation; it passes through their poles, of course, 
and under those circumstances the phenomena occur which I have already 
explained with regard to the meridian [II, 1,3]. But in this instance we regard 
the day as extending from sunrise to sunset, and not in some way from daylight 
to darkness, as it is commonly understood, that is, from dawn to the first artificial 5 
light. But I shall say more about this subject in connection with the rising and 
setting of the zodiacal signs [II, 13]. 

On the other hand, where the earth’s axis is perpendicular to the horizon, 
nothing rises and sets. On the contrary, everything revolves in a circle, perpetually 
visible or hidden. The exception is what is produced by another motion, such as 10 
the annual revolution around the sun. As a result of this it follows that under 
those conditions day lasts continuously for a period of six months, and night for 
the rest of the time. Nor is there any other difference than that between winter 
and summer, since in that situation the equator coincides with the horizon. 

In the oblique sphere, however, certain bcJdies rise and set, while certain is 
others are always visible or hidden. Meanwhile the days and nights become 
unequal. Under these circumstances the horizon, being oblique, is tangent to 
two parallels of latitude, according to the amount of its inclination. Of these 
two parallels, the one toward the visible pole is the boundary of the bodies which 
are perpetually visible; and the opposite parallel, the one toward the hidden pole, 20 
is the boundary of the bodies which are perpetually hidden. Extending throughout 
the entire latitude between these limits, therefore, the horizon divides all the 
intervening parallels of latitude into unequal arcs. The equator is an exception, 
since it is the greatest of the parallels of latitude, and great circles bisect each 
other. In the upper hemisphere, then, the horizon obliquely cuts off from the 25 
parallels of latitude greater arcs toward the visible pole than toward the southern 
and hidden pole. The converse is true in the hidden hemisphere. The apparent 
daily motion of the sun in these arcs produces the inequality of the days and 
nights. 

THE DIFFERENCES IN NOON SHADOWS Chapter 6 30 

In noon shadows too there are differences, on account of which some people 
are called periscian, others amphiscian, and still others heteroscian. Now the 
periscians are the people whom we may label “circumumbratile”, since they 
receive the sun’s shadow in all directions. And they are the people whose zenith, 
or pole of the horizon, is at a distance from the earth’s pole which is smaller, 35 
or not greater, than the distance of a tropic from the equator. For in those regions 
the parallels of latitude to which the horizon is tangent are the boundaries of the 
perpetually visible or hidden stars, and are greater than the tropics, or equal to 
them. And therefore in the summer time the sun, high up among the perpetually 
visible stars, in that season casts the shadows of the sundials in all directions. But 40 
where the horizon is tangent to the tropics, these themselves become the boundaries 
of the perpetually visible and perpetually hidden stars. Therefore at the time of 
the solstice the sun is seen to graze the earth at midnight. At that moment the entire 
ecliptic coincides with the horizon, six zodiacal signs rise swiftly and simulta¬ 
neously, the opposite signs in equal number set at the same time, and the pole 45 
of the ecliptic coincides with the pole of the horizon. 


60 



BOOK II CH. 6 


The amphiscians, whose noon shadows fall on both sides, are the people who 
live between the two tropics, in the region which the ancients call the middle zone. 
Throughout that whole area the ecliptic passes directly overhead twice [daily], as 
is demonstrated in Theorem II of Euclid’s Phenomena. Hence in the same area 
5 the sundials’ shadows vanish twice, and as the sun moves to either side, the sundials 
cast their shadows sometimes to the south, and at other times to the north. 

We, the rest of the earth’s inhabitants, who live between the amphiscians 
and the periscians, are the heteroscians, because we cast our noon shadows in 
only one of these directions, that is, the north. 

10 Now the ancient mathematicians used to divide the earth into seven climes 
by means of the several parallels of latitude passing, for example, through Meroe, 
Syene, Alexandria, Rhodes, the Hellespont, the middle of the Black Sea, the 
Dnieper, Constantinople and so on. [These parallels were selected on a threefold 
basis:] the difference and increase in the length of the longest day [in the specified 
is localities during the course of a year ]; the length of the shadows observed by means 
of sundials at noon on the equinoctial days and the two solstices of the sun; and 
the altitude of the pole or the width of each clime. These quantities, having partly 
changed with time, are not exactly the same as they once were. The reason is, 
as I mentioned [II, 2], the variable obliquity of the ecliptic, which was overlooked 
20 by previous astronomers. Or, to speak mote precisely, the reason is the variable 
inclination of the equator to the plane of the ecliptic. Those quantities depend 
on this inclination. But the altitudes of the pole, or the latitudes of the places, 
and the shadows on the equinoctial days agree with the recorded ancient observa¬ 
tions. This had to happen, because the equator follows the pole of the terrestrial 
25 globe. Therefore those climes likewise are not drawn and bounded with sufficient 
precision by means of any impermanent properties of shadows and days. On the 
other hand, they are delimited more correctly by their distances from the equator, 
which remain the same forever. But that variation in the tropics, although it is 
quite small, in southern localities allows a slight difference of days and shadows, 
30 which becomes more perceptible to those who travel north. 

Now so far as the shadows of sundials are concerned, then, for any given 
altitude of the sun obviously the length of the shadow is obtained, and conversely. 
Thus, let there be a sundial AB, which casts a shadow BC. Since the pointer is 
perpendicular to the plane of the horizon, it must always make ABC a right angle, 
35 in accordance with the definition of lines perpendicular to a plane. Hence, if 
AC is joined, we shall have the right triangle ABC, and for a given altitude of the 
sun, we shall have also angle ACB given. In accordance with Theorem I on 
Plane Triangles, the ratio of the pointer AB to its shadow BC will be given, and 
BC will be given as a length. In turn, when AB and BC are given, in accordance 
40 with Theorem III on Plane Triangles, angle ACB and the altitude of the sun 
casting that shadow at the time will also be known. In this way, in their description 
of those climes of the terrestrial globe, the ancients assigned to each clime its own 
length of noon shadow, not only on the equinoctial days, but also on both solstitial 
days. 


61 



REVOLUTIONS 


HOW TO DERIVE FROM ONE ANOTHER Chapter 7 

THE LONGEST DAY, THE DISTANCE BETWEEN 
SUNRISES, AND THE INCLINATION OF THE SPHERE; 

THE REMAINING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DAYS 

Thus also for any obliquity of the sphere or inclination of the horizon, I shall s 
simultaneously demonstrate the longest and shortest day as well as the distance 
between sunrises, and the remaining difference between the days. Now the distance 
between sunrises is the arc of the horizon intercepted between the sunrises at 
the solstices, summer and winter, or the distance of both of them from the sunrise 
at the equinox. 10 

Then let ABCD be the meridian. In the eastern hemisphere let BED be the 
semicircle of the horizon, and AEC the semicircle of the equator. Let the equator’s 
north pole be F. Assume that the sunrise at the summer solstice is in the point G. 
Draw FGH as an arc of a great circle. Now since the rotation of the terrestrial 
globe is accomplished around F, the pole of the equator, points G and H must is 
reach the meridian ABCD together. For, their parallels of latitude are drawn 
around the same poles, and all great circles passing through these poles cut off 
similar arcs of those parallels. Therefore the time elapsing from the rising at 
G until noon is equally the measure of arc AEH, and of CH, the rest of the semi¬ 
circle below the horizon, the time from midnight until sunrise. Now AEC is 20 
a semicircle, while AE and EC are quadrants, being drawn from the pole of ABCD. 
Consequently EH will be half of the difference between the longest day and the 
equinoctial day, while EG will be the distance between the equinoctial and sol¬ 
stitial sunrises. In triangle EGH, therefore, GEH, the angle of the obliquity of the 
sphere, is known through the arc AB. GHE is a right angle. Side GH also is known 25 
as the distance of the summer solstice from the equator. Therefore, in accordance 
with Theorem IV on Spherical Triangles, the remaining sides are also given: 
EH, half of the difference between the equinoctial day and the longest day, as well 
as GE, the distance between the sunrises. Furthermore if, together with side 
GH, side EH, [half] the difference between the longest day and the equinoc- 30 
tial day, or EG is given, E, the angle of the inclination of the sphere, is given, and 
therefore so is FD, the altitude of the pole above the horizon. 

Next, assume that G on the ecliptic is not the solstice, but any other point. 
Nevertheless, both of the arcs EG and EH will be known. For from the Table 
of Declinations exhibited above, GH is obtained as the arc of declination corre- 35 
sponding to that degree of the ecliptic, and all the other quantities are found by 
the same method of proof. Hence it also follows that the degrees of the ecliptic 
which are equidistant from the solstice cut off the same arcs of the horizon from 
the equinoctial sunrise, and in the same direction. They also make the days and 
nights equal in length. This happens because the same parallel of latitude contains 40 
both degrees of the ecliptic, since their declination is equal and in the same direc¬ 
tion. However, when equal arcs are taken in both directions from the intersection 
with the equator, the distances between the risings come out equal again, but in 
opposite directions, and in the inverse order the lengths of the days and nights 
are equal too, because on both sides they describe equal arcs of the parallels of 4 s 
latitude, just as the points [on the ecliptic] equidistant from the equinox have 
equal declinations from the equator. 


62 



BOOK II CH. 7 


Now in the same diagram, draw arcs of parallels of latitude. Let them be GM 
and KN, intersecting the horizon BED in points G and K. From L, the south 
pole, also draw LKO as a quadrant of a great circle. Then the declination HG 
is equal to KO. Hence there will be two triangles, DFG and BLK, in which two 
5 sides are equal to two corresponding sides: FG to LK, and FD, the altitude of the 
pole, to LB. B and D are right angles. Therefore the third side, DG, is equal 
to the third side, BK. Their remainders, GE and EK, the distances between the 
risings, are also equal. Here too, then, two sides, EG and GH, are equal to two 
sides, EK and KO. The vertical angles at E are equal. Hence the remaining sides, 
10 EH and EO, are equal. When these equals are added to equals, as a sum the whole 
arc OEC is equal to the whole arc AEH. But since great circles drawn through 
the poles cut off similar arcs of parallel circles on spheres, GM and KN will also 
be similar and equal. Q.E.D. 

However, all this can be demonstrated also in another way. Draw the meridian 
is ABCD in the same way. Let its center be E. Let the diameter of the equator and 
its intersection with the meridian be AEC. Let the diameter of the horizon and 
the meridian line be BED ; the axis of the sphere, LEM', the visible pole, L\ and 
the hidden pole, M. Assume that the distance of the summer solstice or that any 
other declination is AF. At this declination draw FG as the diameter of a parallel 
20 of latitude and also as the parallel’s intersection with the meridian. FG will intersect 
the axis at K, and the meridian line at N. Now according to Posidonius’ definition, 
parallels neither converge nor diverge, but make the perpendicular lines between 
them everywhere equal. Therefore the straight line KE will be equal to half of the 
chord subtending twice the arc AF. Similarly, with reference to the parallel of lati- 
25 tude whose radius is FK, KN will be half of the chord subtending the arc marking 
the difference between the equinoctial day and the unequal day. The reason for 
this is that all the semicircles, of which these lines are the intersections, that is, 
of which they are the diameters, namely, BED of the oblique horizon, LEM of 
the right horizon, AEC of the equator, and FKG of the parallel of latitude, are 
so perpendicular to the plane of the circle ABCD. And, in accordance with Euclid’s 
Elements, XI, 19, the lines in which these semicircles intersect one another are 
perpendicular to the same plane at points E, K, and N. In accordance with 
Theorem 6 of the same Book, these perpendiculars are parallel to one another. 
K is the center of the parallel of latitude, and E is the center of the sphere. There- 
35 fore EN is half of the chord subtending twice the horizon arc marking the difference 
between sunrise on the parallel of latitude and the equinoctial sunrise. AF, the 
declination, is given, together with FL, the remainder of the quadrant. Hence KE 
and FK, as halves of the chords subtending twice the arcs AF and FL, will be 
known in units whereof AE is 100,000. But in the right triangle EKN, angle 
40 KEN is given through DL, the altitude of the pole; and KNE, the complementary 
angle, is equal to AEB, because as parallels of latitude on the oblique sphere they 
are equally inclined to the horizon. Therefore the sides are given in the same units 
whereof the radius of the sphere is 100,000. Now in units whereof FK, the radius 
of the parallel of latitude, is 100,000, KN also will be given. And as half of the 
45 chord subtending the entire difference between the equinoctial day and [the 
day pertaining to] the parallel of latitude, KN will be given in units whereof in 
like manner the parallel as a circle is 360. Hence the ratio of FK to KN clearly 
consists of two ratios, namely, the ratio of the chord subtending twice FL to the 


63 



REVOLUTIONS 


chord subtending twice AF, that is, FK : KE, and the ratio of the chord subtending 
twice AB to the chord subtending twice DL. The latter ratio is equal to EK : KN } 
with EK of course taken as the mean proportional between FK and KN. Simi¬ 
larly the ratio of BE to EN is likewise formed by the ratios BE : EK and 
KE : EN, as Ptolemy shows in greater detail by means of spherical segments 5 
[Syntaxis, 1,13]. In this way, I believe, the inequality of the days and nights 
is found. But also in the case of the moon and of whatever stars the declination 
is given, the segments of the parallels of latitude described by them in the 
daily rotation above the horizon are distinguished from the segments which are 
below the horizon. From these segments their risings and settings can easily 10 
be learned. 


64 



BOOK II CH. 7 
















































REVOLUTIONS 


| TABLE OF THE DIFFERENCE IN THE ASCENSIONS ON AN OBLIQUE SPHERE 

De¬ 

clina¬ 

tion 

Elevation of the Pole 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 | 

42 I 

Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute j 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

1 

0 

45 


47 

0 

49 


50 


52 

0 

54 

2 

i 

31 

i 

34 

i 

37 

i 

41 


44 

i 

48 

3 


16 

2 

21 


26 

2 

31 


37 

2 

42 

4 


1 

3 

8 


15 

3 

22 


29 

3 

37 

5 


47 

3 

55 


4 

4 

13 


22 

4 

31 

6 


33 

4 

43 


53 

5 

4 

5 

15 

5 

26 

7 

5 

19 

5 


5 

42 

5 

55 

6 

8 

6 

21 

8 

6 

5 

6 

18 

6 

32 

6 

46 

H 

1 

7 

16 

9 

6 

51 

m 

6 

7 

22 

7 

38 

HI 

55 

8 

12 


7 

38 

1 

55 

8 

13 

8 

30 

8 

49 

9 

8 

11 

8 

25 

8 

44 


3 

9 

23 

9 

44 

10 

5 

12 

9 

13 

m 

34 


55 

10 

16 


39 

11 

2 



1 

I 

24 

10 

46 

11 


11 

35 

12 

0 

14 

10 

50 

19 

14 

11 

39 

12 

5 

12 

31 

12 

58 

15 

11 

39 

12 

5 

12 

32 

13 

0 

13 

28 

13 

58 

16 

12 

29 

12 

57 

13 

26 

13 

55 

14 

26 

14 

58 

17 

13 

19 

13 

49 

14 

20 

14 

52 

15 

25 

15 

59 

18 

14 

10 

14 

42 

15 

15 

15 

49 

16 

24 

17 

1 

19 

15 

2 

15 

36 

16 

11 

16 

48 

17 

25 

18 

4 

m 

15 

55 

16 

31 

17 

8 

17 

47 

18 

27 

19 

8 

21 

16 

49 

17 

27 

18 


18 

47 

19 

30 

20 

13 

22 

17 

44 

18 

24 

19 


19 

49 

20 

34 

21 

20 

23 

18 

39 

19 

22 

20 


20 

52 

21 

39 

22 

28 

24 

19 

36 

20 

21 

21 


21 

56 

22 

46 

23 

38 

25 


34 

21 

21 

22 


23 

2 

23 

55 

24 

50 

26 

21 

34 

22 

24 

23 

16 

24 


25 

5 

26 

3 

27 

22 

35 

23 

28 

24 

22 

25 

19 

26 

17 

27 

18 

28 

23 

37 

24 

33 

25 

30 

26 


27 

31 

28 

36 

29 

24 

41 

25 

40 

26 

40 

27 

43 

28 

48 

29 

57 


25 

47 

26 

49 

27 

52 

28 

59 

30 

7 

31 

19 

31 

26 

55 

28 

0 

29 

7 

30 

17 

31 

29 

32 

45 

32 

28 

5 

29 

13 

30 

54 

31 

31 

32 

54 

34 

14 

33 

29 

18 

30 

29 

31 

44 

33 

1 

34 

22 

35 

47 

34 


32 

31 

48 

33 

6 

34 

27 

35 

54 

37 

24 

35 

31 

51 

33 

10 

34 

33 

35 

59 

37 

KB 

39 

5 

36 

33 

12 

34 

35 

36 

2 

37 

34 

39 

H 

40 

51 











































BOOK II CH. 7 



67 














































REVOLUTIONS 



68 




































BOOK II CH. 7 


J 

TABLE OF THE DIFFERENCE IN THE ASCENSIONS ON AN OBLIQUE SPHERE 

De- 

clina- 

Elevation of the Pole 

tion 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute i 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

Degree 

Minute 

i 

i 

26 

i 

29 

i 

32 

i 

36 

i 

40 

i 

44 

2 

2 

52 

2 

58 

3 

5 

3 

12 

3 

20 

3 

28 

3 

4 

17 

4 

27 

4 

38 

4 

49 

5 

0 

5 

12 

4 

5 

44 

5 

57 

6 

11 

6 

25 

6 

41 

6 

57 

5 

7 

11 

B 

w 

■Pf 

44 

8 

3 

8 

22 

8 

43 

6 

8 

38 

1 

(9 


19 

9 

41 

10 

4 

10 

29 


D 

6 

I'! 


■ 

54 

11 

20 

11 

47 

12 

17 



35 

12 

i 


30 

13 

0 

13 

32 

14 

5 


IS 

4 

13 

35 

■.. 

7 

14 

41 

15 

17 

15 

55 

10 

14 

35 

15 

9 


45 

16 

23 

17 

4 

17 

47 

11 

16 

7 

16 

45 


25 

18 

8 

18 

53 

19 

41 

12 

17 


18 

22 

19 

6 

19 

53 

20 

43 

21 

36 

13 

19 

15 

20 

1 

20 

50 

21 

41 

22 

36 

23 

34 

14 

20 

52 

21 

42 

22 

35 

23 

31 

24 

31 

25 

35 

15 

22 

30 

23 

24 

24 

22 

25 

23 

26 

29 

27 

39 

16 

24 


25 

9 

26 

12 

27 

19 

28 

30 

29 

47 

17 

25 

53 

26 

57 

28 

5 

29 

18 

30 

35 

31 

59 

18 

27 

39 

28 

48 

30 

1 

31 

20 

32 

44 

34 

19 

19 

29 

27 

30 

41 

32 

1 

33 

26 

34 

58 

36 

37 

20 

31 

19 

32 

39 

34 

5 

35 

37 

37 

17 

39 

5 

21 

33 

15 

34 

41 

36 

14 

37 

54 

39 

42 

41 

40 

22 

35 

14 

36 

48 

38 

28 

40 

17 

42 

15 

44 

25 

23 

37 

19 

39 

0 

40 

49 

42 

47 

44 

57 

47 

20 

24 

39 

29 

41 

18 

43 

17 

45 

26 

47 

49 

50 

27 

25 

41 

45 

43 

44 

45 

54 

48 

16 

50 

54 

53 

52 

26 

44 

9 

46 

18 

48 

41 

51 

19 

54 

16 

57 

39 

27 

46 


49 

4 

51 

41 

54 

38 

58 

0 

61 

57 

28 

49 


52 

1 

54 

58 

58 

19 

62 

14 

67 

4 

29 

52 


55 

16 

58 

36 

62 

31 

67 

18 

73 

46 

30 

55 


58 

52 

62 

45 

67 

31 

73 

55 

90 

0 

31 

59 


62 

58 

67 

42 

74 

4 

90 

0 



32 

63 

10 

67 

53 

B 

12 

90 

0 





33 

68 

1 

Q 

19 


0 

L 






34 

Q 

33 


0 

i 


The vacant spaces here belong to 

stars 

35 

o 

0 

1 




which 

neither rise nor set. 



36 

■ 


■ 

| 

■ 









69 






























REVOLUTIONS 


THE HOURS AND PARTS 
OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 


Chapter 8 


From the foregoing, therefore, it is clear that, for a stated altitude of the pole, 
we may take the difference in the days as indicated for a declination of the sun in 
the Table. This difference may be added to a quadrant in the case of a northern 5 
declination, or subtracted from it in the case of a southern declination. If the result 
is doubled, we shall have the length of that day, and the duration of the night, 
which is the rest of the circle. 

If either of these two is divided by 15 degrees of the equator, the quotient 
will show how many equal hours it contains. But if we take the twelfth part, we 10 
shall have the duration of a seasonal hour. Now these hours take the name of 
their day, of which they are always the twelfth part. Hence the terms “summer 
solstitial, equinoctial, and winter solstitial hours” are found employed by the 
ancients. Nor were any other hours originally in use than the twelve hours from 
dawn to dusk. But they used to divide the night into four vigils or watches. This 15 
regulation of the hours lasted for a long time by the unspoken agreement of all 
nations. For the purpose of this regulation, water-clocks were invented. By the 
subtraction from and addition to the water dripped from these clocks, the hours 
were adjusted to the difference in the days, so that the subdivision of time would 
not be obscured even by a cloudy sky. Afterwards, equal hours, common to day- 20 
time and nighttime, were generally adopted. Since these equal hours are easier to 
observe, the seasonal hours became obsolete. Hence, if you ask any ordinary person 
which is the first, third, sixth, ninth or eleventh hour of the day, he has no answer 
or at any rate his answer has no relevance to the subject. Also with regard to the 
numbering of the equal hours, some now take it from noon, others from sunset, 25 
others from midnight, and still others from sunrise, in accordance with the 
decision of each society. 


THE OBLIQUE ASCENSION OF THE DEGREES Chapter 9 
OF THE ECLIPTIC j HOW TO DETERMINE 
WHAT DEGREE IS AT MID-HEAVEN 
WHEN ANY DEGREE IS RISING 



Now that I have thus explained the lengths of the days and nights as well as 
the difference in those lengths, the next topic in proper order is the oblique 
ascensions. I refer to the times during which the dodecatemories, that is, the 
twelve zodiacal signs, or any other arcs of the zodiac, rise. For, between right 35 
ascensions and oblique ascensions, there are no differences other than those which 
I set forth between the equinoctial day and a day which is unequal to its night in 
length. Now the names of living things have been borrowed for the zodiacal signs, 
which consist of immovable stars. Starting from the vernal equinox, the signs have 
been called Ram, Bull, Twins, Crab, and so on, as they follow in order. 40 
For the sake of greater clarity, then, again draw the meridian ABCD. Let 
AEC, the semicircle of the equator, and the horizon BED intersect each other in 
the point E. Put the equinox in H. Let the ecliptic FHI, passing through H, inter¬ 
sect the horizon in L. Through this intersection draw KLM, the quadrant of 
a great circle, from K, the pole of the equator. Thus it is certainly clear that arc 4 s 


70 



BOOK II CH. 9-10 


HL of the ecliptic rises with HE of the equator. But in the right sphere, HL rose 
with HEM. The difference between them is EM which, as I showed above [II, 7], is 
half of [the difference between] the equinoctial day and the unequal day. But what 
was added there in a northern declination, is subtracted here. In a southern declina- 
s tion, on the other hand, it is added to the right ascension in order to obtain the 
oblique ascension. Accordingly, how long a whole sign, or other arc of the ecliptic, 
takes to rise will be made clear by the ascensions computed from the beginning 
[of the sign or arc] to its end. 

Hence it follows that when any degree of the ecliptic, measured from the 
io equinox, is given as rising, the degree which is at mid-heaven is also given. For, 
L [being the point which is] rising [on the ecliptic], given its declination through 
HL, its distance from the equinox, its right ascension HEM, and the whole of 
AHEM as the arc of the half-day, then the remainder, AH, is given. This is the 
right ascension of FH, which is given by the Table, or also because AHF, the 
is angle of the obliquity, is given, together with the side AH, while FAH is a right 
angle. Therefore the whole arc FHL of the ecliptic is given between the degree 
of rising and the degree at mid-heaven. 

Conversely, if the degree at mid-heaven, for instance, the arc FH, is given 
first, we shall also know the degree which is rising. For, the declination AF will 
20 be obtained, and so will AFB, through the angle of obliquity of the sphere, and 
the remainder FB. Now in triangle BFL, angle BFL is given by what precedes; 
so is side FB’, and FBL is a right angle. Therefore the required side FHL is given. 
An alternative method of obtaining it will appear below [II, 10]. 

THE ANGLE AT WHICH THE ECLIPTIC Chapter 10 

25 INTERSECTS THE HORIZON 

Furthermore, since the ecliptic is a circle oblique to the axis of the sphere, 
it makes various angles with the horizon. It is perpendicular to the horizon twice 
for those who live between the tropics, as I have already said with regard to the 
differences in the shadows [II, 6 ]. However, Ithinkthat it is enoughfor us to demon- 
30 strate only those angles which concern us who live in the heteroscian region. From 
these angles, the entire theory of the angles will be easily understood. Now in the 
oblique sphere, when the equinox or first point of the Ram is rising, the ecliptic 
is lower and turns toward the horizon to the extent added by the greatest southward 
declination, which occurs when the first point of the Goat is at mid-heaven. 
35 Conversely, at a higher altitude the ecliptic makes the angle of rising greater when 
the first point of the Balance rises, and the first point of the Crab is at mid-heaven. 
The foregoing statements are quite obvious, I believe. For, these three circles, the 
equator, ecliptic, and horizon, by passing through the same intersection, meet 
in the poles of the meridian. The arcs of the meridian intercepted by these 
40 circles show how great the angle of rising is judged to be. 

But a way of measuring it also for the other degrees of the ecliptic may be 
explained. Again let the meridian be ABCD, half of the horizon BED, and half 
of the ecliptic AEG. Let any degree of the ecliptic rise at E. We are required to 
find how great the angle AEB is in units whereof 4 right angles = 360°. Since 
45 E is given as the rising degree, the degree at mid-heaven is also given by the 
previous discussion, as is also the atcAE together with the meridian altitude AB. 


71 



REVOLUTIONS 


Because ABE is a right angle, the ratio of the chord subtending twice AE to the 
chord subtending twice AB is given as equal to the ratio of the diameter of 
the sphere to the chord subtending twice the arc which measures the angle 
AEB. Therefore the angle AEB also is given. 

However, the given degree may be, not at the rising, but at mid-heaven. Let 5 
it be A. Nevertheless the angle of rising will be measured. For, with its pole at E, 
draw FGH as the quadrant of a great circle. Complete the quadrants BAG and 
EBH. Now AB, the altitude of the meridian, is given, and so is AF, the remainder 
of the quadrant. Angle FAG is also given by the foregoing, and FGA is a right 
angle. Therefore the arc FG is given. So is the remainder GH> which measures 10 
the required angle of rising. Here too, then, it is clear how, given the degree at 
mid-heaven, the degree at the rising is given. For, the ratio of the chord subtending 
twice GH to the chord subtending twice AB is equal to the ratio of the diameter 
to the chord subtending twice AE, as in Spherical Triangles [1,14, Theorem III]. 

For these relations too I have subjoined three kinds of Tables. The first will 15 
give the ascensions in the right sphere, beginning with the Ram, and advancing 
by 6° of the ecliptic. The second will give the ascensions in the oblique sphere, 
likewise in steps of 6°, from the parallel of latitude whose pole’s altitude is 39°, 
by half-steps of 3°, to the parallel with its pole at 57°. The remaining Table will 
give the angles made with the horizon, also by steps of 6°, in the same 7 20 
columns. All these computations are based on the minimum obliquity of the 
ecliptic, 23° 28', which is approximately correct for our age. 


72 



BOOK II CH. 10 


TABLE OF THE ASCENSIONS OF THE ZODIACAL SIGNS IN THE REVOLUTION 

OF THE RIGHT SPHERE 








Ecliptic 

Ascension j 

For a Single 
Degree 


Ecliptic 

Ascension 

For a Single 
Degree 

Sign j 

Degree 







Degree 

Degree 


Degree 

Minute 

T 

6 

5 

■ 

0 

55 



6 

185 

30 

0 

55 


12 

11 

H 

0 

55 



12 

191 

0 

0 

55 


18 

16 

34 

0 

56 



18 

196 

34 

0 

56 


24 

22 


0 

56 



24 

202 

10 

0 

56 


30 

27 

54 

0 

57 


n 

30 

207 

54 

0 

57 

« 

6 

33 

43 

0 

58 


6 

213 

43 

0 

58 


12 

39 

35 

0 

59 



12 

219 

35 

0 

59 


18 

45 

32 

1 

D 



18 

225 

32 

1 

0 


24 

51 

37 

1 

l 



24 

231 

37 

1 

1 


30 

57 

48 

1 

2 



30 

237 

48 

1 

2 

X 

6 

64 

6 

1 

3 


s 

6 


6 

1 

3 


12 


29 

1 

4 



12 

250 

29 

1 

4 


18 

76 

57 

1 

5 



18 

256 

57 

1 

5 


24 

83 

27 

1 

5 



24 

263 

27 

1 

5 


30 

90 

0 

1 

5 



30 

270 

0 

1 

5 

0 

6 

96 

33 

1 

5 


% 

6 

276 

33 

1 

5 


12 

103 

3 

1 

5 



12 

283 

3 

1 

5 


18 

109 

31 

1 

5 



18 

289 

31 

1 

5 


24 

115 

54 

1 

4 



24 

295 

54 

1 

4 


30 

122 

12 

1 

3 



30 

302 

12 

1 

3 

a 

6 

128 

23 

1 

2 


AM 

6 

308 

23 

1 

2 


12 

134 

28 

1 

1 



12 

314 

28 

1 

1 


18 

140 

25 

1 




18 

320 

25 

1 

0 


24 

146 

17 

0 

59 



24 

326 

17 

0 

59 


30 

152 

6 

0 

58 



30 

332 

6 

0 

58 

if 

6 

157 

50 

0 

57 


H 

6 

337 


0 

57 


12 

163 

26 

0 

56 



12 

343 

26 

0 

56 


18 

169 

0 

0 

56 



18 

349 


0 

56 


24 


30 

0 

55 



24 

354 


0 

55 


30 


0 

0 

55 



30 

360 


0 

55 


73 



































revolutions 


















































BOOK II CH. 10 


TABLE OF THE ASCENSIONS IN THE OBLIQUE SPHERE 


Altitude of the Pole 


Ecliptic 

39 

42 

45 

48 

51 

54 

57 



Ascen- 

Ascen- 

Ascen- 

Ascen- 

Ascen- 

Ascen- 

Ascen- 



sion 

sion 

sion 

sion 

sion 

sion 

sion 

Sign 

De- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

De- 

Min- 

gree 

gree 

ute 

gree 

ute 


ute 

gree 

ute 

gree 

ute 

gree 

ute 

gree 

ute 


6 

187 

26 

187 

39 

187 

54 

188 

9 

188 

27 

188 

48 

189 

ii 


12 

194 

53 

195 

19 

195 

48 

196 

19 

196 

55 

197 

36 

198 

23 


18 

202 

21 

203 

0 

203 

41 

204 

30 

205 

24 

206 

25 

207 

36 


24 

209 

49 

210 

41 

211 

37 

212 

40 

213 

52 

215 

13 

216 

48 

n 

30 

217 

22 

218 

27 

219 

37 

220 

57 

222 

22 

224 

8 

226 

8 

6 

224 

56 

226 

14 

227 

38 

229 

12 

231 

1 

233 

4 

235 

29 


12 

232 

31 

234 

0 

235 

37 

237 

28 

239 

32 

241 

57 

244 

47 


18 

240 

4 

241 

44 

243 

35 

245 

40 

248 

2 

250 

47 

254 

2 


24 

247 

36 

249 

27 

251 

30 

253 

49 

256 

27 

259 

32 

263 

12 

s 

30 

255 

6 

257 

6 

259 

21 

261 

52 

264 

47 

268 

10 

272 

14 

6 

262 

33 

264 

41 

267 

5 

269 

49 

272 

57 

276 

38 

281 

5 


12 

269 

50 

272 

6 

274 

38 

277 

31 

280 

50 

284 

45 

289 

32 


18 

276 

58 

279 

19 

281 

58 

284 

58 

288 

26 

292 

32 

297 

34 


24 

283 

54 

286 

18 

289 

0 

292 

5 

295 

39 

299 

53 

305 

5 


30 

290 

35 

293 

1 

295 

45 

298 

50 

302 

26 

306 

42 

311 

58 

% 

6 

297 

0 

299 

24 

302 

6 

305 

11 

308 

45 

312 

59 

318 

11 


12 

303 

4 

305 

25 

308 

4 

311 

4 

314 

32 

318 

38 

323 

40 


18 

308 

52 

311 

8 

313 

40 

316 

33 

319 

52 

323 

47 

328 

34 


24 

314 

21 

316 

29 

318 

53 

321 

37 

324 

45 

328 

26 

332 

53 


30 

319 

30 

321 

30 

323 

45 

326 

19 

329 

11 

332 

34 

336 

38 

AAA 

6 

324 

21 

326 

13 

328 

16 

330 

35 

333 

13 

336 

18 

339 

58 


12 

329 

0 

330 

40 

332 

31 

334 

36 

336 

58 

339 

43 

342 

58 


18 

333 

21 

334 

50 

336 

27 

338 

18 

340 

22 

342 

47 

345 

37 


24 

337 

30 

338 

48 

340 

3 

341 

46 

343 

35 

345 

38 

348 

3 

H 

30 

341 

34 

342 

39 

343 

49 

345 

9 

346 

34 

348 

20 

350 

20 

6 

345 

29 

346 

21 

347 

17 

348 

20 

349 

32 

350 

53 

352 

28 


12 

349 

11 

349 

51 

350 

33 

351 

21 

352 

14 

353 

16 

354 

26 


18 

352 

50 

353 

16 

353 

45 

354 

16 

354 

52 

355 

33 

356 

20 


24 

356 

26 

356 

a 

356 

23 

357 

10 

357 

53 

357 

48 

358 

11 


30 

360 

0 

360 

1 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 


5 






























TABLE OF THE ANGLES MADE BY THE ECLIPTIC WITH THE HORIZON 


Ecliptic 


Altitude of the Pole 
45 | 48 J 51 


27 32 

27 37 

27 49 






















































BOOK II CH. 11-12 


THE USE OF THESE TABLES Chapter 11 

The use of the Tables is already clear from what has been established. For 
when the degree of the sun is known, we have received the right ascension. To 
it, for any equal hour, we add 15° of the equator. If the total exceeds the 360° 
5 of a whole circle, they are cast out. The remainder of the right ascension will 
show the related degree of the ecliptic at mid-heaven at the hour in question, 
starting from noon. If you perform the same operation for the oblique ascension 
of your region, in like manner you will have the rising degree of the ecliptic at an 
hour counted from sunrise. Moreover, for any stars which are outside the zodiac 
io and whose right ascension is known, as I showed above [II, 9], these Tables give the 
degrees of the ecliptic which are at mid-heaven with these stars, through the same 
right ascension, starting from the first point of the Ram. The oblique ascension 
of those stars gives the degree of the ecliptic which rises with them, as the ascen¬ 
sions and degrees of the ecliptic are revealed directly by the Tables. You will 
is proceed in the same way with regard to the setting, but always through the oppo¬ 
site place. Furthermore, if a quadrant is added to the right ascension which is at 
mid-heaven, the resulting sum is the oblique ascension of the rising degree. There¬ 
fore, through the degree at mid-heaven, the degree at the rising is also given, and 
conversely. The next Table gives the angles made by the ecliptic with the horizon. 
20 These angles are determined by the degree of the ecliptic at the rising. From them 
it is also learned how great the altitude of the ninetieth degree of the ecliptic is 
from the horizon. A knowledge of this altitude is absolutely necessary in eclipses of 
the sun. 

THE ANGLES AND ARCS OF THOSE CIRCLES Chapter 12 
25 WHICH ARE DRAWN THROUGH THE POLES 
OF THE HORIZON TO THE ECLIPTIC 

I may next explain the theory of the angles and arcs occurring at the inter¬ 
sections of the ecliptic with those circles which pass through the zenith of the hori¬ 
zon and on which the altitude above the horizon is taken. But the noon altitude 
30 of the sun or of any degree of the ecliptic at mid-heaven, and the angle of the 
ecliptic’s intersection with the meridian were set forth above [II, 10]. For, the 
meridian too is one of the circles which pass through the zenith of the horizon. 
The angle at the rising has also been discussed already. When this angle is sub¬ 
tracted from a right angle, the remainder is the angle formed with the rising 
35 ecliptic by a quadrant passing through the zenith of the horizon. 

It remains, then, by repeating the previous diagram [II, 10], to look at the in¬ 
tervening intersections, I mean, of the meridian with the semicircles of the ecliptic 
and horizon. Take any point on the ecliptic between noon and rising or setting. 
Let this point be G. Through it draw the quadrant FGH from F, the pole of the 
40 horizon. Through the designated hour, the whole arc AGE of the ecliptic be¬ 
tween the meridian and the horizon is given. AG is given by hypothesis. In 
like manner AF is also given, because the noon altitude AB is given. The meridian 
angle FAG is likewise given. Therefore FG is also given, by what was proved 
with regard to spherical triangles. The complement GH, which is the altitude 
45 of G, is given, together with angle FGA. These we were required to find. 


77 



REVOLUTIONS 


This treatment of the angles and intersections connected with the ecliptic, 

I excerpted compactly from Ptolemy while I was reviewing the discussion of 
spherical triangles in general. If anybody wishes to work on this subject, he will 
be able by himself to find more applications than those which I discussed only as 
examples. 5 

[An earlier version of the latter part of II, 12 survives in the autograph on folio 46 r , 
without any indication that it was superseded. It begins in the middle of the second sentence of 
the second paragraph above, with the choice of any point on the ecliptic] 
between the rising and noon. Let it be tj, with its quadrant Through the designated hour, 
the arc avjE is given, and likewise ar; as well as aX, with the meridian angle £an). Therefore, in 10 
accordance with Theorem XI on Spherical Triangles, the arc is given as well as the angle ^a. 

These we were required to find. Now the ratios of the chord subtending twice ey] to the chord 
subtending twice 7]0, and of the chords subtending twice the arcs ea and a/3 are both equal to the 
ratio of the radius to the intercept of angle ijeD. Therefore the altitude rjf> of the given point yj is 
given. But in triangle yj&e, sides t ]e and 7)0- are given, as is also angle e, while •& is a right angle. 16 
From these quantities we shall also uncover the measure of the remaining angle er;(h This treatment 
of the angles and segments of circles, I excerpted compactly from Ptolemy and others, while I was 
reviewing the discussion of triangles in general. If anybody wishes to work on this subject, he will 
be able by himself to find many more applications than those which I discussed only as examples. 

THE RISING AND SETTING Chapter 13 20 

OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES 

The risings and settings of the heavenly bodies also belong with the daily 
rotation, as is evident. This is true not only for those simple risings and settings 
which I just discussed, but also for the ways in which the bodies become morning 
and evening stars. Although the latter phenomena occur in conjunction with 25 
the annual revolution, they will nevertheless be treated more appropriately in 
this place. 

The ancient mathematicians distinguish the true [risings and settings] from 
the visible. The true are as follows. The morning rising of a heavenly body 
occurs when it appears at the same time as the sun. On the other hand, the morning 30 
setting of the body occurs when it sets at sunrise. Throughout this entire interval 
the body was called a “morning star”. But the evening rising occurs when the 
body appears at sunset. On the other hand, the evening setting occurs when the 
body sets at the same time as the sun. In the intervening period it is called an 
“evening star”, because it is obscured by day and comes forth at night. 35 

By contrast, the visible risings and settings are as follows. The morning 
rising of the body occurs when it first emerges and begins to appear at dawn and 
before sunrise. On the other hand, the morning setting occurs when the body is 
seen to have set just as the sun is about to rise. The body’s evening rising occurs 
when it first appears to rise at twilight. But its evening setting occurs when it 40 
ceases any longer to be visible after sunset. Thereafter the presence of the sun 
blots the body out, until at their morning rising [the heavenly bodies] emerge in 
the order described above. 

In the same way as these phenomena occur in the fixed stars, they occur also 
in the planets Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. But the risings and settings of Venus 45 
and Mercury are different. For they are not blotted out by the approach of the 
sun, as the other planets are, nor are they made visible by its departure. On the 
contrary, when they precede the sun, they immerse themselves in its brilliance 


78 



BOOK II CH. 13 


and extricate themselves. When the other planets have their evening rising and 
morning setting, they are not obscured at any time, but shine throughout almost 
the entire night. On the other hand, Venus and Mercury disappear completely 
from [evening] setting to [morning] rising, and cannot be seen anywhere. There 
5 is also another difference. In Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, the true risings and 
settings are earlier than the visible in the morning, and later in the evening, 
to the extent that they precede sunrise in the first case, and follow sunset in the 
second case. On the other hand, in the lower planets the visible morning and 
evening risings are later than the true, whereas the settings are earlier. 

10 Now the way in which the [risings and settings] may be determined can be 
understood from what was said above, where I explained the oblique ascension 
of any star having a known position, and the degree of the ecliptic with which 
it rises or sets [II, 9]. If at that time the sun appears in that degree or the opposite 
degree, the star will have its true morning or evening rising or setting, 
is From these, the visible risings and settings differ according to the brilliance 
and size of each body. Thus, those which have a more powerful light are obscured 
by the sun’s rays for a shorter time than those which are less bright. Moreover, 
the limits of disappearance and appearance are determined by the subhorizontal 
arcs, between the horizon and the sun, on the circles which pass through the poles 
20 of the horizon. For fixed stars of the first magnitude, these limits are almost 12°; 
for Saturn, 11 °; for Jupiter, 10 0 ; for Mars, 11 1 / 2 0 i for Venus, 5 0 ; and for Mercury, 
10°. But the whole belt in which the remnant of daylight yields to night, the belt 
which embraces twilight or dawn, contains 18° of the aforesaid circle. When the 
sun has descended by these 18 °, the smaller stars also begin to appear. Now this 
25 is the distance at which some people put a plane parallel to the horizon and below 
it. When the sun reaches this plane, they say that the day is begi nnin g or the night 
is ending. We may know with what degree of the ecliptic a body rises or sets. 
We may also discover the angle at which the ecliptic intersects the horizon at 
that same degree. We may also find at that time as many degrees of the ecliptic 
30 between the rising degree and the sun as are enough and as are associated with 
the sun’s depth below the horizon in accordance with the aforementioned limits 
of the body in question. If so, we shall assert that its first appearance or disap¬ 
pearance is occurring. However, what I explained in the preceding demonstration 
with regard to the sun’s altitude above the earth also fits in all respects its descent 
35 below the earth, since there is no difference in anything but position. Thus, the 
bodies which set so far as the visible hemisphere is concerned, rise so far as the 
hidden hemisphere is concerned, and everything occurs conversely and is readily 
understood. Therefore, what has been said about the rising and setting of the 
heavenly bodies, and, to that extent, about the daily rotation of the terrestrial 
40 globe may be enough. 


79 



REVOLUTIONS 


THE INVESTIGATION OF THE PLACES Chapter 14 

OF THE STARS, AND THE ARRANGEMENT 
OF THE FIXED STARS IN A CATALOGUE 

[The beginning of a new book, according to Copernicus’ original plan; an earlier draft of the 
first two-thirds of this Chapter survives in the autograph, folio 46 v - 47 v , without any 5 
indication that it was superseded; where this earlier draft is somewhat more explicit than the printed 
text, it too is translated here]. 

[Earlier draft: 

Now that I have expounded the terrestrial globe’s daily rotation and its consequences with 
respect to the days and nights and their parts and variations, the explanations of the annual revolu- 10 
tion ought to have come next. Not a few astronomers, however, agree with the traditional 
practice of giving precedence to the phenomena of the fixed stars as the foundations of this science. 
Hence I thought that I in particular should adhere to this judgement. For among my principles 
and fundamental propositions I have assumed that the sphere of the fixed stars is absolutely immov¬ 
able ; and that the wanderings of all the planets are rightly compared with it, since motion requires 15 
that something should be at rest. Yet someone may wonder why I adopted this order, whereas in 
his Syntaxis [III, 1, introduction] Ptolemy considered that an explanation of the fixed stars could 
not be given unless the knowledge of the sun and moon came first, and for this reason he deemed it 
necessary to postpone his discussion of the fixed stars until then]. 

20 

[Printed text: 

This opinion, I believe, should be opposed. If, on the other hand, you interpret 
it as referring to the calculations for computing the apparent motion of the sun and 
moon, perhaps Ptolemy’s opinion will hold good. For, the geometer Menelaus 
likewise kept track of most of the stars and their places through computations 
based on their conjunctions with the moon. 25 

[Earlier draft: 

Of course I acknowledge that the stars’ places cannot be determined apart from the moon’s, 
nor in turn can the moon’s apart from the sun’s. But these are problems which require the help of 
instruments, and I believed that this topic must not be investigated in any other way. On the other 
hand, anybody who wants the theory of the [solar and lunar] motions and revolutions in precise so 
tables will accomplish nothing, I maintain, if he disregards the fixed stars. Hence Ptolemy and 
others before him and after him, who derived the length of the solar year only from the equinoxes 
or solstices, in striving to establish fundamental propositions for us could never agree about this 
length. In no topic, consequently, was there greater discord. This so disturbed most [specialists] 
that they almost abandoned the hope of mastering astronomy and declared the motions in the 35 
heavens to be beyond the comprehension of the human mind. Being aware of this attitude, Ptolemy 
[Syntaxis, III, 1] computed the solar year in his own age not without suspecting that an error 
could appear in the course of time, and advised posterity to seek finer precision in this matter 
subsequently. Hence it seemed to me worth while in this book, first, to show how much instru¬ 
ments help to determine the places of the sun, moon, and stars, that is, their distances from an 40 
equinoctial or solstitial point, and then to explain the sphere of the fixed stars studded with 
constellations]. 

[Printed text: 

But we shall do much better if we locate any star with the help of instruments 
through a careful examination of the positions of the sun and moon, as I shall 45 
soon show. I am also warned by the ineffectual attempt of those who thought 
that the length of the solar year should be delimited simply by the equinoxes or 
solstices, and not also by the fixed stars. In this effort down to our own time they 
have never been able to agree, so that nowhere has there been greater dissension. 
This was noticed by Ptolemy. When he computed the solar year in his own age, so 


80 



BOOK II CH. 14 


not without suspecting that an error could appear in the course of time, he advised 
posterity to seek finer precision in this matter subsequently. Hence it seemed 
to me worth while in this book to show how skill with instruments may establish 
the positions of the sun and moon, that is, the amount of their distance from the 
5 vernal equinox or other cardinal points of the universe. These places will then 
facilitate our investigation of other heavenly bodies, by means of which we may 
also set before the eyes the sphere of the fixed stars studded with constellations, 
and its representation. 

Now I have already explained the instruments by which we may determine 
10 the distance between the tropics, the obliquity of the ecliptic, and the inclination 
of the sphere or the altitude of the pole of the equator [II, 2]. In the same way we can 
obtain any other altitude of the sun at noon. Through its difference from the incli¬ 
nation of the sphere, this altitude will show us the amount of the sun’s declination 
from the equator. Then through this declination its position at noon, as measured 
is from an equinox or solstice, will also become clear. Now in a period of 24 hours 
the sun seems to pass through almost 1°; the hourly fraction thereof amounts 
to 2 1 I%. Hence for any designated hour other than noon, its position will be easily 
inferred. 

But for observing the positions of the moon and of the stars, another instru- 
20 ment is constructed, which Ptolemy calls the “astrolabe” [Syntaxis, V, 1], Now two 
rings, or quadrilateral frames of rings, are made in such a way that their flat sides, or 
members, are set at right angles to their concave - convex surface. These rings 
are equal and similar in all respects, and of a convenient size. That is, if they 
are too big, they become less manageable. Yet otherwise, generous dimensions 
25 are better than skimpy, for the purpose of division into parts. Thus let [the rings’] 
width and thickness be at least one-thirtieth of the diameter. Then they will be 
joined and connected with each other at right angles along the diameter, with the 
concave-convex surfaces fitting together as though in the roundness of a single 
sphere. In fact, let one of them take the place of the ecliptic; and the other, of the 
30 circle which passes through the poles of both (I mean, of the equator and the 
ecliptic). Then the sides of the ecliptic ring should be divided into equal parts, 
which are usually 360, and these may be further subdivided according to the size 
of the instrument. Also on the other ring, by measuring quadrants from the ecliptic, 
indicate the poles of the ecliptic. Take a distance from these poles in proportion 
35 to the obliquity of the ecliptic, and mark the poles of the equator too. 

After these rings have been arranged in this way, two other rings are made. 
They are fastened at the ecliptic’s poles, on which they will move, [one on the] 
outside and [the other on the] inside. Make these rings equal to the others in 
thickness between the two flat surfaces, while the width of their rims is similar. 
40 Fit them together so that there is contact everywhere between the larger ring’s 
concave surface and the ecliptic’s convex surface, as well as between the smaller 
one’s convex surface and the ecliptic’s concave surface. However, let there be 
no obstacle to their being turned about, but let them permit the ecliptic with its 
meridian freely and easily to slide over them, and conversely. Hence we will 
45 neatly perforate these rings at the diametrically opposite poles of the ecliptic, 
and insert axles to attach and support them. Divide the inner ring also into 360 
equal degrees, so that in each quadrant there are 90° to the poles. 

Furthermore, on the concave surface of this ring, another ring, the fifth. 


81 



REVOLUTIONS 


should be placed, and be able to turn in the same plane. To the rims of this ring, 
attach diametrically opposite brackets with apertures and peepholes or eyepieces. 
Here the light of the star can impinge and leave along the diameter of the ring, 
as is the practice in the dioptra. Moreover, mount certain blocks on both sides 
of the ring, as pointers toward the numbers on the containing ring, for the purpose 5 
of observing the latitudes. 

Finally, a sixth ring must be attached, to receive the whole astrolabe and support 
it as it hangs from fastenings at the poles of the equator. Place this sixth ring on 
a stand, sustained by which it will be perpendicular to the plane of the horizon. 
Furthermore, when its poles have been adjusted to the inclination of the sphere, 10 
let the astrolabe keep its meridian’s position similar to that of the meridian in na¬ 
ture, without the slightest swerving away from it. 

Then with the instrument fashioned in this way, we may wish to obtain the 
place of a star. In the evening, or when the sun is about to set, at a time when we 
also have the moon in view, we will line up the outer ring with the degree of the 15 
ecliptic in which we have found by what precedes that the sun is known to be 
then. We will also turn the intersection of the rings towards the sun, until both 
of them, I mean, the ecliptic and that outer ring which passes through the poles 
[of the ecliptic] cast equal shadows on each other. Then we also turn the inner 
ring toward the moon. Placing our eye in the plane of the inner ring where we 20 
will see the moon opposite, as though it were bisected by the same plane, we 
will mark the spot on the instrument’s ecliptic. For, that will be the observed 
place of the moon in longitude at that time. In fact, without the moon there was 
no way of understanding the positions of the stars, since of all the heavenly bodies 
it alone participates in the day and night. Then, as night descends, the star whose 25 
place we are seeking can now be seen. We fit the outer ring to the position of the 
moon. By means of this ring we adjust the position of the astrolabe to the moon, 
as we did in the case of the sun. Then we also turn the inner ring toward the star, 
until it seems to touch the plane of the ring, and is visible through the eyepieces 
which are on the smaller ring within. For in this way we shall find the longitude so 
of the star together with its latitude. While these operations are being performed, 
the degree of the ecliptic at mid-heaven will be placed before our eyes, and there¬ 
fore it will be clear as crystal at what hour the observation was carried out. 

[Earlier draft: 

After these rings have been arranged in this way, two other rings are made. These are not 35 
equal [to the first two rings] in diameter, but they resemble them in thickness and width. Attach 
the latter pair at the ecliptic’s poles, fitting [one on the] outside and [the other on the] inside. Per¬ 
forate them neatly, and install axles on which they may turn. But they are put together so that the 
outside ring’s convex [surface] and the inside ring’s concave [surface] touch [the ecliptic], yet 
without any friction which could interfere with their being rotated. On the inside ring too, divide 40 
the quadrants into degrees like those into which the ecliptic was divided. Furthermore, on the inside 
ring’s concave surface another ring should be placed in the same plane, in which it can turn without 
interference in relation to the inside ring. To this [fifth ring] attach diametrically opposite brackets 
with apertures, as is the practice in the dioptra, for the purpose of observing the latitudes. Finally, 
a sixth ring must be attached which is capable of supporting the whole astrolabe, fastened to and 45 
swinging on the equator’s [poles], as I said. Put [this sixth ring] on a stand or some other somewhat 
elevated place, where it is sustained perpendicular to the plane of the horizon. Furthermore, when 
its poles have been adjusted to the inclination of the sphere, let the ring keep the meridian as placed 
in nature aligned with itself, and do not let the ring swerve away from the meridian at all. 

Then with the instrument fashioned in this way, we may wish to obtain the place of a star. 50 


82 



BOOK II CH. 14 


In the evening, or when the sun is about to set, at a time when the moon too can be seen, we line 
up the outside ring with the degree of the instrument’s ecliptic in which the sun will be thought 
to appear at that time. We also turn the intersection of the rings toward the sun until both of them, 
the ecliptic and the outside ring which passes through the [ecliptic’s] poles, cast shadows on each 
5 other that are equal and bisect each other. Then we also turn the inner ring toward the moon. 
Placing our eye on one side, where we will see the moon on the opposite side as though bisected 
by the same plane, we mark the spot on the instrument’s ecliptic, since that will be the moon’s 
place in longitude at that time. For without the moon there was no way of arriving at the positions 
of the stars, because it alone is the intermediary between light and darkness. Then, as night descends, 
10 the star whose place we want has now become visible. We put the outside ring on the place of the 
moon. By means of this ring we adjust the position of the astrolabe to the moon, as we did in the 
case of the sun. Then we also turn the inside ring toward the star, until... [The earlier draft ends 
abruptly here]. 


For example, in the 2nd year of the emperor Antoninus Pius, on the 9th day of 
i 5 Pharmuthi, the 8 th Egyptian month, about sunset, Ptolemy in Alexandria wanted to 
observe the place of the star in the chest of the Lion which is called Basiliscus or 
Regulus [Syntaxis VII, 2]. Training his astrolabe on the sun, which was already set¬ 
ting, 5 P/J equinoctial hours after noon, he found the sun at 3 V 24 0 within the 
Fishes. By moving the inner ring, he observed the moon following 92 Vs° after the 
20 sun. Therefore the place of the moon was then seen at 5 1 / 6 ° within the Twins. 
Half an hour later, when the 6 th hour after noon was being completed, the star had 
already begun to appear, as 4° within the Twins was at mid-heaven. Ptolemy 
turned the outer ring of the instrument to the place where the moon had already 
been found. By proceeding with the inner ring, he determined the distance of the 
25 star from the moon in the order of the zodiacal signs as 57 7io°- Now the moon 
was found 92 Vs 0 away from the setting sun, as was mentioned, and this fixed 
the moon at 5 Ve° within the Twins. But in the interval of half an hour the moon 
should have moved 1 j i °, since the fraction per hour of the moon’s motion amounts 
to 1 /a°j more or less. However, on account of the lunar parallax, which had to be 
3 n subtracted at that time, the moon must have moved a little less than 1 / i °, and he 
determined the difference as about Via 0 - Accordingly the moon must have been 
at 5 V 3 0 within the Twins. But when I discuss the lunar parallaxes, it will be evident 
that the difference was not so great [IV, 16]. Hence it can be quite clear that the 
observed place of the moon exceeded 5° within the Twins by more than V 3 0 and 
35 by hardly less than *[ s °. To this position, the addition of 57 Vio° establishes the 
place of the star at 2 V 2 0 within the Lion, at a distance from the sun’s summer 
solstice of about 32 1 I 2 °, with a north latitude of Vs 0 - This was the place of Basi¬ 
liscus, through which the approach to all the other fixed stars lay open. Now 
this observation was performed by Ptolemy, according to the Roman [calendar] 
40 on 23 February 139 C.E., the first year of the 229th Olympiad. 

In this way that most outstanding of astronomers noted the distance of 
each of the stars from the vernal equinox at that time, and he set forth the constella¬ 
tions of the celestial creatures. By these achievements he gave no small assistance 
to this study of mine, and relieved me of quite an arduous task. I believed that the 
45 places of the stars should not be located with reference to the equinoxes, whicfi 
shift in the course of time, but that the equinoxes should be located with reference 
to the sphere of the fixed stars. Hence I can easily start the cataloguing of the 
stars at some other unchangeable beginning. I have decided to commence with 
the Ram, as the first zodiacal sign, and with its first star, which is in its head. 


83 



REVOLUTIONS 


My purpose is that in this way always the same definitive appearance will remain 
for those bodies which shine as a team, as though fixed and linked together, once 
they have taken their permanent place. Now through the wonderful zeal and skill 
of the ancients they were grouped into 48 figures. The exceptions are those stars 
which the circle of the perpetually hidden stars kept from the fourth clime, which 
passes near Rhodes, so that these stars, as unknown to the ancients, remained 
unattached to a constellation. Nor were the stars formed into figures for any 
other reason, according to the opinion of the younger Theon in his commentary 
on Aratus, than that their vast number should be separated into parts, which 
could be known one by one under certain designations. This practice is quite 10 
old, since we read that even Job, Hesiod, and Homer mentioned the Pleiades, 
Hyades, Arcturus, and Orion. Therefore in tabulating the stars according to 
their longitude, I shall not use the twelve zodiacal signs, which are derived from the 
equinoxes and solstices, but the simple and familiar number of degrees. In all 
other respects I shall follow Ptolemy, with a few exceptions, which I find either « 
corrupt or distorted in some way. But the method of determining the distance of 
the stars from those cardinal points will be explained by me in the next Book. 


84 



BOOK II CH. 14 


DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF THE SIGNS AND STARS 
I: THOSE WHICH ARE IN THE NORTHERN REGION 




Longitude 


Latitude 

1 


Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 

5 


grees 

utes 


grees 

Utes 



| LITTLE BEAR OR DOG’S TAIL | 


At the tip of the tail 

53 

30 

N. 

66 

0 

3 


To the east in the tail 

55 

50 

N. 

70 

0 

4 


At the beginning of the tail 

69 

20 

N. 

74 

0 

4 

10 

The more southerly [star] on the western side 








of the quadrangle 

83 

0 

N. 

75 

20 

4 


The northern [star] on the same side 

The more southerly [star] on the [quadran- 

87 

0 

N. 

77 

40 

4 


gle’s] eastern side 

100 

30 

N. 

72 

40 

2 

15 

The northern [star] on the same side 

109 

30 

N. 

74 

50 

2 


7 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 1 of the 3rd, 4 of the 4th 


Near the Dog’s Tail, outside the constellation, 








on a straight line with the [quadrangle’s] 
eastern side, quite far to the south 

103 

20 

N. 

71 

10 

4 

20 

GREAT BEAR, [ALSO] CALLED THE DIPPER 


On the muzzle 

[Of the stars] in the two eyes, the one to the 

78 

40 

N. 

39 

50 

4 


west 

79 

10 

N. 

43 

0 

5 


East of the foregoing 

79 

40 

N. 

43 

0 

5 

25 

[Of the two stars] in the forehead, the one to 








the west 

79 

30 

N. 

47 

10 

5 


The eastern [star] in the forehead 

81 

0 

N. 

47 

0 

5 


At the edge of the western ear 

Of the two [stars] in the neck, the one to 

81 

30 

N. 

50 

30 

5 

30 

the west 

85 

50 

N. 

43 

50 

4 


The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] in the chest, the one to 

92 

50 

N. 

44 

20 

4 


the north 

94 

20 

N. 

44 

0 

4 


The one farther south 

93 

20 

N. 

42 

0 

4 

35 

In the knee of the left foreleg 

Of the two [stars] in the left front paw, the 

89 

0 

N. 

35 

0 

3 


one to the north 

89 

50 

N. 

29 

0 

3 


The one farther south 

88 

40 

N. 

28 

30 

3 


In the knee of the right foreleg 

89 

0 

N. 

36 

0 

4 

40 

Below that knee 

101 

10 

N. 

33 

30 

4 


In the shoulder 

104 

0 

N. 

49 

0 

2 


In the groin 

105 

30 

N. 

44 

30 

2 


At the beginning of the tail 

116 

30 

N. 

51 

0 

3 


In the left hind leg 

117 

20 

N. 

46 

30 

2 

45 

Of the two [stars] in the left hind paw, the 








one to the west 

106 

0 

N. 

29 

38 

3 


East of the foregoing 

107 

30 

N. 

28 

15 

3 


In the joint of the left [hind leg] 

Of the two [stars] in the right hind paw, the 

115 

0 

N. 

35 

15 

4 

50 

one to the north 

123 

10 

N. 

25 

50 

3 


85 





REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

The one farther south 

123 


1 

25 

0 

3 

Of the three [stars] in the tail, the first one 







east of the beginning [of the tail] 

125 

30 

N. 

53 

30 

2 

The one in the middle of these [three] 

131 

20 

N. 

55 

40 

2 

The last one, at the tip of the tail 

143 

10 

N. 

54 

0 

2 

27 stars: 6 of the 2nd magnitude, 8 of the 3rd, 8 of the 4th, 5 of the 5th 

NEAR THE DIPPER, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

South of the tail 

141 

10 

N. 

39 

45 

3 

The dimmer [star] to the west of the foregoing 

133 

30 

N. 

41 

20 

5 

Between the Bear’s front paws and the Lion’s 







head 

98 

20 

N. 

17 

15 

4 

[The star] farther north than the foregoing 

96 

40 

N. 

19 

10 

4 

The last of the three dim [stars] 

99 

30 

N. 

20 

0 

dim 

To the west of the foregoing 

95 

30 

N. 

22 

45 

dim 

Farther west 

94 

30 

N. 

23 

15 

dim 

Between the front paws and the Twins 

100 

20 

N. 

22 

15 

dim 

8 stars outside the constellation: 1 of the 3rd magnitude, 2 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th, 4 dim 

| DRAGON 

In the tongue 

200 

0 

N. 

76 

30 

4 

In the mouth 

215 

10 

N. 

78 

30 

4 brighter 

Above the eye 

216 

30 

N. 

75 

40 

3 

In the cheek 

229 

40 

N. 

75 

20 

4 

Above the head 

223 

30 

N. 

75 

30 

3 

In the first twisting of the neck, the one to 







the north 

258 

40 

N. 

82 

20 

4 

Of these [stars], the one to the south 

295 

50 

N. 

78 

15 

4 

The middle one of these same [stars] 

262 

10 

N. 

80 

20 

4 

East of the foregoing, in the second twisting 







[of the neck] 

282 

50 

N. 

81 

10 

4 

The southern [star] on the western side of the 







quadrilateral 

331 

20 

N. 

81 

40 

4 

The northern [star] on the same side 

343 

50 

N. 

83 

0 

4 

The northern [star] on the eastern side 

1 

0 

N. 

78 

50 

4 

The southern [star] on the same side 

346 

10 

N. 

77 

50 

4 

In the third twisting [of the neck], the south- 







em [star] of the triangle 

4 

0 

N. 

80 

30 

4 

Of the remaining [stars] of the triangle, the 







one to the west 

15 

0 

N. 

81 

40 

5 

The one to the east 

19 

30 

N. 

80 

15 

5 

Of the three [stars] in the triangle to the 







west, [the star to the east] 

66 

20 

N. 

83 

30 

4 

Of the remaining [stars] in the same triangle. 







the one to the south 

43 

40 

N. 

83 

30 

4 

The one to the north of the two preceding 







[stars] 

35 

10 

N. 

84 

50 

4 

Of the two small [stars west] of the triangle. 







the one to the east 

110 

0 

N. 

87 

30 

6 


86 









BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

■ 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

9 

5 

Of these [two stars] the one to the west 

105 

0 

N. 

86 

50 

6 


Of the three [stars] which follow in a straight 








line, the one to the south 

152 

30 

N. 

81 

15 

5 


The middle one of the three 

152 

50 

N. 

83 

0 

5 


The one farther north 

151 

0 

N. 

84 

50 

3 

10 

Of the two [stars] to the west of the fore- 








going, the one farther north 

153 

20 

N. 

78 

0 

3 


[The one] farther south 

156 

30 

N. 

74 

40 

4 brighter 


To the west of the foregoing, in the coil of 








the tail 

156 

0 

N. 

70 

0 

3 

15 

Of the two [stars] at a very great distance. 








the one to the west 

120 

40 

N. 

64 

40 

4 


East of the foregoing 

124 

30 

N. 

65 

30 

3 


To the east, on the tail 

102 

30 

N. 

61 

15 

3 


At the tip of the tail 

96 

30 

N. 

56 

15 

3 

20 

Therefore, 31 stars: 8 of the 3rd magnitude, 17 of the 4th, 4 of the 5th 

2 of the 6th 


CEPHEUS 


In the right foot 

28 

40 

N. 

75 

40 

4 


In the left foot 

26 

20 

N. 

64 

15 

4 


On the right side below the belt 

0 

40 

N. 

71 

10 

4 

25 

Above the right shoulder and touching it 

340 

0 

N. 

69 

0 

3 


Touching the right hip joint 

332 

40 

N. 

72 

0 

4 


East of the same hip and touching it 

333 

20 

N. 

74 

0 

4 


In the chest 

352 

0 

N. 

65 

30 

5 


In the left arm 

1 

0 

N. 

62 

30 

4 brighter 

30 

Of the three [stars] in the tiara, the one to 








the south 

339 

40 

N. 

60 

15 

5 


The one in the middle of these [three] 

340 

40 

N. 

61 

15 

4 


Of the three, the one to the north 

342 

20 

N. 

61 

30 

5 


11 stars: 1 of the 3rd magnitude, 7 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th 

35 

Of the two [stars] outside the constellation. 








the one to the west of the tiara 

337 

0 

N. 

64 

0 

5 


The one to the east of it 

344 

40 

N. 

59 

30 

4 


HERDSMAN OR BEAR-KEEPER 


Of the three [stars] in the left hand, the 







40 

one to the west 

145 

40 

N. 

58 

40 

5 


The middle one of the three, farther south 

147 

30 

N. 

58 

20 

5 


Of the three, the one to the east 

149 

0 

N. 

60 

10 

5 


In the left hip joint 

143 

0 

N. 

54 

40 

5 


In the left shoulder 

163 

0 

N. 

49 

0 

3 

45 

In the head 

170 

0 

N. 

53 

50 

4 brighter 


In the right shoulder 

179 

0 

N. 

48 

40 

4 


Of the two [stars] in the staff, the one far- 








ther south 

179 

0 

N. 

53 

15 

4 


87 









REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

The one farther north, at the tip of the 







5 

staff 

178 

20 

N. 

57 

30 

4 


Of the two [stars] on the spear below the 








shoulder, the one to the north 

181 

0 

N. 

46 

10 

4 brighter 


Of these [two], the one farther south 

181 

50 

N. 

45 

30 

5 


At the tip of the right hand 

181 

35 

N. 

41 

20 

5 

10 

Of the two [stars] in the palm, the one to 








the west 

180 

0 

N. 

41 

40 

5 


East of the foregoing 

180 

20 

N. 

42 

30 

5 


At the tip of the handle of the staff 

181 

0 

N. 

40 

20 

5 


In the right leg 

173 

20 

N. 

40 

15 

3 

15 

Of the two [stars] in the belt, the one to the 








east 

169 

0 

N. 

41 

40 

4 


The one to the west 

168 

20 

N. 

42 

10 

4 brighter 


In the right heel 

178 

40 

N. 

28 

0 

3 


Of the three [stars] in the left leg, the one 







20 

to the north 

164 

40 

N. 

28 

0 

3 


The middle one of the three 

163 

50 

N. 

26 

30 

4 


The one farther south 

164 

50 

N. 

25 

0 

4 


| 22 stars: 4 of the 3rd magnitude, 9 of the 4th 

9 of the 

5th 




Outside the constellation, between the legs. 







25 

called “Arcturus” 

170 

20 

N. 

31 

30 

1 


| NORTHERN CROWN 


The bright [star] in the crown 

188 

0 

N. 

44 

30 

2 brighter 


The [most] westerly of all 

185 

0 

N. 

46 

10 

4 brighter 


East [of the foregoing], to the north 

185 

10 

N. 

48 

0 

5 

30 

East [of the foregoing] farther north 

193 

0 

N. 

50 

30 

6 


East of the bright [star], to the south 

191 

30 

N. 

44 

45 

4 


Immediately to the east [of the foregoing] 

190 

30 

N, 

44 

50 

4 


Somewhat farther to the east of the foregoing 

194 

40 

N. 

46 

10 

4 


The most easterly of all [the stars] in the 







35 

crown 

195 

0 

N. 

49 

20 

4 


|| 8 stars: 1 of the 2nd magnitude, 5 of the 4th, 

l of the 5th, 1 of the 6th 


| KNEELER 


In the head 

221 

0 

N. 

37 

30 

3 


In the right armpit 

207 

0 

N. 

43 

0 

3 

40 

In the right arm 

205 

0 

N. 

40 

10 

3 


In the right [side of the] groin 

201 

20 

N. 

37 

10 

4 


In the left shoulder 

220 

0 

N. 

48 

0 

3 


In the left arm 

225 

20 

N. 

49 

30 

4 brighter 


In the left [side of the] groin 

231 

0 

N. 

42 

0 

4 

45 

Of the three [stars] in the left palm, [the 








one to the east] 

238 

50 

N. 

52 

50 

4 brighter 


Of the other two, the one to the north 

235 

0 

N. 

54 

0 

4 brighter 


The one farther south 

234 

50 

N. 

53 

0 

4 


In the right side 

207 

10 

N. 

56 

10 

3 

50 

In the left side 

213 

30 

N. 

53 

30 

4 



88 




BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min- | 
utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

In the left buttock 

213 

20 

N. 

56 

10 

5 


At the top of the same leg 

214 

30 

N. 

58 

30 

5 


Of the three [stars] in the left leg, the one 








to the west 

217 

20 

N. 

59 

50 

3 


East of the foregoing 

218 

40 

N. 

60 

20 

4 

10 

The third one, east [of the foregoing] 

219 

40 

N. 

61 

15 

4 


In the left knee 

237 

10 

N. 

61 

0 

4 


In the left thigh 

225 

30 

N. 

69 

20 

4 


Of the three [stars] in the left foot, the one 








to the west 

188 

40 

N. 

70 

15 

6 

15 

The middle one of these [three] 

220 

10 

N. 

71 

15 

6 


Of the three, the one to the east 

223 

0 

N. 

72 

0 

6 


At the top of the right leg 

207 

0 

N. 

60 

15 

4 brighter 


[The star] farther north in the same leg 

198 

50 

N. 

63 

0 

4 


In the right knee 

189 

0 

N. 

65 

30 

4 brighter 

20 

Of the two [stars] below the same knee, the 








one farther south 

186 

40 

N. 

63 

40 

4 


The one farther north 

183 

30 

N. 

64 

15 

4 


In the right shin 

184 

30 

N. 

60 

0 

4 


At the tip of the right foot; identical with 







25 

[the star] at the tip of the Herdsman’s staff 

178 

20 

N. 

57 

30 

4 


Not including the foregoing, 28 stars: 6 of the 3rd magnitude, 17 of the 4th, 


2 of the 5th, 3 of the 6th 








Outside the constellation, to the south of 








the right arm 

206 

0 

N. 

38 

10 

5 

30 

LYRE 


The bright [star] called “Lyre” or “Little 








Lute” 

250 

40 

N. 

62 

0 

1 


Of the two adjacent [stars], the one to the 








north 

253 

40 

N. 

62 

40 

4 brighter 

35 

The one farther south 

253 

40 

N. 

61 

0 

4 brighter 


Between the curvature of the arms 

262 

0 

N. 

60 

0 

4 


Of the two [stars] close together in the east. 








the one to the north 

265 

20 

N. 

61 

20 

4 


The one farther south 

265 

0 

N. 

60 

20 

4 

40 

Of the two [stars] to the west on the cross- 








piece, the one to the north 

254 

20 

N. 

56 

10 

3 


The one farther south 

254 

10 

N. 

55 

0 

4 dimmer 


Of the two [stars] to the east on the same 








crosspiece, the one to the north 

257 

30 

N. 

55 

20 

3 

45 

The one farther south 

258 

20 

N. 

54 

45 

4 dimmer 


10 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 2 of the 3rd, 7 of the 4th 


SWAN OR BIRD 


In the mouth 

267 

50 

N. 

49 

20 

3 


In the head 

272 

20 

N. 

50 

30 

5 

50 

In the middle of the neck 

279 

20 

N. 

54 

30 

4 brighter 


89 




REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

■ 

m 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

In the breast 

291 

50 

N. 

56 

20 

3 

The bright [star] in the tail 

302 

30 

N. 

60 

0 

2 

In the bend of the right wing 

282 

40 

N. 

64 

40 

3 

Of the three [stars] in the spread of the 







right [wing], the one farther south 

285 

50 

N. 

69 

40 

4 

The one in the middle 

284 

30 

N. 

71 

30 

4 brighter 

The last of the three, at the tip of the wing 

280 

0 

N. 

74 

0 

4 brighter 

In the bend of the left wing 

294 

10 

N. 

49 

30 

3 

In the middle of that wing 

298 

10 

N. 

52 

10 

4 brighter 

At the tip of the same [wing] 

300 

0 

N. 

74 

0 

3 

In the left foot 

303 

20 

N. 

55 

10 

4 brighter 

In the left knee 

307 

50 

N. 

57 

0 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the right foot, the one 







to the west 

294 

30 

N. 

64 

0 

4 

The one to the east 

296 

0 

N. 

64 

30 

4 

The cloudy [star] in the right knee 

305 

30 

N. 

63 

45 

5 

17 stars: 1 of the 2nd magnitude, 5 of the 3rc 

, 9 of the 4th, 

2 of the 5th 


TWO ADDITIONAL [STARS] NEAR THE SWAN 

OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 


Of the two [stars] below the left wing, the 







one farther south 

306 

0 

N. 

49 

40 

4 

The one farther north 

307 

10 

N. 

51 

40 

4 

1 CASSIOPEA 

In the head 

1 

10 

N. 

45 

20 

4 

In the breast 

4 

10 

N. 

46 

45 

3 brighter 

In the girdle 

6 

20 

N. 

47 

50 

4 1 

Above the seat, at the hips 

10 

0 

N. 

49 

0 

3 brighter 

At the knees 

13 

40 

N. 

45 

30 

3 

In the leg 

20 

20 

N. 

47 

45 

4 

At the tip of the foot 

355 

0 

N. 

48 

20 

4 

In the left arm 

8 

0 

N. 

44 

20 

4 

In the left elbow 

7 

40 

N. 

45 

0 

5 

In the right elbow 

357 

40 

N. 

50 

0 

6 

In the foot of the chair 

8 

20 

N. 

52 

40 

4 

In the middle of the back [of the chair] 

1 

10 

N. 

51 

40 

3 dimmer 

At the edge [of the back of the chair] 

357 

10 

N. 

51 

40 

6 

13 stars: 4 of the 3rd magnitude, 6 of the 4th 

, 1 of the 5th, 

2 of the 6th 


| PERSEUS j 

At the tip of the right hand, in a cloudy 







wrapping 

21 

0 

N. 

40 

30 

cloudy 

In the right elbow 

24 

30 

N. 

37 

30 

4 

In the right shoulder 

26 

0 

N. 

34 

30 

4 dimmer 

In the left shoulder 

20 

50 

N. 

32 

20 

4 

In the head or cloud 

24 

0 

N. 

34 

30 

4 

In the shoulder blades 

24 

50 

N. 

31 

10 

4 

The bright [star] on the right side 

28 

10 

N. 

30 

0 

2 


90 















BOOK II CH. 14 



Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

Constellations of the stars 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

Of the three [stars] on the same side, the 








one to the west 

28 

40 

N. 

27 

30 

4 


The one in the middle 

30 

20 

N. 

27 

40 

4 


The remaining [one] of the three 

31 

0 

N. 

27 

30 

3 


In the left elbow 

24 

0 

N. 

27 

0 

4 

10 

The bright [star] in the left hand, and 








in the head of Medusa 

23 

0 

N. 

23 

0 

2 


In the same head, the one to the east 

22 

30 

N. 

21 

0 

4 


In the same head, the one to the west 

21 

0 

N. 

21 

0 

4 


Still farther west of the foregoing 

20 

10 

N. 

22 

15 

4 

15 

In the right knee 

38 

10 

N. 

28 

15 

4 


In the knee, to the west of the foregoing 

37 

10 

N. 

28 

10 

4 


Of the two [stars] in the belly, the one to 








the west 

35 

40 

N. 

25 

10 

4 


The one to the east 

37 

20 

N. 

26 

15 

4 

20 

In the right hip 

37 

30 

N. 

24 

30 

5 


In the right calf 

39 

40 

N. 

28 

45 

5 


In the left hip 

30 

10 

N. 

21 

40 

4 brighter 


In the left knee 

32 

0 

N. 

19 

50 

3 


In the left leg 

31 

40 

N. 

14 

45 

3 brighter 

25 

In the left heel 

24 

30 

N. 

12 

0 

3 dimmer 


At the top of the foot, on the left side 

29 

40 

N. 

11 

0 

3 brighter 


26 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 5 of the 3rd, 16 of the 4th, 2 of the 5th, 1 cloudy 


NEAR PERSEUS, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 


East of the left knee 

34 

10 

N. 

31 

0 

5 

30 

North of the right knee 

38 

20 

N. 

31 

0 

5 


West of the head of Medusa 

18 

0 

N. 

20 

40 

dim 


3 stars: 2 of the 5th magnitude, 1 dim 


REINSMAN OR CHARIOTEER 


Of the two [stars] in the head, the one 







35 

farther south 

55 

50 

N. 

30 

0 

4 


The one farther north 

55 

40 

N. 

30 

50 

4 


The bright [star] in the left shoulder, called 








“Capella” 

78 

20 

N. 

22 

30 

1 | 


In the right shoulder 

56 

10 

N. 

20 

0 

2 

40 

In the right elbow 

54 

30 

N. 

15 

15 

4 


In the right palm 

56 

10 

N. 

13 

30 

4 brighter 


In the left elbow 

45 

20 

N. 

20 

40 

4 brighter 


Of the goats, the one to the west 

45 

30 

N. 

18 

0 

4 dimmer 


Of the goats in the left palm, the one to 







45 

the east 

46 

0 

N. 

18 

0 

4 brighter 


In the left calf 

53 

10 

N. 

10 

10 

3 dimmer 


In the right calf, and at the tip of the 








northern horn of the Bull 

49 

0 

N. 

5 

0 

3 brighter 


In the ankle 

49 

20 

N. 

8 

30 

5 

50 

In the buttock 

49 

40 

N. 

12 

20 

5 


91 



REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

j De- 
1 grees 

Min¬ 
utes | 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

The small [star] in the left foot 

24 

0 

N. 

10 

20 

6 

14 stars: 1 of the first magnitude, 1 of the 2nd, 2 of the 3rd, 7 of the 4th, 2 of the 5th, 1 of 

1 the 6th 







SERPENT CARRIER OR SNAKE HOLDER 

In the head 

228 

10 

N. 

36 

0 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the right shoulder, the 1 







one to the west 

231 

20 

N. 

27 

15 

4 brighter 

The one to the east 

232 

20 

N. 

26 

45 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the left shoulder, the 







one to the west 

216 

40 

N. 

33 

0 

4 

The one to the east 

218 

0 

N. 

31 

50 

4 

In the left elbow 

211 

40 

N. 

34 

30 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the left hand, the one to 







the west 

208 

20 

N. 

17 

0 

4 

The one to the east 

209 

20 

N. 

12 

30 

3 

In the right elbow 

220 

0 

N. 

15 

0 

4 

In the right hand, the one to the west 

205 

40 

N. 

18 

40 

4 dimmer 

The one to the east 

207 

40 

N. 

14 

20 

4 

In the right knee 

224 

30 

N. 

4 

30 

3 

In the right shin 

227 

0 

N. 

2 

15 

3 brighter 

Of the four [stars] in the right foot, the one to 







the west 

226 

20 

S. 

2 

15 

4 brighter 

The one to the east 

227 

40 

s. 

1 

30 

4 brighter 

The third one, to the east 

228 

20 

s. 

0 

20 

4 brighter 

The remaining one, to the east 

229 

10 

s. 

0 

45 

5 brighter 

Touching the heel 

229 

30 

s. 

1 

0 

5 ij 

In the left knee 

215 

30 

N. 

11 

50 

3 ! i 

Of the three [starsj in the left leg, in a straight 







line, the one to the north 

215 

0 

N. 

5 

20 

5 brighter 

The middle one of these [three] 

214 

0 

N. 

3 

10 

5 

Of the three, the one farther south 

213 

10 

N. 

1 

40 

5 brighter 

In the left heel 

215 

40 

N. 

0 

40 

5 

Touching the instep of the left foot 

214 

0 

S. 

0 

45 

4 

24 stars: 5 of the 3rd magnitude, 13 of the 4th, 6 of the 5th 

NEAR THE SERPENT CARRIER, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the three [stars] to the east of the right 







shoulder, the one farthest north 

235 

20 

N. 

28 

10 

4 

The middle one of the three 

236 

0 

N. 

26 

20 

4 

The southern one of the three 

233 

40 

N. 

25 

0 

4 

Farther east of the three 

237 

0 

N. 

27 

0 

4 

At a distance from the four, to the north 

238 

0 

N. 

33 

0 

4 

Therefore, 5 [stars] outside the constellation, all of the 4th magnitude i 

THE SERPENT OF THE SERPENT CARRIER 

In the quadrilateral, in the cheek 

192 

10 

N. 

38 

0 

4 

Touching the nostrils 

201 

0 

N. 

40 

0 

4 


92 





BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

In the temple 

197 

40 

N. 

35 

0 

3 


At the beginning of the neck 

195 

20 

N. 

34 

15 

3 


In the middle of the quadrilateral and in the 








mouth 

194 

40 

N. 

37 

15 

4 


North of the head 

201 

30 

N. 

42 

30 

4 

10 

In the first curve of the neck 

195 

0 

N. 

29 

15 

3 


Of the three [stars] to the east, the one to the 








north 

198 

10 

N. 

26 

30 

4 


The middle one of these 

197 

40 

N. 

25 

20 

3 


The most southerly of the three 

199 

40 

N. 

24 

0 

3 

15 

Of the two [stars] in the Snake Holder’s left 








[hand], the one to the west 

202 

0 

N. 

16 

30 

4 


East of the foregoing in the same hand 

211 

30 

N. 

16 

15 

5 


East of the right hip 

227 

0 

N. 

10 

30 

4 


Of the two [stars] east [of the foregoing], the 







20 

one to the south 

230 

20 

N. 

8 

30 

4 brighter 


The one to the north 

231 

10 

N. 

10 

30 

4 


East of the right hand in the coil of the tail 

237 

0 

N. 

20 

0 

4 


East [of the foregoing] in the tail 

242 

0 

N. 

21 

10 

4 brighter 


At the tip of the tail 

251 

40 

N. 

27 

0 

4 

25 

18 stars: 5 of the 3rd magnitude, 12 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th 


ARROW 


At the tip 

273 

30 

N. 

39 

20 

4 


Of the three [stars] in the shaft, the one to the 








east 

270 

0 

N. 

39 

10 

6 

30 

The middle one of these [three] 

269 

10 

N. 

39 

50 

5 


The western one of the three 

268 

0 

N. 

39 

0 

5 


In the notch 

266 

40 

N. 

38 

45 

5 


5 stars: 1 of the 4th magnitude, 3 of the 5th, 

1 of the 6th 






EAGLE | 

35 

In the middle of the head 

270 

30 

N. 

26 

50 

4 


In the neck 

268 

10 

N. 

27 

10 

3 


In the shoulder blades, the bright [star] called 








the “Eagle” 

267 

10 

N. 

29 

10 

2 brighter 


Very near the foregoing, farther north 

268 

0 

N. 

30 

0 

3 dimmer 

40 

In the left shoulder, the one to the west 

266 

30 

N. 

31 

30 

3 


The one to the east 

269 

20 

N. 

31 

30 

5 


In the right shoulder, the one to the west 

263 

0 

N. 

28 

40 

5 


The one to the east 

264 

30 

N. 

26 

40 

5 brighter 


In the tail, touching the Milky Way 

255 

30 

N. 

26 

30 

3 

45 

9 stars: 1 of the 2nd magnitude, 4 of the 3rd, 1 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th 


NEAR THE EAGLE, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 


South of the head, the one to the west 

272 

0 

N. 

21 

40 

3 


The one to the east 

272 

10 

N. 

29 

10 

3 


93 




REVOLUTIONS 



Longitude 

Latitude 


Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 


grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


To the southwest of the right shoulder 

259 

20 

N. 

25 

0 

4 brighter 

To the south [of the foregoing] 

261 

30 

N. 

20 

0 

3 

Farther south 

The westernmost of all [six stars outside the 

263 

0 

N. 

15 

30 

5 

constellation] 

254 

30 

N. 

18 

10 

3 

6 stars outside the constellation: 4 of the 3rd magnitude, 1 of the 4th, and 1 of the 5th 

DOLPHIN 

Of the three [stars] in the tail, the one to the 







west 

281 

0 

N. 

29 

10 

3 dimmer 

Of the other two, the one farther north 

282 

0 

N. 

29 

0 

4 dimmer 

The one farther south 

In the western side of the rhomboid, the one 

282 

0 

N. 

26 

40 

4 

farther south 

281 

50 

N. 

32 

0 

3 dimmer 

In the same side, the one to the north 

283 

30 

N. 

33 

50 

3 dimmer 

In the eastern side, the one to the south 

284 

40 

N. 

32 

0 

3 dimmer 

In the same side, the one to the north 

Of the three [stars] between the tail and the 

286 

50 

N. 

33 

10 

3 dimmer 

rhombus, the one farther south 

Of the other two toward the north, the one to 

280 

50 

N. 

34 

15 

6 

the west 

280 

50 

N. 

31 

50 

6 

The one to the east 

282 

20 

N. 

31 

30 

6 

10 stars, namely, 5 of the 3rd magnitude, 2 of the 4th, 3 of the 6th 

HORSE SEGMENT 

Of the two [stars] in the head, the one to the 







west 

289 

40 

N. 

20 

30 

dim 

The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] in the mouth, the one to the 

292 

20 

N. 

20 

40 

dim 

west 

289 

40 

N. 

25 

30 

dim 

The one to the east 

291 

0 

N. 

25 

0 

dim 

4 stars, all dim 

WINGED HORSE OR PEGASUS ! 

In the open mouth 

Of the two [stars] close together in the head. 

298 

40 

N. 

21 

30 

3 brighter 

the one to the north 

302 

40 

N. 

16 

50 

3 

The one farther south 

Of the two [stars] in the mane, the one farther 

301 

20 

N. 

16 

0 

4 

south 

314 

40 

N. 

15 

0 

5 

The one farther north 

Of the two [stars] in the neck, the one to the 

313 

50 

N. 

16 

0 

5 

west 

312 

10 

N. 

18 

0 

3 

The one to the east 

313 

50 

N. 

19 

0 

4 

In the left hock 

305 

40 

N. 

36 

30 

4 brighter 

In the left knee 

311 

0 

N. 

34 

15 

4 brighter 


94 



BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

In the right hock 

317 

0 

N. 

41 

10 

4 brighter 


Of the two [stars] close together in the chest. 








the one to the west 

319 

30 

N. 

29 

0 

4 


The one to the east 

320 

20 

N. 

29 

30 

4 


Of the two [stars] in the right knee, the one to 







10 

the north 

322 

20 

N. 

35 

0 

3 


The one farther south 

321 

50 

N. 

24 

30 

5 


Of the two [stars] in the body below the wing. 








the one to the north 

327 

50 

N. 

25 

40 

4 


The one farther south 

328 

20 

N. 

25 

0 

4 

15 

In the shoulder blades and attachment of the 








wing 

350 

0 

N. 

19 

40 

2 dimmer 


In the right shoulder and top of the leg 

325 

30 

N. 

31 

0 

2 dimmer 


At the tip of the wing 

335 

30 

N. 

12 

30 

2 dimmer 


In the midriff; also in the head of Andromeda 

341 

10 

N. 

26 

0 

2 dimmer 

20 

20 stars, namely, 4 of the 2nd magnitude, 4 of the 3rd, 9 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th 


ANDROMEDA 


In the shoulder blades 

348 

40 

N. 

24 

30 

3 


In the right shoulder 

349 

40 

N. 

27 

0 

4 


In the left shoulder 

347 

40 

N. 

23 

0 

4 

25 

Of the three [stars] in the right arm, the one 








farther south 

347 

0 

N. 

32 

0 

4 


The one farther north 

348 

0 

N. 

33 

30 

4 


The middle one of the three 

348 

20 

N. 

32 

20 

5 


Of the three [stars] at the tip of the right 







30 

hand, the one farther south 

343 

0 

N. 

41 

0 

4 


The middle one of these [three] 

344 

0 

N. 

42 

0 

4 


The northern one of the three 

345 

30 

N. 

44 

0 

4 


In the left arm 

347 

30 

N. 

17 

30 

4 


In the left elbow 

349 

0 

N. 

15 

50 

3 

35 

Of the three [stars] in the girdle, the one to 








the south 

357 

10 

N. 

25 

20 

3 


The one in the middle 

355 

10 

N. 

30 

0 

3 


The northern one of the three 

355 

20 

N. 

32 

30 

3 


In the left foot 

10 

10 

N. 

23 

0 

3 

40 

In the right foot 

10 

30 

N. 

37 

20 

4 brighter 


To the south of these 

8 

30 

N. 

35 

20 

4 brighter 


Of the two [stars] below the back of the knee. 








the one to the north 

5 

40 

N. 

29 

0 

4 


The one to the south 

5 

20 

N. 

28 

0 

4 

45 

In the right knee 

5 

30 

N. 

35 

30 

5 


Of the two [stars] in the robe or its train, the 








one to the north 

6 

0 

N. 

34 

30 

5 


The one to the south 

7 

30 

N. 

32 

30 

5 | 


At a distance from the right hand and outside 







50 

the constellation 

5 

0 

N. 

44 

0 

3 


23 stars, since [there are] 7 of the 3rd magnitude, 12 of the 4th, 4 of the 5th 


95 






REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

TRIANGLE [ 

In the vertex of the triangle 

4 

20 

N. 

16 

30 

3 

Of the three [stars] in the base, the one to the 







west 

9 

20 

N. 

20 

40 

3 

The one in the middle 

9 

30 

N. 

20 

20 

4 

Of the three, the one to the east 

10 

10 

N. 

19 

0 

3 


4 stars: 3 of the 3rd magnitude, 1 of the 4th 


Accordingly, in the northern region [there are] altogether 360 stars: 3 of the 1st magnitude, 
18 of the 2nd, 81 of the 3rd, 177 of the 4th, 58 of the 5th, 13 of the 6th, 1 cloudy, 9 dim. 


96 







BOOK II CH. 14 


[II:] THOSE WHICH ARE IN THE MIDDLE AND NEAR THE ZODIAC 


5 

Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 


Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 



RAM 


Of the two [stars] in the horn, the one to the 








west, and the first of all [the stars] 

0 

0 

N. 

7 

20 

3 dimmer 


In the horn, the one to the east 

i 

0 

N. 

8 

20 

3 

10 

Of the two [stars] in the open mouth, the one 








to the north 

4 

20 

N. 

7 

40 

5 


The one farther south 

4 

50 

N. 

6 

0 

5 i 


In the neck 

9 

50 

N. 

5 

30 

5 


In the loins 

10 

50 

N. 

6 

0 

6 i 

15 

At the beginning of the tail 

14 

40 

N. 

4 

50 

5 


Of the three [stars] in the tail, the one to the 








west 

17 

10 

N. 

1 

40 

4 


The one in the middle 

18 

40 

N. 

2 

30 

4 


Of the three, the one to the east 

20 

20 

N. 

1 

50 

4 

20 

In the hip 

13 

0 

N. 

1 

10 

5 


Behind the knee 

11 

20 

S. 

1 

30 

5 


At the tip of the hind foot 

8 

10 

S. 

5 

15 

4 brighter 


13 stars: 2 of the 3rd magnitude, 4 of the 4th, 6 of the 5th 

1 of the 6th 



NEAR THE RAM, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

25 

The bright [star] above the head 

3 

50 

N. 

10 

0 

3 brighter 


Above the back, the farthest to the north 

15 

0 

N. 

10 

10 

4 


Of the remaining three dim [stars], the one to 








the north 

14 

40 

N. 

12 

40 

5 


The one in the middle 

13 

0 

N. 

10 

40 

5 

30 

Of these [three], the one to the south 

12 

30 

N. 

10 

40 

5 


5 stars: 1 of the 3rd magnitude, 1 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th 


BULL 


Of the four [stars] at the cut, the one farthest 








north 

19 

40 

S. 

6 

0 

4 

35 

The second one, after the foregoing 

19 

20 

S. 

7 

15 

4 


The third one 

18 

0 

s. 

8 

30 

4 


The fourth one, the farthest south 

17 

50 

s. 

9 

15 

4 


In the right shoulder 

23 

0 

s. 

9 

30 

5 


In the chest 

27 

0 

s. 

8 

0 

3 

40 

In the right taaee 

30 

0 

s. 

12 

40 

4 


In the right hock 

26 

20 

s. 

14 

50 

4 


In the left knee 

35 

30 

s. 

10 

0 

4 


In the left hock 

36 

20 

s. 

13 

30 

4 


Of the Hyades, the 5 [stars] in the face which 







45 

are called the "Piglets”, the one in the 








nostrils 

32 

0 

s. 

5 

45 

3 dimmer 


Between the foregoing and the northern eye 

33 

40 

s. 

4 

15 

3 dimmer 


Between the same [star] and the southern eye 

34 

10 

s. 

0 

50 

3 dimmer 


In that eye, the bright [star] called “Palili- 







50 

cium” by the Romans 

36 

0 

s. 

5 

10 

1 


97 






REVOLUTIONS 


Venus’ 

apogee 

48°20' 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 


m 


■ 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

Magnitude 

In the northern eye 

35 

10 



0 

3 dimmer 

Between the beginning of the southern horn 







and the ear 

40 

30 

S. 

4 

0 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the same horn, the one 







farther south 

43 

40 

S. 

5 

0 

4 

The one farther north 

43 

20 

s. 

3 

30 

5 

At the tip of the same [horn] 

50 

30 

s. 

2 

30 

3 

At the beginning of the northern horn 

49 

0 

s. 

4 

0 

4 

At the tip of the same [horn], and also in the 







right foot of the Reinsman 

49 

0 

N. 

5 

0 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the northern ear, the one 







to the north 

35 

20 

N. 

4 

30 

5 

Of these [two], the one to the south 

35 

0 

N. 

4 

0 

5 

Of the two small [stars] in the neck, the one to 







the west 

30 

20 

N. 

0 

40 

5 

The one to the east 

32 

20 

N. 

1 

0 

6 

Of the western [stars] of the quadrilateral in 







the neck, the one to the south 

31 

20 

N. 

5 

0 

5 

The one to the north on the same side 

32 

10 

N. 

7 

10 

5 

The one to the south on the eastern side 

35 

20 

N. 

3 

0 

5 

The one to the north on this side 

35 

0 

N. 

5 

0 

5 

Of the western side of the Pleiades, the north- 







em end [called] “Vergiliae” 

25 

30 

N. 

4 

30 

5 

The southern end of the same side 

25 

50 

N. 

4 

40 

5 

The eastern, very narrow end of the Pleiades 

27 

0 

N. 

5 

20 

5 

The small [star] of the Pleiades, at a distance 







from the outermost 

26 

0 

N. 

3 

0 

5 

32 stars, not including the one at the tip of the northern horn: I of the 1st magnitude, j 

| 6 of the 3rd, 11 of the 4th, 13 of the 5th, 1 of the 6 th 





NEAR THE BULL, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION | 

Below, between the foot and the shoulder 

18 

20 

S. 

17 

30 

4 

Of the three [stars] near the southern horn. 







the one to the west 

43 

20 

S. 

2 

0 

5 

The middle one of the three 

47 

20 

s. 

1 

45 

5 

The eastern one of the three 

49 

20 

s. 

2 

0 

5 

Of the two [stars] below the tip of the same 







horn, the one to the north 

52 

20 

s. 

6 

20 

5 

The one to the south 

52 

20 

s. 

7 

40 

5 

Of the five [stars] below the northern horn. 







the one to the west 

50 

20 

N. 

2 

40 

5 

The second one to the east 

52 

20 

N. 

1 

0 

5 

The third one to the east 

54 

20 

N. 

1 

20 

5 

Of the remaining two, the one to the north 

55 

40 

N. 

3 

20 

5 

The one to the south 

56 

40 

N. 

1 

15 

5 

11 stars outside the constellation: 1 of the 4th magnitude. 

10 of the 5th 


TWINS 

In the head of the western Twin, Castor 

76 

40 

N. 

9 

30 

2 


98 










BOOK II CH. 14 




Longitude 

j Latitude 



Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 



grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


5 

The yellowish [star] in the head of the eastern 








Twin, Pollux 

79 

50 

N. 

6 

15 

2 


In the left elbow of the western Twin 

70 

0 

N. 

10 

0 

4 


In the same arm 

72 

0 

N. 

7 

20 

4 


In the shoulder blades of the same Twin 

75 

20 

N. 

5 

30 

4 

10 

In the right shoulder of the same [Twin] 

77 

20 

N. 

4 

50 

4 


In the left shoulder of the eastern Twin 

80 

0 

N. 

2 

40 

4 


In the right side of the western Twin 

75 

0 

N. 

2 

40 

5 


In the left side of the eastern Twin 

76 

30 

N. 

3 

0 

5 


In the left knee of the western Twin 

66 

30 

N. 

1 

30 

3 

15 

In the left knee of the eastern [Twin] 

71 

35 

S. 

2 

30 

3 


In the left groin of the same [Twin] 

75 

0 

S. 

0 

30 

3 


In the right joint of the same [Twin] 

The western [star] in the foot of the western 

74 

40 

s. 

0 

40 

3 


Twin 

60 

0 

s. 

1 

30 

4 brighter 

20 

The eastern [star] in the same foot 

61 

30 

s. 

1 

15 

4 


At the end of the foot of the western Twin 

63 

30 

s. 

3 

30 

4 


At the top of the foot of the eastern [Twin] 

65 

20 

s. 

7 

30 

3 


At the bottom of the same foot 

68 

0 

s. 

10 

30 

4 


18 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 5 of the 3rd, 9 of the 4th 

, 2 of the 5th 


25 

NEAR THE TWINS, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 


The western [star] at the top of the foot of the 








western Twin 

57 

30 

S. 

0 

40 

4 


The bright [star] west of the hnee of the same 








[Twin] 

59 

50 

N. 

5 

50 

4 brighter 

30 

West of the left knee of the eastern Twin 
Of the three [stars] east of the right hand of 

68 

30 

S. 

2 

15 

5 


the eastern [Twin], the one to the north 

81 

40 

S. 

1 

20 

5 


The one in the middle 

Of the three [stars] near the right arm, the one 

79 

40 

s. 

3 

20 

5 

35 

to the south 

79 

20 

s. 

4 

30 

5 


The bright [star] east of the three 

84 

0 

s. 

2 

40 

4 


7 stars outside the constellation: 3 of the 4th magnitude, 4 of the 5th 


CRAB 


The middle [star] in the cloud in the chest; 







40 

called “Praesepe” 

Of the two western [stars] of the quadrilateral. 

93 

40 

N. 

0 

40 

cloudy 


the one to the north 

91 

0 

N. 

1 

15 

4 dimmer 


The one to the south 

Of the two eastern [stars] called the “Asses”, 

91 

20 

s. 

1 

10 

4 dimmer 

45 

the one to the north 

93 

40 

N. 

2 

40 

4 brighter 


The southern Ass 

94 

40 

S. 

0 

10 

4 brighter 


In the southern claw or arm 

99 

50 

s. 

5 

30 

4 


In the northern arm 

91 

40 

N. 

11 

50 

4 


At the tip of the northern foot 

86 

0 

N. 

1 

0 

5 

50 

At the tip of the southern foot 

90 

30 

S. 

7 

30 

4 brighter 


9 stars: 7 of the 4th magnitude, 1 of the 5th, 1 cloudy 


99 








REVOLUTIONS 


Mars’ 

apogee 

109°50' 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

NEAR THE CRAB, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Above the elbow of the southern claw 

103 

0 

S. 

2 

40 

4 dimmer 

East of the tip of the same claw 

105 

0 

S. 

5 

40 

4 dimmer 

Of the two [stars] above the small cloud, the 







one to the west 

97 

20 

N. 

4 

50 

5 

East of the foregoing 

100 

20 

N. 

7 

15 

5 

4 [stars] outside the constellation: 2 of the 4th magnitude, 2 of the 5th 

LION 

In the nostrils 

101 

40 

N. 

10 

0 

4 

In the open mouth 

104 

30 

N. 

7 

30 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the head, the one to the 







north 

107 

40 

N. 

12 

0 

3 

The one to the south 

107 

30 

N. 

9 

30 

3 brighter 

Of the three [stars] in the neck, the one to the 







north 

113 

30 

N. 

11 

0 

3 

The one in the middle 

115 

30 

N. 

8 

30 

2 

Of the three, the one to the south 

114 

0 

N. 

4 

30 

3 

In the heart; called "Little King” or 







“Regulus” 

115 

50 

N. 

0 

10 

1 

Of the two [stars] in the chest, the one to the 







south 

116 

50 

S. 

1 

50 

4 

Slightly to the west of the star in the heart 

113 

20 

s. 

0 

15 

5 

In the knee of the right foreleg 

110 

40 


0 

0 

5 

In the right paw 

117 

30 

s. 

3 

40 

6 

In the knee of the left foreleg 

122 

30 

s. 

4 

10 

4 

In the left paw 

115 

50 

s. 

4 

15 

4 

In the left armpit 

122 

30 

s. 

0 

10 

4 

Of the three [stars] in the belly, the one to the 







west 

120 

20 

N. 

4 

0 

6 

Of the two to the east, the one to the north 

1 126 

20 

N. 

5 

20 

6 

The one to the south 

125 

40 

N. 

2 

20 

6 

Of the two [stars] in the loins, the one to the 







west 

124 

40 

N. 

12 

15 

5 

The one to the east 

127 

30 

N. 

13 

40 

2 

Of the two [stars] in the buttock, the one to 







the north 

127 

40 

N. 

11 

30 

5 

The one to the south 

129 

40 

N. 

9 

40 

3 

In the hind hip 

133 

40 

N. 

5 

50 

3 

In the bend [of the leg] 

135 

0 

N. 

1 

15 

4 

In the joint of the hind [leg] 

135 

0 

S. 

0 

50 

4 

In the hind foot 

134 

0 

S. 

3 

0 

5 

At the tip of the tail 

137 

50 

N. 

11 

50 

1 dimmer 

I 27 stars: 2 of the 1st magnitude, 2 of the 2nd, 6 of the 3rd, 8 of the 4th, 5 of the 5th, 4 of j 

the 6th 







| NEAR THE LION, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the two [stars] above the back, the one to 







the west 

119 

20 

N. 

13 

20 

5 


100 




BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

| Longitude 

Latitude 



De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 



grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


s 

The one to the east 

Of the three [stars] below the belly, the one to 

121 

30 

N. 

15 

30 

5 


the north 

129 

50 

N. 

1 

10 

4 dimmer 


The one in the middle 

130 

30 

S. 

0 

30 

5 


Of the three, the one to the south 

132 

20 

S. 

2 

40 

5 

10 

In the cloudy formation between the outer- 








most [stars] of the Lion and the Bear, the 
star farthest to the north, called “Bereni¬ 
ce’s Hair” 

138 

10 

N. 

30 

0 

brilliant 


Of the two [stars] to the south, the one to the 







15 

west 

133 

50 

N. 

25 

0 

dim 


The one to the east, in the shape of an ivy 








leaf 

141 

50 

N. 

25 

30 

dim 


Outside the constellation, 8 [stars]: 1 of the 4th magnitude, 4 of the 5th, 1 brilliant, 2 dim 


VIRGIN 

20 

Of the two [stars] at the top of the head, the 








one to the west and south 

139 

40 

N. 

4 

15 

5 


The one to the east and farther north 

Of the two [stars] in the face, the one to the 

140 

20 

N. 

5 

40 

5 


north 

144 

0 

N. 

8 

0 

5 

25 

The one to the south 

143 

30 

N. 

5 

30 

5 


At the tip of the left, southern wing 

Of the four [stars] in the left wing, the one to 

142 

20 

N. 

6 

0 

3 


the west 

151 

35 

N. 

1 

10 

3 


The second one, to the east 

156 

30 

N. 

2 

50 

3 

30 

The third 

160 

30 

N. 

2 

50 

5 


The last of the four, to the east 

164 

20 

N. 

1 

40 

4 


In the right side below the girdle 

Of the three [stars] in the right, northern 

157 

40 

N. 

8 

30 

3 


wing, the one to the west 

151 

30 

N. 

13 

50 

5 

35 

Of the other two, the one to the south 

Of these [two], the one to the north, called 

153 

30 

N. 

11 

40 

6 


“Vindemiator” 

155 

30 

N. 

15 

10 

3 brighter 


In the left hand; called the “Spike” 

170 

0 

S. 

2 

0 

1 


Below the girdle and in the right buttock 

168 

10 

N. 

8 

40 

3 

40 

Of the western [stars] in the quadrilateral in 








the left hip, the one to the north 

169 

40 

N. 

2 

20 

5 


The one to the south 

Of the two eastern [stars], the one to the 

170 

20 

N. 

0 

10 

6 


north 

173 

20 

N. 

1 

30 

4 

45 

The one to the south 

171 

20 

N. 

0 

20 

5 


In the left knee 

175 

0 

N. 

1 

30 

5 


On the eastern [side] of the right hip 

171 

20 

N. 

8 

30 

5 


In the gown, the one in the middle 

180 

0 

N. 

7 

30 

4 


The one to the south 

180 

40 

N. 

2 

40 

4 

50 

The one to the north 

181 

40 

N. 

11 

40 

4 i 


In the left, southern foot 

183 

20 

N. 

0 

30 

4 


In the right, northern foot 

186 

0 

N. 

9 

50 

3 


26 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 7 of the 3rd, 

6 of the 4th, 10 of the 5th, 2 of the 6th 


Jupiter’s 

apogee 

154°20' 


Mercury’s 

apogee 

183°20' 


101 




REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

NEAR THE VIRGIN, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the three [stars] in a straight line below the 







left arm, the one to the west 

158 

0 

S. 

3 

30 

5 

The one in the middle 

162 

20 

S. 

3 

30 

5 

The one to the east 

165 

35 

S. 

3 

20 

5 

Of the three [stars] in a straight line below the 







Spike, the one to the west 

170 

30 

S. 

7 

20 

6 

The one in the middle, a double [star] 

171 

30 

S. 

8 

20 

5 

Of the three, the one to the east 

173 

20 

S. 

7 

50 

6 

6 [stars] outside the constellation: 4 of the 5th magnitude, 2 of the 6th 

CLAWS 

Of the two [stars] at the tip of the southern 







claw, the bright one 

191 

20 

N. 

0 

40 

2 brighter 

The dimmer one to the north 

190 

20 

N. 

2 

30 

5 

Of the two [stars] at the tip of the northern 







claw, the bright one 

195 

30 

N. 

8 

30 

2 

The dimmer one, west of the foregoing 

191 

0 

N. 

8 

30 

5 

In the middle of the southern claw 

197 

20 

N. 

1 

40 

4 

In the same [claw], the one to the west 

194 

40 

N. 

1 

15 

4 

In the middle of the northern claw 

200 

50 

N. 

3 

45 

4 

In the same [claw, the star] to the east 

206 

20 

N. 

4 

30 

4 

8 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 4 of the 4th, 2 of the 5th 

NEAR THE CLAWS, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the three [stars] north of the northern claw. 







the one to the west 

199 

30 

N. 

9 

0 

5 

Of the two to the east, the one to the south 

207 

0 

N. 

6 

40 

4 

Of these [two], the one to the north 

207 

40 

N. 

9 

15 

4 

Of the three [stars] between the claws, the one 







to the east 

205 

50 

N. 

5 

30 

6 

Of the other two to the west, the one to the 







north 

203 

40 

N. 

2 

0 

4 

The one to the south 

204 

30 

N. 

1 

30 

5 

Of the three [stars] below the southern claw. 







| the one to the west 

196 

20 

S. 

7 

30 

3 

Of the other two to the east, the one to the 







north 

204 

30 

S. 

8 

10 

4 

The one to the south 

205 

20 

s. 

9 

40 

4 

9 [stars] outside the constellation: 1 of the 3rd magnitude, 5 of the 4th, 2 of the 5th, 1 of 1 

| the 6th 







| SCORPION 

Of the three bright [stars] in the forehead, the 







one to the north 

209 

40 

N. 

1 

20 

3 brighter 

The one in the middle 

209 

0 

s. 

1 

40 

3 

Of the three, the one to the south 

209 

0 

s. 

5 

0 

3 


102 






BOOK II CH. 14 




Longitude 

Latitude 



Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 



grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


5 

Farther south and in the foot 

Of the two [stars] close together, the bright 

209 

20 

S. 

7 

50 

3 


one to the north 

210 

20 

N. 

1 

40 

4 


The one to the south 

Of the three bright [stars] in the body, the one 

210 

40 

N. 

0 

30 

4 

10 

to the west 

214 

0 

S. 

3 

45 

3 


The reddish [star] in the middle, called 








“Antares” 

216 

0 

S. 

4 

0 

2 brighter 


Of the three, the one to the east 

Of the two [stars] in the last claw, the one to 

217 

50 

s. 

5 

30 

3 

15 

the west 

212 

40 

s. 

6 

10 

5 


The one to the east 

213 

50 

s. 

6 

40 

5 


In the first segment of the body 

221 

50 

s. 

11 

0 

3 


In the second segment 

Of the double [star] in the third [segment], the 

222 

10 

s. 

15 

0 

4 

20 

one to the north 

223 

20 

s. 

18 

40 

4 


Of the double [star], the one to the south 

223 

30 

s. 

18 

0 

3 


In the fourth segment 

226 

30 

s. 

19 

30 

3 


In the fifth [segment] 

231 

30 

s. 

18 

50 

3 


In the sixth segment 

233 

50 

s. 

16 

40 

3 

25 

In the seventh [segment], the star next to the 
sting 

Of the two [stars] in the sting, the one to the 

; 232 

20 

s. 

15 

10 

3 


east 

230 

50 

s. 

13 

20 

3 


The one to the west 

230 

20 

s. 

13 

30 

4 

30 

21 stars: 1 of the 2nd magnitude, 13 of the 3rd, 5 of the 4th, 

2 of the 5th 



NEAR THE SCORPION, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 


The cloudy [star], east of the sting 

Of the two [stars] north of the sting, the one 

234 

30 

s. 

13 

15 

cloudy 


to the west 

228 

50 

s. 

6 

10 

5 

35 

The one to the east 

232 

50 

s. 

4 

10 

5 


3 [stars] outside the constellation: 2 of the 5th magnitude, 1 cloudy 


ARCHER 


At the tip of the arrow 

237 

50 

s. 

6 

30 

3 


In the grip of the left hand 

241 

0 

s. 

6 

30 

3 

40 

In the southern part of the bow 

Of the two [stars] in the northern [part of the 

241 

20 

s. 

10 

50 

3 


bowj, the one to the south 

242 

20 

s. 

1 

30 

3 


Farther north at the tip of the bow 

240 

0 

N. 

2 

50 

4 


In the left shoulder 

248 

40 

s. 

3 

10 

3 

45 

To the west of the foregoing, in the arrow 

246 

20 

s. 

3 

50 

4 


The double, cloudy [star] in the eye 

Of the three [stars] in the head, the one to the 

248 

30 

N. 

0 

45 

cloudy 


west 

249 

0 

N. 

2 

10 

4 


The one in the middle 

251 

0 

N. 

1 

30 

4 brighter 

50 

The one to the east 

252 

30 

N. 

2 

0 

4 


Saturn’s 

apogee 

226°30' 


103 





REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

1 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

Of the three [stars] in the northern [part of 







the] garment, the one farther south 

254 

40 

N. 

2 

50 

4 

The one in the middle 

255 

40 

N. 

4 

30 

4 

Of the three, the one to the north 

256 

10 

N. 

6 

30 

4 

The dim [star] east of the three [foregoing] 

259 

0 

N. 

5 

30 

6 

Of the two [stars] in the southern [part of the] 







garment, the one to the north 

262 

50 

N. 

5 

50 

5 

The one to the south 

261 

0 

N. 

2 

0 

6 

In the right shoulder 

255 

40 

S. 

1 

50 

5 

In the right elbow 

258 

10 

S. 

2 

50 

5 

In the shoulder blades 

253 

20 

s. 

2 

30 

5 

In the broad of the back 

251 

0 

s. 

4 

30 

4 brighter 

Below the armpit 

249 

40 

s. 

6 

45 

3 

In the hock of the left front [leg] 

251 

0 

s. 

23 

0 

2 

In the knee of the same leg 

250 

20 

s. 

18 

0 

2 

In the hock of the right front [leg] 

240 

0 

s. 

13 

0 

3 

In the left shoulder blade 

260 

40 

s. 

13 

30 

3 

In the knee of the right front [leg] 

260 

0 

s. 

20 

10 

3 

Of the four [stars] on the northern side at the 







beginning of the tail, the one to the west 

261 

0 

s. 

4 

50 

5 

On the same side, the one to the east 

261 

10 

s. 

4 

50 

5 

On the southern side, the one to the west 

261 

50 

s. 

5 

50 

5 

On the same side, the one to the east 

263 

0 

s. 

6 

30 

5 ; 

31 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 9 of the 3rd, 9 of the 4th, 8 of the 5th, 2 of the 6th, 

1 cloudy 







| GOAT | 

Of the three [stars] in the western horn, the 







one to the north 

270 

40 

N. 

7 

30 

3 

The one in the middle 

271 

0 

N. 

6 

40 

6 

Of the three, the one to the south 

270 

40 

N. 

5 

0 

3 

At the tip of the eastern horn 

272 

20 

N. 

8 

0 

6 

Of the three [stars] in the open mouth, the one 







to the south 

272 

20 

N. 

0 

45 

6 

Of the other two, the one to the west 

272 

0 

N. 

1 

45 

6 

The one to the east 

272 

10 

N. 

1 

30 

6 

Below the right eye 

270 

30 

N. 

0 

40 

5 

Of the two [stars] in the neck, the one to the 







north 

275 

0 

N. 

4 

50 

6 

The one to the south 

275 

10 

S. 

0 

50 

5 

In the right knee 

274 

10 

s. 

6 

30 

4 

In the left, bent knee 

275 

0 

s. 

8 

40 

4 

In the left shoulder 

280 

0 

s. 

7 

40 

4 

Of the two [stars] close together below the 







belly, the one to the west 

283 

30 

s. 

6 

50 

4 

The one to the east 

283 

40 

s. 

6 

0 

5 

Of the three [stars] in the middle of the body. 







the one to the east 

282 

0 

s. 

4 

15 

5 

Of the two others to the west, the one to the 







south 

280 

0 

s. 

4 

0 

5 


104 




BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 



De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 



grccs 

utes 


grees 

utes 


5 

Of these [two], the one to the north 

Of the two [stars] in the back, the one to the 

280 

0 

S. 

2 

50 

5 


west 

280 

0 

S. 

0 

0 

4 


The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] in the southern [part of the] 

284 

20 

S. 

0 

50 

4 

10 

rib cage, the one to the west 

286 

40 

S. 

4 

45 

4 


The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] at the beginning of the tail. 

288 

20 

S. 

4 

30 

4 


the one to the west 

288 

10 

S. 

2 

10 

3 


The one to the east 

289 

40 

S. 

2 

0 

3 

15 

Of the four [stars] in the northern part of the 








tail, the one to the west 

290 

10 

S. 

2 

20 

4 


Of the other three, the one to the south 

292 

0 

S. 

5 

0 

5 


The one in the middle 

291 

0 

S. 

2 

50 

5 


The one to the north, at the tip of the tail 

292 

0 

N. 

4 

20 

5 

20 

28 stars: 4 of the 3rd magnitude, 9 of the 4th, 9 of the 5th, 6 of the 6th 


WATER BEARER 


In the head 

293 

40 

N. 

15 

45 

5 


In the right shoulder, the brighter one 

299 

44 

N. 

11 

0 

3 


The dimmer one 

298 

30 

N. 

9 

40 

5 

25 

In the left shoulder 

290 

0 

N. 

8 

50 

3 


Below the armpit 

Of the three [stars] in the garment below the 

290 

40 

N. 

6 

15 

5 


left hand, the one to the east 

280 

0 

N. 

5 

30 

3 


The one in the middle 

279 

30 

N. 

8 

0 

4 

so 

Of the three, the one to the west 

278 

0 

N. 

8 

30 

3 


In the right elbow 

302 

50 

N. 

8 

45 

3 


In the right hand, the one to the north 

Of the other two to the south, the one to the 

303 

0 

N. 

10 

45 

3 


west 

305 

20 

N. 

9 

0 

3 

35 

The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] close together in the right 

306 

40 

N. 

8 

30 

3 


hip, the one to the west 

299 

30 

N. 

3 

0 

4 


The one to the east 

300 

20 

N. 

2 

10 

5 


In the right buttock 

302 

0 

S. 

0 

50 

4 

40 

Of the two [stars] in the left buttock, the one 








to the south 

295 

0 

S. 

1 

40 

4 


The one farther north 

295 

30 

N. 

4 

0 

6 


In the right shin, the one to the south 

305 

0 

S. 

7 

30 

3 


The one to the north 

304 

40 

S. 

5 

0 

4 

15 

In the left hip 

Of the two [stars] in the left shin, the one to 

301 

0 

s. 

5 

40 

5 


the south 

300 

40 

s. 

10 

0 

5 


The one to the north, below the knee 

In the water poured by the hand, the first 

302 

10 

s. 

9 

0 

5 

50 

[star] 

303 

20 

N. 

2 

0 

4 


To the east, farther south 

308 

10 

N. 

0 

10 

4 


To the east, in the first curve of the water 

311 

0 

s. 

1 

10 

4 


To the east of the foregoing 

313 

20 

s. 

0 

30 

4 


In the second curve, the one to the south 

313 

50 

s. 

1 

40 

4 


105 





REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

Of the two [stars] to the east, the one to the 






■■l 

north 

312 

30 

S. 

3 

30 

4 

The one to the south 

312 

50 

S. 

4 

10 

4 

At a distance to the south 

314 

10 

S. 

8 

15 

5 

Of the two [stars] close together east of the 







foregoing, the one to the west 

316 

0 

S. 

11 

0 

5 

The one to the east 

316 

30 

S. 

10 

50 

5 

Of the three [stars] in the third curve of the 







water, the one to the north 

315 

0 

S. 

14 

0 

5 

The one in the middle 

316 

0 

S. 

14 

45 

5 | 

Of the three, the one to the east 

316 

30 

s. 

15 

40 

5 

Of the three [stars] to the east in a similar 







formation, the one to the north 

310 

20 

s. 

14 

10 

4 

The one in the middle 

310 

50 

s. 

15 

0 

4 

Of the three, the one to the south 

311 

40 

s. 

15 

45 

4 ! 

Of the three [stars] in the last curve, the one 







to the west 

305 

10 

s. 

14 

50 

4 

Of the two [stars] to the east, the one to the 







south 

306 

0 

s. 

15 

20 

4 

The one to the north 

306 

30 

s. 

14 

0 

4 

The last [star] in the water; also in the mouth 







of the Southern Fish 

300 

20 

s. 

23 

0 

1 

42 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 9 of the 3rd 

18 of the 4th, 

13 of the 5th, 1 of the 6th 

NEAR THE WATER BEARER, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the three [stars] east of the curve in the wa- 







ter, the one to the west 

320 

0 

S. 

15 

30 

4 

Of the other two, the one to the north 

323 

0 

S. 

14 

20 

4 

Of these [two], the one to the south 

322 

20 

S. 

18 

15 

4 

3 stars: brighter than the 4th magnitude 

FISHES 

The western fish: 







In the mouth 

315 

0 

N. 

9 

15 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the back of the head, the 







one to the south 

317 

30 

N. 

7 

30 

4 brighter 

The one to the north 

321 

30 

N. 

9 

30 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the back, the one to the 







west 

319 

20 

N. 

9 

20 

4 

The one to the east 

324 

0 

N. 

7 

30 

4 

In the belly, the one to the west 

319 

20 

N. 

4 

30 

4 

The one to the east 

323 

0 

N. 

2 

30 

4 

In the tail of the same fish 

329 

20 

N. 

6 

20 

4 

On its line, the first [star] from the tail 

334 

20 

N. 

5 

45 

6 

The one to the east 

336 

20 

N. 

2 

45 

6 

Of the three bright [stars] east of these [two 







foregoing], the one to the west 

340 

30 

N. 

2 

15 

4 

The one in the middle 

343 

50 

N. 

1 

10 

4 

The one to the east 

346 

20 

S. 

1 

20 

4 


106 







BOOK II CH. 14 




Longitude 

Latitude 



Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 


s 

grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


5 

Of the two small [stars] in the bend, the one 








to the north 

345 

40 

S. 

2 

0 

6 


The one to the south 

Of the three [stars] east of the bend, the one 

346 

20 

S. 

5 

0 

6 


to the west 

350 

20 

S. 

2 

20 

4 

10 

The one in the middle 

352 

0 

S. 

4 

40 

4 


The one to the east 

354 

0 

S. 

7 

45 

4 


In the interwining of both lines 

On the northern line, to the west of the in- 

356 

0 

S. 

8 

30 

3 


terwining 

354 

0 

S. 

4 

20 

4 

15 

Of the three [stars] east of the foregoing, the 








one to the south 

353 

30 

N. 

1 

30 

5 


The one in the middle 

Of the three, the one to the north and the last 

353 

40 

N. 

5 

20 

3 


on the line 

353 

50 

N. 

9 

0 

4 

20 

The eastern fish: 

Of the two [stars] in the mouth, the one to the 








north 

355 

20 

N. 

21 

45 

5 


The one to the south 

Of the three small [stars] in the head, the one 

355 

0 

N. 

21 

30 

5 

25 

to the east 

352 

0 

N. 

20 

0 

6 


The one in the middle 

351 

0 

N. 

19 

50 

6 


Of the three, the one to the west 

Of the three [stars] in the southern fin, the 

350 

20 

N. 

23 

0 

6 


one to the west, near the left elbow of 







30 

Andromeda 

349 

0 

N. 

14 

20 

4 


The one in the middle 

349 

40 

N. 

13 

0 

4 


Of the three, the one to the east 

Of the two [stars] in the belly, the one to the 

351 

0 

N. 

12 

0 

4 


north 

355 

30 

N. 

17 

0 

4 

35 

The one farther south 

352 

40 

N. 

15 

20 

4 


In the eastern fin, near the tail 

353 

20 

N. 

11 

45 

4 


34 stars: 2 of the 3rd magnitude, 22 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th, 7 of the 6th 


NEAR THE FISHES, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

40 

On the northern side of the quadrilateral 







below the western fish, the one to the west 

324 

30 

S. 

2 

40 

4 


The one to the east 

325 

35 

S. 

2 

30 

4 


On the southern side, the one to the west 

324 

0 

s. 

5 

50 

4 


The one to the east 

325 

40 

s. 

5 

30 

4 


4 [stars] outside the constellation, of the 4th magnitude 

45 

Accordingly, in the zodiac there are altogether 346 stars, namely, 5 of the 1st magnitude. 


9 of the 2nd, 64 of the 3rd, 133 of the 4th, 

105 of the 5th, 27 of the 6th, 3 cloudy. 


In addition to [this] number, there is also the Hair, which, as I remarked above, was called 


“Berenice’s Hair” by the astronomer Conon. 








107 




REVOLUTIONS 


[III:] THOSE WHICH ARE IN THE SOUTHERN REGION 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

j WHALE 

At the tip of the nostril 

n 

0 

S. 

7 

45 

4 

Of the three [stars] in the jaw, the one to the 







east 

ii 

0 

S. 

11 

20 

3 

The middle one, in the middle of the mouth 

6 

0 

S. 

11 

30 

3 

The western one of the three, in the cheek 

3 

50 

S. 

14 

0 

3 

In the eye 

4 

0 

S. 

8 

10 

4 

In the hair, to the north 

5 

30 

S. 

6 

20 

4 

In the mane, to the west 

1 

0 

S. 

4 

10 

4 

Of the four [stars] in the chest, the northern 







one of those to the west 

355 

20 

S. 

24 

30 

4 

The southern one 

356 

40 

S. 

28 

0 

4 

Of those to the east, the one to the north 

0 

0 

S. 

25 

10 

4 

The one to the south 

0 

20 

S. 

27 

30 

3 

Of the three [stars] in the body, the one in the 







middle 

345 

20 

S. 

25 

20 

3 

The one to the south 

346 

20 

S. 

30 

30 

4 

Of the three, the one to the north 

348 

20 

S. 

20 

0 

3 

Of the two [stars] near the tail, the one to the 







east 

343 

0 

S. 

15 

20 

3 

The one to the west 

338 

20 

S. 

15 

40 

3 

Of the quadrilateral in the tail, of the [stars] 







to the east, the one to the north 

335 

0 

S. 

11 

40 

5 

The one to the south 

334 

0 

S. 

13 

40 

5 

Of the remaining [stars] to the west, the one 







to the north 

332 

40 

S. 

13 

0 

5 

The one to the south 

332 

20 

S. 

14 

0 

5 

At the northern tip of the tail 

327 

40 

S. 

9 

30 

3 

At the southern tip of the tail 

329 

0 

S. 

20 

20 

3 

22 stars: 10 of the 3rd magnitude, 8 of the 4th, 4 of the 5th 

ORION 

The cloudy [star] in the head 

50 

20 

S. 

16 

30 

cloudy 

The bright reddish [star] in the right shoulder 

55 

20 

S. 

17 

0 

1 

In the left shoulder 

43 

40 

s. 

17 

30 

2 brighter 

East of the foregoing 

48 

20 

s. 

18 

0 

4 dimmer 

In the right elbow 

57 

40 

s. 

14 

30 

4 

In the right forearm 

59 

40 

s. 

11 

50 

6 

Of the four [stars] in the right hand, of those 







! to the south, the one to the east 

59 

50 

s. 

10 

40 

4 

The one to the west 

59 

20 

s. 

9 

45 

4 

On the northern side, the one to the east 

60 

40 

s. 

8 

15 

6 

On the same side, the one to the west 

59 

0 

s. 

8 

15 

6 

Of the two [stars] in the club, the one to the 







west 

55 

0 

s. 

3 

45 

5 

The one to the east 

57 

40 

s. 

3 

15 

5 

Of the four [stars] in a straight line in the 







back, the one to the east 

50 

50 

s. 

19 

40 

4 


108 







BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars ! 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

The second, to the west 

49 

40 

S. 

20 

0 

6 


The third, to the west 

48 

40 

S. 

20 

20 

6 


In the fourth place, to the west 

47 

30 

S. 

20 

30 

5 


Of the nine [stars] in the shield, the farthest 








north 

43 

50 

S. 

8 

0 

4 

10 

The second 

42 

40 

S. 

8 

10 

4 


The third 

41 

20 

S. 

10 

15 

4 


The fourth 

39 

40 

S. 

12 

50 

4 


The fifth 

38 

30 

S. 

14 

15 

4 


The sixth 

37 

50 

S. 

15 

50 

3 

15 

The seventh 

38 

10 

S. 

17 

10 

3 


The eighth 

38 

40 

S. 

20 

20 

3 


The remaining one of these, the farthest 








south 

39 

40 

S. 

21 

30 

3 


Of the three bright [stars] in the belt, the one 







20 

to the west 

48 

40 

S. 

24 

10 

2 


The one in the middle 

50 

40 

S. 

24 

50 

2 


Of the three [stars] in a straight line, the one 








to the east 

52 

40 

S. 

25 

30 

2 


In the hilt of the sword 

47 

10 

S. 

25 

50 

3 

25 

Of the three [stars] in the sword, the one to 








the north 

50 

10 

S. 

28 

40 

4 


The one in the middle 

50 

0 

S. 

29 

30 

3 


The one to the south 

50 

20 

S. 

29 

50 

3 dimmer 


Of the two [stars] at the tip of the sword, the 







30 

one to the east 

51 

0 

S. 

30 

30 

4 


The one to the west 

49 

30 

S. 

30 

50 

4 [ 


The bright [star] in the left foot; also in the 








River 

42 

30 

S. 

31 

30 

1 


In the left shin 

44 

20 

S. 

30 

15 

4 brighter 

35 

In the left heel 

46 

40 

S. 

31 

10 

4 


In the right knee 

53 

30 

s. 

33 

30 

3 


38 stars: 2 of the 1st magnitude, 4 of the 2nd, 8 of the 3rd, 15 of the 4th, 3 of the 5th, 5 of j 


the 6th, and 1 cloudy 








RIVER 

40 

Beyond the left foot of Orion, at the beginning 








of the River 

41 

40 

s. 

31 

50 

4 


In the bend at Orion’s leg, the one farthest 








north 

42 

10 

s. 

28 

15 

4 


Of the two [stars] east of the foregoing, the 







45 

one to the east 

41 

20 

s. 

29 

50 

4 


The one to the west 

38 

0 

s. 

28 

15 

4 


Of the next two, the one to the east 

36 

30 

s. 

25 

15 

4 


The one to the west 

33 

30 

s. 

25 

20 

4 


Of the three after the foregoing, the one to the 







50 

east 

29 

40 

s. 

26 

0 

4 


The one in the middle 

29 

0 

s. 

27 

0 

4 


Of the three, the one to the west 

26 

10 

s. 

27 

50 

4 


Of the four at a distance, the one to the east 

20 

20 

s. 

32 

50 

3 


109 










REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

West of the foregoing 

18 

0 

S. 

31 

0 

4 

The third one, to the west 

17 

30 

S. 

28 

50 

3 

Of all four, the [farthest] west 

15 

30 

S. 

28 

0 

3 

Of four [other stars], once more in like 







manner, the one to the east 

10 

30 

S. 

25 

30 

3 

West of the foregoing 

8 

10 

S. 

23 

50 

4 

Still farther west than the foregoing 

5 

30 

S. 

23 

10 

3 

Of these four, the farthest west 

3 

50 

S. 

23 

15 

4 

In the bend of the River, touching the chest of 







the Whale 

358 

30 

S. 

32 

10 

4 

East of the foregoing 

359 

10 

S. 

34 

50 

4 

Of the three [stars] to the east, the one to the 







west 

2 

10 

S. 

38 

30 

4 

The one in the middle 

7 

10 

S. 

38 

10 

4 

Of the three, the one to the east 

10 

50 

S. 

39 

0 

5 

Of the two western [stars] in the quadrilateral, 







the one to the north 

14 

40 

S. 

41 

30 

4 

The one to the south 

14 

50 

S. 

42 

30 

4 

On the eastern side, the one to the west 

15 

30 

S. 

43 

20 

4 

Of these four, the one to the east 

18 

0 

S. 

43 

20 

4 

Toward the east, of the two [stars] close to- 







gether, the one to the north 

27 

30 

S. 

50 

20 

4 

The one farther south 

28 

20 

S. 

51 

45 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the bend, the one to the 







east 

21 

30 

S. 

53 

50 

4 

The one to the west 

19 

10 

S. 

53 

10 

4 

Of the three [stars] in the remaining distance. 







the one to the east 

11 

10 

S. 

53 

0 

4 

The one in the middle 

8 

10 

S. 

53 

30 

4 [ 

Of the three, the one to the west 

5 

10 

S. 

52 

0 

4 

The bright [star] at the end of the River 

353 

30 

S. 

53 

30 

1 

34 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 5 of the 3rc 

, 27 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th 


HARE 

Of the quadrilateral in the ears, of the western 







[stars] the one to the north 

43 

0 

S. 

35 

0 

5 

The one to the south 

43 

10 

s. 

36 

30 

5 

On the eastern side, the one to the north 

44 

40 

s. 

35 

30 

5 

The one to the south 

44 

40 

s. 

36 

40 

5 

In the chin 

42 

30 

s. 

39 

40 

4 brighter 

At the end of the left forefoot 

39 

30 

s. 

45 

15 

4 brighter 

In the middle of the body 

48 

50 

s. 

41 

30 

3 

Below the belly 

48 

10 

s. 

44 

20 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the hind feet, the one to 







the north 

54 

20 

s. 

44 

0 

4 

The one farther south 

52 

20 

s. 

45 

50 

4 

In the loins 

53 

20 

s. 

38 

20 

4 

At the tip of the tail 

56 

0 

s. 

38 

10 

4 

12 stars: 2 of the 3rd magnitude, 6 of the 4th, 4 of the 5th 


110 





BOOK II CH. 14 


I 

Constellations of the stars j 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

DOG 

The most brilliant [star], in the mouth, called 







the “Dog Star” 

71 

0 

S. 

39 

10 

1 brightest 

In the ears 

73 

0 

S. 

35 

0 

4 

In the head 

74 

40 

S. 

36 

30 

5 

Of the two [stars] in the neck, the one to the 







north 

76 

40 

S. 

37 

45 

4 

The one to the south 

78 

40 

S. 

40 

0 

4 

In the chest 

73 

50 

S. 

42 

30 

5 

Of the two [stars] in the right knee, the one to 







the north 

69 

30 

S. 

41 

15 

5 

The one to the south 

69 

20 

S. 

42 

30 

5 

At the tip of the forefoot 

64 

20 

S. 

41 

20 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the left knee, the one to 







s the west 

68 

0 

S. 

46 

30 

5 

The one to the east 

69 

30 

S. 

45 

50 

5 

Of the two [stars] in the left shoulder, the one 







to the east 

78 

0 

S. 

46 

0 

4 

The one to the west 

75 

0 

S. 

47 

0 

5 

In the left hip 

80 

0 

S. 

48 

45 

3 dimmer 

Below the belly, between the thighs 

77 

0 

S. 

51 

30 

3 

In the instep of the right foot 

76 

20 

S. 

55 

10 

4 

At the tip of that foot 

77 

0 

S. 

55 

40 

3 

At the tip of the tail 

85 

30 

S. 

50 

30 

3 dimmer 

18 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 5 of the 3rd, 5 of the 4th, 7 of the 5th 

NEAR THE DOG, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

North of the Dog’s head 

72 

50 

S. 

25 

15 

4 

In a straight line below the hind feet, [the 







star] to the south 

63 

20 

S. 

60 

30 

4 

The one farther north 

64 

40 

S. 

58 

45 

4 

Still farther north than the foregoing 

66 

20 

S. 

57 

0 

4 

Of these four, the last [star], farthest north 

67 

30 

S. 

56 

0 

4 

Of the three [stars] almost in a straight line to 







the west, the one to the west 

50 

20 

s. 

55 

30 

4 

The one in the middle 

53 

40 

s. 

57 

40 

4 

Of the three, the one in the east 

55 

40 

s. 

59 

30 

4 

Of the two bright [stars] below the foregoing. 







the one to the east 

52 

20 

s. 

59 

40 

2 

To the west 

49 

20 

s. 

57 

40 

2 

The last one, farther south than the afore- 







mentioned 

45 

30 

s. 

59 

30 

4 

11 stars: 2 of the 2nd magnitude, 9 of the 4th 

LITTLE DOG OR PROCYON 

In the neck 

78 

20 

s. 

14 

0 

4 


111 




REVOLUTIONS 


| Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

The bright star in the thigh: Procyon or the 







| Little Dog 

82 

30 

S. 

16 

10 

1 

2 [stars]: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 1 of the 4th 

ARGO OR SHIP 

Of the two [stars] at the end of the ship, the 







one to the west 

93 

40 

S. 

42 

40 

5 

The one to the east 

97 

40 

S. 

43 

20 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the stern, the one to the 







north 

92 

10 

S. 

45 

0 

4 

The one farther south 

92 

10 

IS. 

46 

0 

4 

West of the two [foregoing] 

88 

40 

S. 

45 

30 

4 

The bright [star] in the middle of the shield 

89 

40 

s. 

47 

15 

4 

Of the three [stars] below the shield, the one 







to the west 

88 

40 

s. 

49 

45 

4 

The one to the east 

92 

40 

s. 

49 

50 

4 

Of the three, the one in the middle 

91 

50 

s. 

49 

15 

4 

At the end of the rudder 

97 

20 

s. 

49 

50 

4 ! 

Of the two [stars] in the keel of the stem, the 







one to the north 

87 

20 

s. 

53 

0 

4 

The one to the south 

87 

20 

s. 

58 

30 

3 

In the deck of the stem, the one to the north 

93 

30 

s. 

55 

30 

5 

Of the three [stars] in the same deck, the one 







to the west 

95 

30 

s. 

58 

30 

5 

The one in the middle 

96 

40 

s. 

57 

15 

4 

The one to the east 

99 

50 

s. 

57 

45 

4 

The bright [star] to the east in the crossbank 

104 

30 

s. 

58 

20 

2 

Of the two dim [stars] below the foregoing. 







the one to the west 

101 

30 

s. 

60 

0 

5 

The one to the east 

104 

20 

s. 

59 

20 

5 

Of the two [stars] above the aforementioned 







bright [star], the one to the west 

106 

30 

s. 

56 

40 

5 

The one to the east 

107 

40 

s. 

57 

0 

5 

Of the three [stars] in the small shields and 







the foot of the mast, the one to the north 

119 

0 

s. 

51 

30 

4 brighter 

The one in the middle 

119 

30 

s. 

55 

30 

4 brighter 

Of the three, the one to the south 

117 

20 

s. 

57 

10 

4 

Of the two [stars] close together below the 







foregoing, the one to the north 

122 

30 

s. 

60 

0 

4 

The one farther south 

122 

20 

s. 

61 

15 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the middle of the mast. 







the one to the south 

113 

30 

s. 

51 

30 

4 

The one in the north 

112 

40 

s. 

49 

0 

4 

Of the two [stars] at the top of the sail, the one 







to the west 

111 

20 

s. 

43 

20 

4 

The one to the east 

112 

20 

s. 

43 

30 

4 

Below the third [star], east of the shield 

98 

30 

s. 

54 

30 

2 dimmer 

In the juncture of the deck 

100 

50 

s. 

51 

15 

2 

Between the oars in the keel 

95 

0 

s. 

63 

0 

4 

The dim [star] east of the foregoing 

102 

20 

s. 

64 

30 

6 

The bright [star] east of the foregoing, in the 







deck 

113 

20 

s. 

63 

50 

2 


112 






BOOK II CH. 14 




Longitude 

Latitude 



Constellations of the stars 

De- 

Min- 


De- 

Min- 

Magnitude 



grees 

utes 


grees 

utes 


s 

The bright [star] farther south, below the 








keel 

121 

50 

S. 

69 

40 

2 


Of the three [stars] east of the foregoing, the 








one to the west 

128 

30 

S. 

65 

40 

3 


The one in the middle 

134 

40 

S. 

65 

50 

3 

10 

The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] to the east, at the juncture. 

139 

20 

S. 

65 

50 

2 


the one to the west 

144 

20 

S. 

62 

50 

3 


The one to the east 

In the northern, western oar, the star to the 

151 

20 

S. 

62 

15 

3 

15 

west 

57 

20 

S. 

65 

50 

4 brighter 


The one to the east 

In the remaining oar, [the star] to the west: 

73 

30 

S. 

65 

40 

3 brighter 


Canopus 

70 

30 

S. 

75 

0 

1 


The remaining [star], east of the foregoing 

82 

20 

S. 

71 

50 

3 brighter 

20 

45 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 6 of the 2nd, 8 of the 3rd, 22 of the 4th, 7 of the 5th, 1 of 


the 6th 








HYDRA 


Of the five [stars] in the head, [and] of the 








two to the west, the one to the south, in 







25 

the nostrils 

97 

20 

S. 

15 

0 

4 


Of the two, the one to the north, in the eye 

Of the two to the east, the one to the north, in 

98 

40 

S. 

13 

40 

4 


the back of the head 

99 

0 

S. 

11 

30 

4 


Of these, the one to the south, in the open 







30 

mouth 

98 

50 

S. 

14 

45 

4 


East of all the foregoing, in the cheek 

Of the two [stars] in the beginning of the 

100 

50 

S. 

12 

15 

4 


neck, the one to the west 

103 

40 

S. 

11 

50 

5 


The one to the east 

106 

40 

S. 

13 

30 

4 

35 

Of the three [stars] in the bend of the neck. 








the one in the middle 

111 

40 

S. 

15 

20 

4 


East of the foregoing 

114 

0 

S. 

14 

50 

4 


The farthest south 

To the south, of the two [stars] close together. 

111 

40 

s. 

17 

10 

4 

40 

the dim one to the north 

112 

30 

s. 

19 

45 

6 


The bright one of these, to the east and to the 








south 

113 

20 

s. 

20 

30 

2 


Of the three [stars] east of the bend in the 








neck, the one to the west 

119 

20 

s. 

26 

30 

4 

45 

The one to the east 

124 

30 

s. 

23 

15 

4 


The one in the middle of these [three] 

Of the three [stars] in a straight line, the one 

122 

0 

s. 

26 

0 

4 


to the west 

131 

20 

s. 

24 

30 

3 


The one in the middle 

133 

20 

s. 

23 

0 

4 

50 

The one to the east 

Of the two [stars] below the bottom of the 

136 

20 

s. 

22 

10 

3 


Cup, the one to the north 

144 

50 

s. 

25 

45 

4 


The one to the south 

145 

40 

s. 

30 

10 

4 j 


113 







REVOLUTIONS 



Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

Constellations of the stars 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

In the triangle east of the foregoing, the one 







to the west 

155 

30 

S. 

31 

20 

4 

Of these, the one to the south 

157 

50 

S. 

34 

10 

4 

Of the same three [stars], the one to the east 

159 

30 

S. 

31 

40 

3 

East of the Crow, next to the tail 

173 

20 

S. 

13 

30 

4 

At the tip of the tail 

186 

50 

s. 

17 

30 

4 

25 stars: 1 of the 2nd magnitude, 3 of the 3rd, 19 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th, 1 of the 6th 

NEAR HYDRA, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

South of the head 

96 

0 

s. 

23 

15 

3 

East of the [stars] in the neck 

124 

20 

s. 

26 

0 

3 

2 [stars] outside the constellation, of the 3rd magnitude 

CUP 

In the bottom of the cup; also in Hydra 

139 

40 

s. 

23 

0 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the middle of the cup, the 







one to the south 

146 

0 

s. 

19 

30 

4 

Of these, the one to the north 

143 

30 

s. 

18 

0 

4 

In the southern edge of the lip 

150 

20 

s. 

18 

30 

4 brighter 

In the northern edge 

142 

40 

s. 

13 

40 

4 

In the southern handle 

152 

30 

s. 

16 

30 

4 dimmer 

In the northern handle 

145 

0 

s. 

11 

50 

4 

| 7 stars of the 4th magnitude 

| CROW 

In the beak; also in Hydra 

158 

40 

s. 

21 

30 

3 

In the neck 

157 

40 

s. 

19 

40 

3 

In the breast 

160 

0 

s. 

18 

10 

5 

In the right, western wing 

160 

50 

s. 

14 

50 

3 

Of the two [stars] in the eastern wing, the one 







to the west 

160 

0 

s. 

12 

30 

3 

The one to the east 

161 

20 

s. 

11 

45 

4 

At the tip of the foot; also in Hydra 

163 

50 

s. 

18 

10 

3 

7 stars: 5 of the 3rd magnitude, 1 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th 

CENTAUR 

Of the four [stars] in the head, the one farthest 







south 

183 

50 

s. 

21 

20 

5 

Farther north 

183 

20 

s. 

13 

50 

5 

Of the two in the middle, the one to the west 

182 

30 

s. 

20 

30 

5 

The one to the east; the last of the four 

183 

20 

s. 

20 

0 

5 

In the left, western shoulder 

179 

30 

s. 

25 

30 

3 

In the right shoulder 

189 

0 

s. 

22 

30 

3 | 

In the left side of the back 

182 

30 

s. 

17 

30 

4 

Of the four [stars] in the shield, the northern 







one of the two to the west 

191 

30 

s. 

22 

30 

4 

The southern one 

192 

30 

s. 

23 

45 

4 


114 






BOOK II CH. 14 



Constellations of the stars 

| Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

5 

Of the remaining two, the one at the top of the 








shield 

195 

20 

S. 

18 

15 

4 


The one farther south 

196 

50 

S. 

20 

50 

4 


Of the three [stars] in the right side, the one 








to the west 

186 

40 

S. 

28 

20 

4 

10 

The one in the middle 

187 

20 

S. 

29 

20 

4 


The one to the east 

188 

30 

S. 

28 

0 

4 


In the right arm 

189 

40 

S. 

26 

30 

| 4 


In the right elbow 

196 

10 

S. 

25 

15 

3 


At the tip of the right hand 

200 

50 

s. 

24 

0 

4 

15 

The bright [star] at the beginning of the hu- 








man body 

191 

20 

s. 

33 

30 

3 


Of the two dim [stars], the one to the east 

191 

0 

s. 

31 

0 

5 


The one to the west 

189 

50 

s. 

30 

20 

5 


In the juncture of the back 

185 

30 

s. 

33 

50 

5 

20 

West of the foregoing, in the back of the horse 

182 

20 

s. 

37 

30 

5 


Of the three [stars] in the groin, the one to the 








east 

179 

10 

s. 

40 

0 

3 


The one in the middle 

178 

20 

s. 

40 

20 

4 


Of the three, the one to the west 

176 

0 

s. 

41 

0 

5 

25 

Of the two [stars] close together in the right 








hip, the one to the west 

176 

0 

s. 

46 

10 

2 


The one to the east 

176 

40 

s. 

46 

45 

4 | 


In the chest below the wing of the horse 

191 

40 

s. 

40 

45 

4 


Of the two [stars] in the belly, the one to the 







30 

west 

179 

50 

s. 

43 

0 

2 


The one to the east 

181 

0 

s. 

43 

45 

3 


In the instep of the right foot 

183 

20 

s. 

51 

10 

2 


In the calf of the same [leg] 

188 

40 

s. 

51 

40 

2 


In the instep of the left foot 

188 

40 

s. 

55 

10 

4 

35 

Below the muscle of the same [leg] 

184 

30 

s. 

55 

40 

4 


At the top of the right forefoot 

181 

40 

s. 

41 

10 

1 


In the left knee 

197 

30 

s. 

45 

20 

2 


Outside [the constellation] below the right 








thigh 

188 

0 

s. 

49 

10 

3 

40 

37 stars: 1 of the 1st magnitude, 5 of the 2nd, 7 of the 3rd 

15 of the 4th, 9 of the 5th 


BEAST HELD BY THE CENTAUR | 


At the top of the hind foot near the Centaur’s 








hand 

201 

20 

S. 

24 

50 

3 


In the instep of the same foot 

199 

10 

S. 

20 

10 

3 

45 

Of the two [stars] in the shoulder, the one to 








the west 

204 

20 

S. 

21 

15 

4 ; 


The one to the east 

207 

30 

S. 

21 

0 

4 


In the middle of the body 

206 

20 

S. 

25 

10 

4 


In the belly 

203 

30 

S. 

27 

0 

5 

50 

In the hip 

204 

10 

S. 

29 

0 

5 


Of the two [stars] in the joint of the hip, the 








one to the north 

208 

0 

S. 

28 

30 

5 


The one to the south 

207 

0 

S. 

30 

0 

5 


At the top of the loins 

208 

40 

S. 

33 

10 

5 


115 




REVOLUTIONS 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

Of the three [stars] at the tip of the tail, the 







one to the south 

195 

20 

S. 

31 

20 

5 

The one in the middle 

195 

10 

S. 

30 

0 

4 

Of the three, the one to the north 

196 

20 

S. 

29 

20 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the throat, the one to the 







south 

212 

10 

S. 

17 

0 

4 

The one to the north 

212 

40 

S. 

15 

20 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the open mouth, the one 







to the west 

209 

0 

S. 

13 

30 

4 

The one to the east 

210 

0 

S. 

12 

50 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the forefoot, the one to 







the south 

240 

40 

S. 

11 

30 

4 

Farther north 

239 

50 

S. 

10 

0 

4 

19 stars: 2 of the 3rd magnitude, 11 of the 4th, 6 of the 5th 

HEARTH OR CENSER 

Of the two [stars] in the base, the one to the 







north 

231 

0 

S. 

22 

40 

5 

The one to the south 

233 

40 

S. 

25 

45 

4 

In the middle of the small altar 

229 

30 

S. 

26 

30 

4 

Of the three [stars] in the brazier, the one to 







the north 

224 

0 

S. 

30 

20 

5 

Of the two [stars] close together, the one to 







the south 

228 

30 

S. 

34 

10 

4 

The one to the north 

228 

20 

S. 

33 

20 

4 

In the middle of the flame 

224 

10 

S. 

34 

10 

4 

7 stars: 5 of the 4th magnitude, 2 of the 5th 

SOUTHERN CROWN 

Outside the southern edge, to the west 

242 

30 

S. 

21 

30 

4 

East of the foregoing, in the crown 

245 

0 

S. 

21 

0 

5 

East of the foregoing 

246 

30 

S. 

20 

20 

5 

Farther east 

248 

10 

S. 

20 

0 

4 

East of the foregoing, west of the Archer’s 







knee 

249 

30 

S. 

18 

30 

5 

The bright [star] in the knee, to the north 

250 

40 

S. 

17 

10 

4 

Farther north 

250 

10 

S. 

16 

0 

4 

Still farther north 

249 

50 

S. 

15 

20 

4 

Of the two [stars] in the northern edge, the 







one to the east 

248 

30 

S. 

15 

50 

6 ' 

The one to the west 

248 

0 

S. 

14 

50 

6 

At some distance to the west of these [two 







foregoing] 

245 

10 

S. 

14 

40 

5 

Still farther west 

343 

0 

s. 

15 

50 

5 

The remaining [star], farther south 

242 

30 

s. 

18 

30 

5 

13 stars: 5 of the 4th magnitude, 6 of the 5th, 2 of the 6th 


116 












BOOK II CH. 14 


Constellations of the stars 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magnitude 

De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 


De¬ 

grees 

Min¬ 

utes 

SOUTHERN FISH 

In the mouth; also at the edge of the River 

300 

20 

S. 

23 

0 

1 

Of the three [stars] in the head, the one to the 







west 

294 

0 

S. 

21 

20 

4 

The one in the middle 

297 

30 

S. 

22 

15 

4 

The one to the east 

299 

0 

S. 

22 

30 

4 

At the gill 

297 

40 

S. 

16 

15 

4 

In the southern fin and back 

288 

30 

S. 

19 

30 

5 

Of the two [stars] in the belly, the one to the 







east 

294 

30 

S. 

15 

10 

5 

The one to the west 

292 

10 

S. 

14 

30 

4 

Of the three [stars] in the northern fin, the one 







to the east 

288 

30 

S. 

15 

15 

4 

The one in the middle 

285 

10 

S. 

16 

30 

4 

Of the three, the one to the west 

284 

20 

S. 

18 

10 

4 

At the tip of the tail 

289 

20 

S. 

22 

15 

4 

Not including the first [star], 11 stars: 9 of the 4th magnitude, 2 of the 5th 

NEAR THE SOUTHERN FISH, OUTSIDE THE CONSTELLATION 

Of the bright [stars] west of the Fish, the one 







to the west 

271 

20 

S. 

22 

20 

3 

The one in the middle 

274 

30 

S. 

22 

10 

3 

Of the three, the one to the east 

277 

20 

S. 

21 

0 

3 

The dim [star] west of the foregoing 

275 

20 

S. 

20 

50 

5 

Of the others toward the north, the one farther 







south 

277 

10 

S. 

16 

0 

4 

The one farther north 

277 

10 

S. 

14 

50 

4 

6 stars: 3 of the 3rd magnitude, 2 of the 4th, 1 of the 5th 


In the southern region [there are] 316 stars: 7 of the 1st magnitude, 18 of the 2nd, 60 of 
the 3rd, 167 of the 4th, 54 of the 5th, 9 of the 6th, 1 cloudy. Therefore, [there are] altogether 
1022 stars: 15 of the 1st magnitude, 45 of the 2nd, 208 of the 3rd, 474 of the 4th, 216 of the 
3B 5th, 50 of the 6th, 9 dim, 5 cloudy. 


117 





Book Three 


THE PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES Chapter 1 

AND SOLSTICES 

5 Having portrayed the appearance of the fixed stars, I must pass on to the 
topics connected with the annual revolution. Hence I shall first discuss the shift 
in the equinoxes, on account of which the fixed stars too are believed to move. 
(I always bear in mind that the circles and poles generated by the earth’s motion 
appear in like form and in the same way in the heavens, as I have often remarked 
xo [II, 1], and these are the subjects treated here) [these words were written by 
Copernicus in the margin of fol. 71 r , and later deleted]. 

Now, the ancient astronomers, I have found, made no distinction between 
the tropical or natural year, which is measured from an equinox or solstice, and 
the year which is completed with reference to one of the fixed stars. Hence they 
is thought that the Olympic years, which they started with the rising of Procyon, 
were the same as the years measured from a solstice (since the difference between 
the one and the other had not yet been discovered). 

Now Hipparchus of Rhodes, a man of marvelous acumen, was the first to notice 
that these years are different from each other. When he was scrutinizing the length 
so of the year more intently, he found that as measured with reference to the fixed 
stars, it was longer than when measured with reference to the equinoxes or sol¬ 
stices. Hence he thought that the fixed stars too had a motion in the order of the 
zodiacal signs, but a very slow motion which could not be perceived immedi¬ 
ately [Ptolemy, Syntaxis, III, 1]. Now however, with the passage of time it has 
25 become absolutely clear. Because of it we see that at present the signs and stars 
rise and set quite differently from the indications of the ancients, and that the 
twelve signs of the zodiac have shifted a considerable distance away from those con¬ 
stellations of the fixed stars which originally agreed with them in name and 
position. 

so Moreover, the motion is found to be nonuniform. The desire to account for 
this nonuniformity has elicited various beliefs. In the opinion of some people, the 
universe, being in suspension, has a certain oscillation, a motion such as we find 
in the latitudes of the planets [VI, 2]; within fixed limits on either side, the advance 
will be matched at some time by a return; and the deviation from the mean in 
35 both directions is not greater than 8 °. But this idea, which is already obsolete, 
could not survive. The principal reason is, as is now quite clear, that the first 
point of the constellation Ram is more than three times 8° away from the vernal 
equinox. The same is true of other stars, while in the meantime throughout so 
many centuries no trace of a return has been perceived. Others have indeed held 
40 that the sphere of the fixed stars moves forward, but with unequal strides; yet 
they have laid down no definite pattern. Besides, another marvel of nature super¬ 
vened: the obliquity of the ecliptic does not appear as great to us as it did before 
Ptolemy, as I said above. 


119 



REVOLUTIONS 


As the explanation of these observations, some people excogitated a ninth 
sphere, and others a tenth, by which they thought that these phenomena are 
brought to pass in this way. Yet they could not furnish what they promised. An 
eleventh sphere too has already begun to emerge into the light of day, as though 
so large a number of circles were not enough. By invoking the motion of the 6 
earth, I shall easily refute this number of circles as superfluous by showing that they 
have no connection with the sphere of the fixed stars. For, as I have already ex¬ 
plained in part in Book I [Chapter 11], the two revolutions, I mean, the annual incli¬ 
nation and the revolution of the earth’s center, are not exactly equal, the inclination 
being of course completed a little ahead of the period of the center. Hence, as 10 
must follow, the equinoxes and solstices seem to move forward. The reason is not 
that the sphere of the fixed stars moves eastward, but rather that the equator 
moves westward, the equator being oblique to the plane of the ecliptic in proportion 
to the inclination of the axis of the terrestrial globe. For it would be more appro¬ 
priate to say that the equator is oblique to the ecliptic than that the ecliptic is ob- is 
lique to the equator (since a smaller thing is being compared with something bigger). 
Indeed, the ecliptic, being described by the annual revolution at the distance between 
the sun and the earth, is much bigger than the equator, which is produced, as I said 
[I, 11], by the earth’s daily motion around its axis. And in this way those inter¬ 
sections at the equinoxes, together with the entire obliquity of the ecliptic, are 20 
seen to move ahead in the course of time, whereas the stars lag behind. Now the 
measurement of this motion and the explanation of its variation were not known 
to earlier [astronomers]. The reason is that the period of its revolution is still 
undiscovered on account of its unforeseeable slowness. For in so many centuries, 
since it was first discovered by mortal man, it has completed barely x / 15 of a circle. 25 
Nevertheless, so far as I can, I shall clarify this matter by means of what I have 
learned about it from the history of the observations down to our own time. 

HISTORY OF THE OBSERVATIONS PROVING Chapter 2 

THAT THE PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES 

AND SOLSTICES IS NOT UNIFORM 30 

Now in the first period of 76 years according to Callippus, and in the 36th year 
thereof, which was the 30th year after the death of Alexander the Great, Timocha- 
ris of Alexandria, the first man to be concerned about the places of the fixed stars, 
reported that the Spike, which the Virgin holds, was at a distance of 82 V 3 0 from the 
[summer] solstitial point, with a latitude of 2 ° souht. The northernmost [star] of the 35 
three in the forehead of the Scorpion, and the first in order as that zodiacal sign is 
formed, had a [north] latitude of 1 1 j z °, with a distance of 32° from the autumnal 
equinox. Again, in the 48th year of the same period he found the Spike in the Virgin 
at a distance of 82 1 I 2 ° from the summer solstice, while its latitude remained the 
same. But in the 50th year of the 3rd Callippic period, the 196th year of Alexander, 40 
the star called Regulus, which is in the Lion’s chest, was found by Hipparchus 
to be following the summer solstice by 29 °50'. Then in the first year of the emperor 
Trajan, which was the 99th year after the birth of Christ, and the 422nd year 
after the death of Alexander, the Roman geometer Menelaus reported that the 
longitudinal distance of the Spike in the Virgin from the [summer] solstice was 4 s 
86 1 U°, while the [star] in the forehead of the Scorpion was 35 u / 12 ° away from the 


120 



BOOK III CH. 2 


autumnal equinox. Following them, in the aforementioned 2nd year of Antoninus 
Pius [II, 14], which was the 462nd year after the death of Alexander, Ptolemy 
learned that Regulus in the Lion had acquired a longitudinal distance of 
32 V 2 ° from the [summer] solstice, the Spike 86 V 2 °, and the aforesaid [star] in 
5 the forehead of the Scorpion 36 1 j z ° from the autumnal equinox. In latitude 
there was no change at all, as was indicated above in the Catalogue. I have re¬ 
viewed these determinations just as they were reported by those [astronomers]. 

But a long time later, namely, 1202 years after Alexander’s death, Al-Battani 
of Raqqa made the next observation, in which we may have the utmost confidence. 
io In that year Regulus or Basiliscus in the Lion was seen to have reached 44° 5' 
from the [summer] solstice; and the star in the forehead of the Scorpion, 47° 50' 
from the autumnal equinox. In all these observations the latitude of each star 
always remained the same, so that in this regard [astronomers] no longer have 
any doubt. 

is Hence in the year 1525 C.E., the first year after a leap year according to the 
Roman [calendar], and the 1849th Egyptian year since Alexander’s death, at From- 
bork in Prussia I too observed the Spike, which has been mentioned frequently. 

Its maximum altitude on the meridian was seen to be approximately 27°. But 
I found the latitude of Frombork to be 54° 19 x / 2 '. Therefore the Spike’s declination 
20 from the equator evidently was 8°40'. Hence its place was established as follows. 

Through the poles of both the ecliptic and the equator I drew the meridian 
ABCD. Let it intersect the equator in the diameter AEC, and the ecliptic in the 
diameter BED. Let the ecliptic’s north pole be F, and its axis FEG. Let B be the 
first point of the Goat, and D of the Crab. Now take the arc BH equal to the star’s 
25 south latitude of 2°. From the point H, draw HL parallel to BD. Let HL intersect 
the axis of the ecliptic in I, and the equator in K. Also take MA, an arc of 8°40', 
in agreement with the star’s southern declination. From the point M, draw MN 
parallel to AC. MN will intersect HIL, which is parallel to the ecliptic. Then let 
MN intersect HIL in the point O. OP, the straight line at right angles [to AfN]> will 
so be equal to half of the chord subtending twice the declination AM. But the circles M 
whose diameters are FG, HL, and MN are perpendicular to the plane ABCD. 
Their intersections, according to Euclid’s Elements, XI, 19, are perpendicular 
to the same plane at points O and I. These intersections are parallel to each other, 
according to Proposition 6 of the same Book. Moreover, I is the center of the circle 
as whose diameter is HL. Therefore 01 will be equal to half of the chord subtending, 
on the circle whose diameter is HL, twice the arc which is similar to the star’s 
longitudinal distance from the first point of the Balance. This is the arc which 
we are seeking. 

Now it is found in the following way. The angles at OKP and AEB are equal, 
w being alternate interior angles, and OPK is a rigth angle. Therefore the ratio of OP 
to OK is the same as the ratio of half the chord subtending twice AB to BE, and 
of half the chord subtending twice AH to HIK, since the triangles involved are 
similar to OPK. But AB is 23° 28 x / 2 '; and half of the chord subtending twice AB 
is 39,832 units, whereof BE is 100,000. ABH is 25° 28 x / 2 '; half of the chord sub- 
45 tending twice ABH is 43,010. MA, half of the chord subtending twice the decli¬ 
nation, is 15,069 units. Hence it follows that the whole of HIK is 107,978 units; 

OK is 37,831 units; and the remainder HO is 70,147. But twice HOI subtends the 
circular segment HGL of 176°. HOI will be 99,939 units, whereof BE was 100,000. 


121 


j£l» 



REVOLUTIONS 


The remainder OI will therefore be 29,792. But with HOI = 100,000 units 
as half of a diameter, 0/will be 29,810 units, corresponding to an arc of approxi¬ 
mately 17° 21'. This was the distance of the Spike in the Virgin from the first 
point of the Balance, and this was the place of the star. 

Also a decade earlier, namely, in the year 1515,1 found its declination 8 0 36', 5 
and its place at 17° 14' [from the first point] of the Balance. But Ptolemy report¬ 
ed its declination as only ^ [5ynfaxzr, VII, 3]. Therefore its place would 
have been at 26° 40' within the Virgin, which appears to be more accurate in 
comparison with the earlier observations. 

Hence it seems quite clear that virtually throughout the whole interval from 10 
Timocharis to Ptolemy in 432 years the equinoxes and solstices shifted in pre¬ 
cedence 1 0 regularly every 100 years, as there was always a constant ratio between 
the time and the extent of their movement, which in its entirety amounted to 
4 Vs 0 - For also when the distance between the summer solstice and Basiliscus in 
the Lion is compared for the interval from Hipparchus to Ptolemy, in 266 years is 
the equinoxes shifted 2 2 / 3 °. Here too, then, by being compared with the time 
they are found to have moved forward 1 0 in 100 years. On the other hand, the 
[star] at the top of the forehead of the Scorpion in the 782 years intervening between 
Al-Battani and Menelaus traversed 11° 55'. To 1° there will have to be assigned, 
as will be seen, not 100 years at all, but 66 years. Moreover, in the 741 years 20 
from Ptolemy [to Al-Battani], only 65 years are to be assigned to 1 °. Finally, if 
the remaining period of 645 years is compared with the difference of 9° 11' of 
my observation, 1 0 will receive 71 years. Hence in those 400 years before Ptolemy, 
clearly the precession of the equinoxes was slower than from Ptolemy to Al-Battani, 
when it was also quicker than from Al-Battani to our times. as 

Likewise in the motion of the obliquity a difference is discovered. For, Aris¬ 
tarchus of Samos found the obliquity of the ecliptic and equator to be 23 0 51' 20”, 
the same as Ptolemy; Al-Battani, 23° 36'; Al-Zarkali the Spaniard, 190 years after 
him, 23° 34'; and in the same way 230 years later, Profatius the Jew, about 2' less. 
But in our time it is found not greater than 23° 28 1 I 2 '. Hence it is also clear that 30 
from Aristarchus to Ptolemy, the motion was a minimum, but from Ptolemy to , 
Al-Battani a maximum. 

HYPOTHESES BY WHICH THE SHIFT IN THE Chapter 3 
EQUINOXES AS WELL AS IN THE OBLIQUITY 
OF THE ECLIPTIC AND EQUATOR MAY BE 35 

DEMONSTRATED 

From the foregoing it seems to be clear, then, that the equinoxes and solstices 
shift with a nonuniform motion. Nobody will adduce a better explanation of this, 
perhaps, than by a certain divagation of the earth’s axis and of the poles of its 
equator. For this seems to follow from the hypothesis that the earth moves. For 40 
obviously the ecliptic remains forever unchangeable, as is attested by the constant 
latitudes of the fixed stars, whereas the equator shifts. For if the motion of the 
earth’s axis agreed simply and precisely with the motion of its center, as I said [1,11], 
absolutely no precession of the equinoxes and solstices would appear. However, 
since these motions differ from each other, but with a variable difference, the 45 
solstices and equinoxes also had to move ahead of the places of the stars in a nonuni- 


122 



BOOK III CH. 3 


form motion. The same thing happens in the motion of inclination. This motion 
likewise nonuniformly alters the obliquity of the ecliptic, an obliquity which 
would nevertheless be more properly assigned to the equator. 

For this reason, since the poles and circles on a sphere are interconnected 
6 and fit together, it is necessary to posit two interacting motions performed entirely 
by the poles and similar to swinging librations. Now one motion will be that 
which alters the inclination of those circles to each other by deflecting the poles 
in that manner up and down around the angle of intersection. The other [will be 
the motion] which increases and decreases the solstitial and equinoctial precessions 
10 by producing a crosswise motion in both directions. Now I call these motions 
“librations”, because like objects swinging along the same path between two lim¬ 
its, they become faster in the middle and slowest at the extremes, as generally 
happens in the latitudes of the planets, as we shall see in the proper place [VI, 2]. 
Moreover, [these motions] differ in period, since two cycles of the nonuniformity of 
is the equinoxes are completed in one cycle of the obliquity. Now in every apparent 
nonuniform motion something must be posited as a mean, through which the 
pattern of the nonuniformity can be grasped. Similarly, here too of course mean 
poles and a mean equator as well as mean equinoctial intersections and solstitial 
points had to be posited. Turning to either side of these means, but within fixed 
20 limits, the poles and the circle of the earth’s equator make those uniform motions 
appear nonuniform. Thus those two librations running in conjunction with each 
other make the poles of the earth in the course of time describe certain lines 
resembling a twisted little crown. 

But these matters are not easily explained adequately with words. Hence they 
25 will not be understood when heard, I am afraid, unless they are also seen with 
the eyes. Therefore let us draw on a sphere the ecliptic ABCD. Let its north pole 
be E, the first point of the Goat A, of the Crab C, of the Ram B, and of the Balance 
D. Through the points^ and C as well as the pole E, draw the circle AEC. Let 
the greatest distance between the north poles of the ecliptic and of the equator 
30 be EE, the least distance EG, and similarly the mean position of the pole, I. 
About /, describe BHD as the equator. Let this be called the mean equator, 
with B and D as the mean equinoxes. Let all these things be carried around the 
pole £ in a constantly uniform motion in precedence, that is, in the contrary order 
of the zodiacal signs in the sphere of the fixed stars, in a slow motion, as I said 
35 [III, 1]. Now posit, for the terrestrial poles, two interacting motions, like [those of] 
swinging objects. [Of these two motions] one [occurs] between the limits F and G; 
it will be called the “motion of anomaly”, that is, of the nonuniformity of the 
inclination. The other, [which runs] crosswise from precedence to consequence, 
and from consequence to precedence, I shall call the “anomaly of the equinoxes”. 
40 It is twice as fast as the first one. Both of these motions, meeting in the poles 
of the earth, deflect them in a wonderful way. 

For in the first place, put the north pole of the earth at F. The equator drawn 
around it will pass through the same intersections B and D, namely, through the 
poles of the circle AFEC. But this equator will make the angles of the obliquity 
45 greater, in proportion to the arc FI. As the pole of the earth is about to proceed 
from this assumed beginning toward the mean obliquity in I, the other motion 
intervenes and does not permit the pole to go directly along FI. On the contrary, 
the second motion deflects the pole through a roundabout course and extreme 


123 



REVOLUTIONS 



divergence in consequence. Let this be K. When the apparent equator OQP 
is described around this point, its intersection will be, not in B, but behind it in O, 
and the precession of the equinoxes is diminished in proportion to the amount 
of BO. Turning at this point and proceeding in precedence, the pole is taken 
to the mean position I by both motions acting conjointly and simultaneously. 5 
The apparent equator coincides throughout with the uniform or mean equator. 

As the pole of the earth passes through this point, it presses on in precedence. It 
separates the apparent equator from the mean equator, and increases the precession 
of the equinoxes up to the other limit, L. As the pole turns away from this position, 
it subtracts what it had just added to the equinoxes, until it reaches the point G. 10 
There it makes the obliquity a minimum at the same intersection B, where the 
motion of the equinoxes and solstices will again appear very slow, in almost 
exactly the same way as at F. At this time their nonuniformity has clearly completed 
its revolution, since it has passed from the mean through both of the extremes. But 
the motion of the obliquity [has passed] through only half of its circuit, from the is 
greatest inclination to the least. Then as the pole proceeds in consequence, it 
presses on to the outermost limit in M. When it returns therefrom, it coincides 
again with the mean position I. As it presses on once more in precedence, it passes 
through the limit N , and finally completes what I called the twisted line 
FKILGMINF. Thus it is clear that in one cycle of the obliquity, the pole of 20 
the earth reaches the limit in precedence twice, and the limit in consequence 
twice. 


124 



BOOK III CH. 4 


HOW AN OSCILLATING MOTION OR MOTION Chapter 4 
IN LIBRATION IS CONSTRUCTED OUT 
OF CIRCULAR [MOTIONS] 

Now I shall hereafter show that this motion is in agreement with the phenom- 
s ena [III, 6]. But meanwhile someone will ask in what way these librations can be 
understood to be uniform, since it was stated in the beginning [I, 4 ] that a motion 
in the heavens is uniform or composed of uniform and circular [motions]. In this 
instance, however, both of the two motions appear as a single motion within the 
limits of both, so that a cessation [of motion] must intervene. I will indeed admit 
io that they are paired, but [that oscillating motions are formed] from uniform 
[motions] is proved in the following way. 

Let there be a straight line AB. Let it be divided into four equal parts at points 
C, D, and E. Around D, draw the circles ADB and CDE, with the same center 
and in the same plane. On the circumference of the inner circle, take any point 
is F at random. With F as center, and with radius FD, draw the circle GHD. 
Let this intersect the straight line AB at the point H. Draw the diameter DFG. 
It must be shown that the movable point H slides back and forth in both directions 
along the same straight line AB, on account of the paired motions of the circles 
GHD and CFE acting conjointly. This will happen if H is understood to move 
ao in the opposite direction from F and twice as far. For, the same angle CDF, 
being located at the center of the circle CFE and at the circumference of GHD, 
intercepts as arcs of equal circles both FC and GH, which is twice FC. Assume 
that at some time when the straight lines ACD and DFG coincide, the movable 
point H coincides at G with A, while Fis at C. Now, however, the center F moves 
25 to the right along FC, and H moves along the arc GH to the left twice as far as 
CF, or these directions may be reversed. Then the line AB will be the track for H. 
Otherwise, it would happen that a part is greater than its whole. This is easily 
understood, I believe. Now, having been drawn along by the broken line DFH, 


G 



125 


REVOLUTIONS 


which is equal to AD,H has moved away from its previous position A by the length 
of AH, this distance being the excess of the diameter DFG over the chord DH. 

In this way H will be taken to the center D. This will happen when the circle 
DHG is tangent to the straight line AB, while GD is of course perpendicular to 
AB. Then H will reach the other limit B, from which it will return again for the 5 
same reason. 

[In the autograph, fol. 75 r , Chapter 4 originally ended with the following passage, which 
Copernicus subsequently deleted: 

Some people call this the “motion along the width of a circle”, that is, along the diameter. 

But they derive its period and magnitude from the circle’s circumference, as I shall show a little 10 
later on [III, 5], Moreover, it should be noted here in passing that if the circles HG and CF are 
unequal, with all the other conditions remaining the same, they will describe, not a straight line, 
but a conic or cylindric section, called an “ellipse” by the mathematicians. However, [I shall 
discuss] these matters elsewhere]. 

[Printed text: 15 

Therefore it is clear that from two circular, motions acting conjointly in this 
way, a rectilinear motion is compounded, as well as an oscillating and nonuniform 
motion from uniform [motions]. Q. E. D. 

From this demonstration it also follows that the straight line GH will always 
be perpendicular to AB, since the lines DH and HG will subtend a right angle 20 
in a semicircle. Therefore GH will be half of the chord subtending twice the arc 
AG. The other line DH will be half of the chord subtending twice the arc which 
remains when AG is subtracted from a quadrant, since the circle AGB is twice 
HGD in diameter. 


PROOF OF THE NONUNIFORMITY Chapter 5 25 

IN THE PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES 
AND IN THE OBLIQUITY 

Accordingly some people call this the “motion along the width of a circle”, that 
is, along the diameter. Yet they treat its period and uniformity in terms of the 
circumference, but its magnitude in terms of chords. Hence it appears nonuniform, 30 
faster around the center and slower near the circumference, as is easily demon¬ 
strated. 

Now let there be a semicircle ABC, with its center at D, and diameter ADC. 
Bisect the semicircle at the point B. Take equal arcs AE and BF, and from points 
F and E drop the perpendiculars EG and FK on ADC. Now twice DK subtends 35 
twice BF, and twice EG subtends twice AE. Therefore DK and EG are equal. 
But in accordance with Euclid’s Elements, III, 7 , AG is less than GE, and will 
also be less than DK. But GA and KD were traversed in equal times, because the 
arcs AE and BF are equal. Therefore near the circumference A the motion is 
slower than near the center D. 4 o 

Now that this has been demonstrated, put the center of the earth at L, so that 
the straight line LD is perpendicular to ABC, the plane of the semicircle. Through 
the points A and C, with its center at L, draw AMC as the arc of a circle. Extend 
LDM as a straight line. Therefore the pole of the semicircle ABC will be at M, 
and ADC will be the intersection of the circles. Join LA and LC. In like manner 45 
join LK and LG‘, when these are extended as straight lines, let them intersect the 


126 



BOOK III CH. 5 



L 


arc AMC in N and O. Now at LDK there is a right angle. Therefore the angle 
at LKD is acute. Hence it is also true that the line LK is longer than LD. Even 
more so, in the obtuse triangles side LG is longer than side LK, and LA than LG. 

Now a circle drawn with its center at L, and with radius LK, will fall beyond 
s LD, but will intersect the remaining lines LG and LA. Let the circle be drawn, 
and let it be PKRS. Triangle LDK is smaller than the sector LPK. But triangle 
LG A is bigger than the sector LRS. Therefore the ratio of the triangle LDK to 
the sector LPK is less than the ratio of the triangle LGA to the sector LRS. 
In turn, the ratio of the triangle LDK to the triangle LGA will also be less than 
10 the ratio of the sector LPK to the sector LRS. In accordance with Euclid’s Ele¬ 
ments, VI, 1 , base DK is to base AG as triangle LKD is to triangle LGA. The 
ratio of the sector to the sector, however, is as angle DLK is to angle RLS, or 
as arc MN is to arc OA. Therefore the ratio of DK to GA is less than the ratio 
of MN to OA. But I have already shown that DK is bigger than GA. All the more, 
is then, will MN be greater than OA. These are known to be described in equal 
periods of time by the poles of the earth along the equal arcs AE and BF of the 
anomaly. Q. E. D. 

However, the deference between the maximum and minimum obliquity is 
quite small, and does not exceed 2 / 6 °. Therefore also between the curve AMC 
20 and the straight line ADC the difference will be imperceptible. Hence no error 
will occur if we operate simply with the line ADC and the semicircle ABC. Just 
about the same thing happens with regard to the other motion of the poles which 
affects the equinoxes, since it does not reach 1 / 2 °, as will be made clear below. 

Again let there be the circle ABCD through the poles of the ecliptic and mean 
25 equator. We may call this circle the “mean colure of the Crab”. Let half of the 
ecliptic be DEB. Let the mean equator be AEC. Let them intersect each other 
in the point E, where the mean equinox will be. Let the pole of the equator be F, 


127 



REVOLUTIONS 



through which draw the great circle FET. This will therefore be the colure of the 
mean or uniform equinoxes. Now to make the proof easier, let us separate the 
libration of the equinoxes from the [libration of the] obliquity of the ecliptic. 

On the colure EF, take the arc FG. Let G, the apparent pole of the equator, be 
understood to move through FG from F, the mean pole. With G as pole, draw s 
ALKC as the semicircle of the apparent equator. This will intersect the ecliptic 
in L. Therefore the point L will be the apparent equinox. Its distance from the 
mean equinox will be the arc LE, governed by the equality of EK with FG. But 
we may make K a pole, and describe the circle AGC. We may also posit that 
during the time in which the libration FG occurs, the pole of the equator does 10 
not remain the true pole in the point G; on the contrary, under the influence 
of the second libration it diverges toward the obliquity of the ecliptic along the 
arc GO. Therefore, while the ecliptic BED remains stationary, the true apparent 
equator will shift in accordance with the dislocation of the pole O. And in the 
same way the motion of L, the intersection of the apparent equator, will be faster is 
around E, the mean equinox, and slowest at the extremes, approximately in pro¬ 
portion to the libration of the poles, which has already been demonstrated [III, 

3 ]. To have perceived this was worth while. 


THE UNIFORM MOTIONS OF THE PRECESSION Chapter 6 
OF THE EQUINOXES AND OF THE INCLINATION 
OF THE ECLIPTIC 


A 



Now every circular motion which appears nonuniform occupies four boundary 
zones. There is [a zone] where it appears slow, and [one] where it is fast, as ex¬ 
tremes; and midway between, it is average. For at the end of the deceleration and 
beginning of the acceleration it changes in the direction of the average [velocity]; 25 
from the average it increases to [the highest] speed; from high speed it tends 
again toward the average; then the remainder returns from the uniform [speed] 
to the previous slowness. These considerations make known in what part of the 
circle the place of the nonuniformity or anomaly was at a [given] time. From these 
properties the cycle of the anomaly is also understood. 30 

For example, in a circle divided into four equal parts let A be the place of the 
greatest slowness, B the average velocity on the increase, C the end of the increase 
and the beginning of the decrease, and D the average velocity on the decrease. Now 
from Timocharis to Ptolemy, as was indicated above [III, 2 ], the apparent motion 
of the precession of the equinoxes has been found slower than at all other times. 35 
For a while it appeared regular and uniform, as is shown by the observations of 
Aristyllus, Hipparchus, Agrippa, and Menelaus in the middle of the period. This 
proves, therefore, that the apparent motion of the equinoxes was at its very 
slowest. In the middle of the period it was at the beginning of the acceleration. 

At that time the cessation of the deceleration, combined with the beginning of the 40 
acceleration, by counteracting each other made the motion seem uniform in the 
meantime. Hence Timocharis’ observation must be placed in the last part of 
the circle within DA. But Ptolemy’s observation will fall in the first quadrant 
within AB. Furthermore, in the second period from Ptolemy to Al-Battani of 
Raqqa the motion is found to be faster than in the third period. Hence this indicates 45 
that the highest velocity, that is, the point C, passed by in the second period of 


128 



BOOK III CH. 6 


time. The anomaly has now reached the third quadrant of the circle within CD. 
In the third period down to our time the cycle of the anomaly is nearly completed 
and is returning to where it began with Timocharis. For we may incorporate 
the entire cycle of 1819 years from Timocharis to us in the customary 360°. In 
s proportion to 432 years, we shall have an arc of 85 1 I 2 °; but for 742 years, 146° 51'; 
and for the remaining 645 years, the remaining arc of 127° 39'. I obtained these 
results offhand and by a simple conjecture. But I reexamined them in a more 
precise computation of the extent to which they would agree more exactly with the 
observations. I found that in 1819 Egyptian years the motion of the anomaly had 
10 already completed its revolution, and exceeded it by 21 ° 24'. The time of a period 
contains only 1717 Egyptian years. By this calculation the first segment of the 
circle is determined to be 90° 35'; the second, 155° 34'; but the third in 543 
years will contain the remaining 113° 51' of the circle. 

After these results had been established in this way, the mean motion of the 
is precession of the equinoxes also became clear. It is 23° 57' in the same 1717 years 
in which the entire nonuniformity is restored to its original state. For in 1819 
years we had an apparent motion of about 25° 1'. But, the difference between 1717 
years and 1819 being 102, in 102 years after Timocharis the apparent motion must 
have been about 1 ° 4'. For it probably was a little greater than the completion 
20 of 1 ° in 100 years at that time when it was decreasing but had not yet reached 
the end of the deceleration. Accordingly, if we subtract 1 1 / 16 ° from 25° 1', the 
remainder will be, as I mentioned, in 1717 Egyptian years the mean and uniform 
motion, which was then equal to the non unif orm and apparent motion of 23° 57'. 
Hence the entire uniform revolution of the precession of the equinoxes mounts 
26 up to 25,816 years. During that time about 15 1 / 28 cycles of the anomaly are 
completed. 

This computation is also in conformity with the motion of the obliquity, whose 
cycle I said is twice as slow as the precession of the equinoxes [111,3]. Ptolemy report¬ 
ed that the obliquity of 23° 51' 20" had not changed at all in the 400 years before 
so him since Aristarchus of Samos. Hence this shows that it then stayed nearly steady 
around the limit of maximum obliquity, when of course the precession of the 
equinoxes was also having its slowest motion. At present the same restoration of 
the slow motion is also approaching. However, the inclination of the axis is not 
crossing over in like manner to the maximum, but to the minimum. In the inter- 
35 vening period the inclination was found, as I said [III, 2], by Al-Battani to be 23° 
35'; by Al-Zarkali the Spaniard, 190 years after him, 23 ° 34'; and in the same way 
230 years later, by Profatius the Jew, about 2' less. Finally, so far as our own 
times are concerned, in frequent observations over the past 30 years, I have found 
it to be about 23° 28 2 / 6 '. From this determination George Peurbach and Johannes 
*o Regiomontanus, who were my immediate predecessors, differ very little. 


[Earlier draft: 

In the year 1460 C.E. George Peurbach reported the inclination to be 23°, in agreement with 
the previously mentioned astronomers, plus only 28', however; in addition to the whole degrees, 

a fraction more than 29' was reported in the year 1491 C.E. by Domenico Maria da Novara; 46 
according to Johannes Regiomontanus, 23 0 28 l /j'. (Copernicus originally incorporated the references to 
Peurbach and Novara in his text, and then added the remark about Regiomontanus in the 
margin. Later he deleted the Peurbach-Novara passage, but forgot to strike out Regiomontanus)]. 


129 



REVOLUTIONS 


Here again it is absolutely clear that the shift in the obliquity in the 900 years 
after Ptolemy happened to be greater than in any other period of time. Therefore, 
since we already have the cycle of the anomaly of precession in 1717 years, we shall 
also have half a period of the obliquity in that time, and its complete cycle in 
3434 years. Hence if we divide 360° by the same number of 3434 years, or 180° 5 
by 1717, the annual motion of the simple anomaly will come out as 6' 17" 24"' 9"". 
When this quantity is again divided by 365 days, the daily motion becomes 
1" 2"' 2"". Similarly when the mean motion of the precession of the equinoxes - 
and this was 23° 57' - is divided by 1717 years, the annual motion will come out 
as 50" 12'" 5"", and when this quantity is divided by 365 days, the daily motion 10 
will be 8'" 15"". 

Now to make the motions clearer and to have them handy when occasion 
requires, I shall exhibit them in Tables or Catalogues. The annual motion will 
be added continuously and equally. If a number exceeds 60, a unit will always 
be moved over to the higher fraction of a degree or to the degrees. I have extended is 
the Tables as far as the 60-year line (for the sake of convenience). For in 60 years 
the same set of numbers appears (only the designations of degrees and fractions 
of degrees being transposed). Thus what was previously a second becomes a min¬ 
ute, and so on. By this shortcut with these brief Tables and with only two 
entries we may obtain and infer the uniform motions for the years in question 20 
up to 3600 years. The same holds true also for the number of the days. 

In computing the heavenly motions, however, I shall use Egyptian years 
everywhere. Among the civil [years], they alone are found to be uniform. For 
the measuring unit had to agree with what was measured. Harmony to this extent 
does not occur in the years of the Romans, Greeks, and Persians. With them 25 
an intercalation is made, not in any one way, but as each of the nations pre¬ 
ferred. The Egyptian year, however, presents no ambiguity with its definite 
number of 365 days. [They comprise] 12 equal months, which are called in order 
by their own names: Thoth, Phaophi, Athyr, Choiach, Tybi, Mechyr, Phamenoth, 
Pharmuthi, Pachon, Pauni, Ephiphi, and Mesori. These in like manner contain 30 
6 groups of 60 days, and the 5 remaining days are termed intercalary. For this 
reason in the computation of the uniform motions, Egyptian years are most 
convenient. Any other years are easily reduced to them by a transposition of days. 


130 



BOOK III CH. 6 



3 


































REVOLUTIONS 


























































BOOK III CH. 6 


THE NONUNIFORM MOTION OF THE EQUINOXES IN YEARS AND PERIODS 
OF SIXTY YEARS 

Christian Era 6° 45' 


Years 

Motion 


Years 

Motion 

O 

O 

vO 

o 

/ 

0 

« 

o 

© 

VO 

o 

/ 

0 

m 

1 

0 

0 

6 

17 

24 


31 

0 

3 

14 

59 

28 

2 

0 

0 

12 

34 

48 


32 

0 

3 

21 

16 

52 

3 

0 

0 

18 

52 

12 


33 

0 

3 

27 

34 

16 

4 

0 

0 

25 

9 

36 


34 

0 

3 

33 

51 

41 

5 

0 

0 

31 

27 

0 


35 

0 

3 

40 

9 

5 

6 

0 

0 

37 

44 

24 


36 

0 

3 

46 

26 

29 

7 

0 

0 

44 

1 

49 


37 

0 

3 

52 

43 

53 

8 

0 

0 

50 

19 

13 


38 

0 

3 

59 

1 

17 

9 

0 

0 

56 

36 

37 


39 

0 

4 

5 

18 

42 

10 

0 

1 

2 

54 

1 


40 

0 

4 

11 

36 

6 

11 

0 

1 

9 

11 

25 


41 

0 

4 

17 

53 

30 

12 

0 

1 

15 

28 

49 


42 

0 

4 

24 

10 

54 

13 

0 

1 

21 

46 

13 


43 

0 

4 

30 

28 

18 

14 

0 

1 

28 

3 

38 


44 

0 

4 

36 

45 

42 

15 

0 

1 

34 

21 

2 


45 

0 

4 

43 

3 

6 

16 

0 

1 

40 

38 

26 


46 

0 

4 

49 

20 

31 

17 

0 

1 

46 

55 

50 


47 

0 

4 

55 

37 

55 

18 

0 

1 

53 

13 

14 


48 

0 

5 

1 

55 

19 

19 

0 

1 

59 

30 

38 


49 

0 

5 

8 

12 

43 

20 

0 

2 

5 

48 

3 


50 

0 

5 

14 

30 

7 

21 

0 

2 

12 

5 

27 


51 

0 

5 

20 

47 

31 

22 

0 

2 

18 

22 

51 


52 

0 

5 

27 

4 

55 

23 

0 

2 

24 

40 

15 


53 

0 

5 

33 

22 

20 

24 

0 

2 

30 

57 

39 


54 

0 

5 

39 

39 

44 

25 

0 

2 

37 

15 

3 


55 

0 

5 

45 

57 

8 

26 

0 

2 

43 

32 

27 


56 

0 

5 

52 

14 

32 

27 

0 

2 

49 

49 

52 


57 

0 

5 

58 

31 

56 

28 

0 

2 

56 

7 

16 


58 

0 

6 

4 

49 

20 

29 

0 

3 

2 

24 

40 


59 

0 

6 

11 

6 

45 

30 

0 

3 

8 

42 

4 


60 

0 

6 

17 

24 

9 


133 









REVOLUTIONS 


































BOOK III CH. 7 


WHAT IS THE GREATEST DIFFERENCE Chapter 7 

BETWEEN THE UNIFORM AND THE APPARENT 
PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES? 


[Earlier draft: Originally Copernicus began III, 7 with the following passage, which he 
5 later deleted: 

Since I have explained as well as I could the uniform and mean motion of the precession of the 
equinoxes, I must ask how great the maximum difference is between it and the apparent motion. 
Through this [maximum difference] I shall easily obtain the individual [differences] also. Now 
the motion of the double anomaly, that is, [the anomaly] of the equinoxes in the 432 years from 
to Timocharis to Ptolemy evidently was 90° 35' [III, 6], But the mean motion of precession was 6°, and 
the apparent 4° 20', the difference between them being 1° 40'. I have located the final phase of the 
slow motion and the beginning of the acceleration in the middle of this period. In it, therefore, 
the mean motion had to coincide with the apparent, and the apparent equinoxes with the mean. 
On both sides of that terminus, consequently, there were halves and equal distances, I mean, 
15 45° 17 x / a ' and in like manner differences of 50' between the apparent equinoxes and the mean 
[equinoxes]. 

[Printed text: 

The mean motions having been set forth in this way, we must now ask how 
great the maximum difference is between the uniform and the apparent motion 
20 of the equinoxes, or [how great] the diameter of the small circle is through which 
the motion in anomaly revolves. For when this is known, it will be easy to determine 
any other differences between these motions. Now, as was indicated above [III, 2], 
between Timocharis’ first [observation] and Ptolemy’s [observation] in the 2nd 
year of Antoninus there were 432 years. In that time the mean motion is 6°. But 
as the apparent [motion] was 4° 20'. The difference between them is 1 ° 40'. Further¬ 
more, the motion of the double anomaly was 90° 35'. Moreover, in the middle of 
this period or about that time, as has been seen [III, 6], the apparent motion reach¬ 
ed the extreme of greatest slowness. In this [period] it must agree with the mean 
motion, while the true and mean equinoxes must have been at the same intersec- 
30 tion of the circles. Therefore when the motion and time are divided in half, on 
both sides the differences between the nonuniform and uniform motions will be 
5 / 6 °. These differences are enclosed on either side below 45° 17 V 2 ' arcs of the 
circle of anomaly. 

Now that these things have been established in this way, let ABC be an arc 
as of the ecliptic, DBE the mean equator, and B the mean intersection of the apparent 
equinoxes, whether the Ram or the Balance. Through the poles of DBE, draw 
FB. Now to either side on ABC take equal arcs BI and BK of s / 6 °, so that the 
whole of IBK is 1° 40'. Also draw two arcs IG and HK of the apparent equators 
at right angles to FB, extended to FBH. Now I say “at right angles”, although 
40 the poles of IG and HK are very often outside the circle BF, since the motion in 
inclination intermingles itself, as was seen in the hypothesis [III, 3]. But because the 
distance is quite small, not exceeding at its maximum V 460 of a right angle [= 12 '], 
I treat those angles as though they were right angles, so far as perception is concern¬ 
ed. For, no error will appear on that account. Now in triangle IBG, angle IBG is 
45 given as 66° 20'. For, the complementary angle DBA was 23° 40', the mean 
obliquity of the ecliptic. BGI is a right angle. Moreover, angle BIG is almost 
exactly equal to its alternate interior angle IBD. Side IB is given as 50'. There¬ 
fore BG, the distance between the poles of the mean and apparent [equator], 
is equal to 20'. Similarly, in triangle BHK, two angles BHK and HBK are equal 


135 



REVOLUTIONS 


to the two angles IBG and IGB, and side BK is equal to side BI. BH will 
also be equal to BG’s 20'. But all of this is concerned with very small quanti¬ 
ties, which do not amount to 1 1 / 2 ° of the ecliptic. In these quantities the straight 
lines are virtually equal to the arcs subtended by them, any divergence being 
barely found in 60ths of a second. I am satisfied with minutes, however, and will 5 
commit no error if I use straight lines instead of arcs. For, GB and BH will be 
proportional to IB and BK, and the same ratio will hold true for the motions in 
both poles as well as in both intersections. 

Let a part of the ecliptic be ABC. On it let the mean equinox be B. With this 
as pole, draw a semicircle ABC, intersecting the ecliptic in points A and C. 10 
From the pole of the ecliptic also draw DB, which will bisect at Z) the semicircle 
we have drawn. Let D be understood to be the utmost limit of the deceleration 
and the beginning of the acceleration. In the quadrant AD, take the arc DE of 
45° 17 1 / 2 '. Through the point E, drop EE from the pole of the ecliptic, and let 
BE be 50'. From these [particulars] it is proposed to find the whole of BE A. Now 15 
it is evident that twice BE subtends twice the segment DE. But as BF s 7107 units 
are to AFB' s 10,000, so BFs 50' are to AFB' s 70'. Therefore AB is given as 
c 1 0 10'. This is the greatest difference between the mean and apparent motions 
of the equinoxes. This is what we were looking for, and what is followed by 
the poles’ greatest divergence of 28'. These [28'] correspond, in the intersections 20 
of the equator, to the 70' in the anomaly of the equinoxes, which I call the “double 
[anomaly]” in contrast to the other “simple [anomaly]” of the obliquity. 

THE INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN Chapter 8 

THESE MOTIONS, AND A TABLE EXHIBITING 

THOSE DIFFERENCES as 

Now AB is given as 70', an arc which seems not to differ in length from the 
straight line subtending it. Hence it will not be difficult to exhibit any other indi¬ 
vidual differences between the mean and the apparent motions. These differences, 
the subtraction or addition of which confers order upon the appearances, are called 
“prosthaphaereses” by the Greeks, and “equations” by the moderns. I prefer to use 30 
the Greek word as more appropriate. 

Now if ED is 3°, according to the ratio of AB to the subtending chord BF, 
we shall have BE as a prosthaphaeresis of 4'; for 6 °, there will be 7'; for 9°, 11 '; 
and so on. We must operate in the same way, I believe, also with regard to the shift 
in the obliquity, where 24' have been found, as I said [111,5], between the maximum 35 
and the minimum. In a semicircle of the simple anomaly these 24' are traversed 
in 1717 years. Half of the duration in a quadrant of the circle will be 12'. There 
the pole of the small circle of this anomaly will be, with the obliquity at 23° 40'. 
And in this way, as I said, we shall infer the remaining parts of the difference 
almost exactly in proportion to what was said above, as contained in the appended 40 
Table. 

Through these demonstrations the apparent motions can be put together in 
various ways. Nevertheless the most satisfactory procedure was that in which 
each individual prosthaphaeresis is taken separately. As a result the computation 
of the motions becomes easier to understand, and conforms more closely to the 45 
explanations of what has been demonstrated. Hence I drew up a Table of 60 lines. 


136 



BOOK III CH. 8 


advancing 3° at a time. For in this arrangement it will not take up a lot of space, 
nor will it seem too compact and brief; in the other similar cases, I shall do the 
same. The present Table will have only 4 columns. The first 2 of them contain 
the degrees of both semicircles. I call these degrees the “common number”, 
s because the number itself yields the obliquity of the ecliptic, while twice the num¬ 
ber will serve as the prosthaphaeresis of the equinoxes, the be ginning of which 
is taken from the start of the acceleration. The 3rd column will contain the 
prosthaphaereses of the equinoxes corresponding to every 3rd degree. These 
prosthaphaereses must be added to or subtracted from the mean motion, which 
xo I initiate from the first star in the head of the Ram at the vernal equinox. The 
subtractive prosthaphaereses [pertain to] the anomaly in the smaller semicircle 
or first column, while the additive prosthaphaereses [pertain to] the second 
[column] and the following semicircle. Finally, the last column contains the 
minutes, called “the differences between the proportions of the obliquity”, 
is mounting to 60 as the maximum. For in place of 24', the surplus by which the 
greatest obliquity exceeds the smallest, I put 60. In proportion thereto I adjust the 
fractions of the remaining surpluses in a similar ratio. Therefore at the beginning 
and end of the anomaly I put 60. But where the surplus reaches 22', as in an 
anomaly of 33°, I put 55 in place of 22'. Thus for 20', I put 50, as in an anomaly 
ao of 48°, and so on for the rest, as in the appended Table. 


137 



REVOLUTIONS 























BOOK III CH. 9 


REVIEW AND CORRECTION Chapter 9 

OF THE DISCUSSION OF THE PRECESSION 
OF THE EQUINOXES 

The nonuniform motion began to accelerate (this is the start of the anomalous 
6 motion, as I arrange it) halfway between the 36th year of the first Callippic pe¬ 
riod and the second year of Antoninus [Pius], according to my conjectural assump¬ 
tion. I must therefore still investigate whether my guess was right and in agree¬ 
ment with the observations. 

Let us recall those three stars observed by Timocharis, Ptolemy, and Al-Battani 
10 of Raqqa. In the first interval [between Timocharis and Ptolemy], clearly, there 
were 432 Egyptian years, and 742 in the second [interval between Ptolemy and 
Al-Battani]. In the first period the uniform motion was 6°, the nonuniform 
motion 4° 20', and the double anomaly 90° 35', with 1 ° 40' being subtracted from 
the uniform motion. In the second period the uniform motion was 10° 21', the 
is nonuniform motion 11 1 I 2 °, and the double anomaly 155° 34', with 1°9' being 
added to the uniform motion. 

As before, let ABC be an arc of the ecliptic. Let B be the mean vernal equinox. 
With B as its pole, describe the circlet ADCE ', the arc AB being 1 ° 10'. Regard B 
as moving uniformly toward A, that is, in precedence. Let A be the western limit, 

20 where B reaches its greatest divergence in precedence from the variable equinox, 
and let C be the eastern limit of B’ s divergence in consequence from the variable 
equinox. Furthermore, drop DBE from the pole of the ecliptic through the c 
point B. Together with the ecliptic, DBE will divide the circlet ADCE into four 
equal parts, since the two circles intersect each other at right angles through their 
26 poles. In the semicirclet ADC the motion is in consequence, whereas it is in 
precedence in the other semicirclet CEA. Therefore the middle of the apparent 
equinox’s retardation will be at D because of the counteraction to B’ s motion. 
On the other hand, the greatest speed will occur at E, since the motions in the 
same direction reinforce each other. Moreover, in front of and behind D take 
30 the arcs FD and DG , each being 45° 17 1 / 2 '. Let F be the anomaly’s first terminus, 
that is, Timocharis’; G, the second, Ptolemy’s; and P ’, the third, Al-Battani’s. 
Through these points [F, G, P] and through the poles of the ecliptic drop the 
great circles FN, GM, and OP, all of which within the circlet are very much like 
straight lines. Then, the circlet ADCE being 360°, the arc FDG will be 90° 35', 

36 reducing the mean motion by MAPs 1°40', ABC being 2° 20'. GCEP will be 
155° 34', increasing [the mean motion] by MO’ s 1 ° 9'. Consequently the remaining 
113° 51' [=360°—(90°35'+155°34')] of PAF will also enhance [the mean motion] 
by the remainder OAPs 3T [=MN—MO=1°40'—1°9'], of which AB is similarly 
70'. The whole arc DGCEP will be 200° 51 V,' [=45 0 17Vi+155°34'] and EP, the 
40 excess over a semicircle, will be 20° 51 1 I 2 . Hence, according to the Table of the 
Straight Lines Subtended in a Circle, as a straight line BO will have 356 traits, of 
which AB is 1000. But if AB is 70', BO will be about 24', and BM was taken as 
50'. Therefore MBO as a whole is 74' and the remainder NO is 26'. But previously 
MBO was 1° 9'; and the remainder NO, 31'. In the latter case [3T—26'] there 
46 is a shortage of 5', which are in excess in the former case [74'—69']. Therefore the 
circlet ADCE must be rotated until both cases are adjusted. This will happen 
if we make the arc DG 42 1 / 2 °, so that the other arc DF is 48° 5'. For in this way, 


139 



REVOLUTIONS 


it will be seen, both errors are straightened out, and so are all the other data. 
Starting from D, the extreme limit of the retardation, the nonuniform motion in 
the first interval will comprise the whole arc DGCEPAF of 311 0 55'; in the second 
interval, DG of 42 Va 0 ; and in the third interval, DGCEP of 198° 4'. And in the 
first interval, according to the foregoing demonstration, BN will be an additive s 
prosthaphaeresis of 52', of which AB is 70'; in the second interval MB will be 
a subtractive prosthaphaeresis of 47 %'; and in the third interval BO will again 
be an additive prosthaphaeresis of about 21'. Therefore in the first interval MN 
as a whole amounts to 1 0 40', and in the second interval MBO as a whole amounts 
to 1 0 9', in quite exact agreement with the observations. Hence the simple anomaly io 
in the first interval is clearly 155° 57 V 2 '; in the second interval, 21° 15'; and 
in the third interval, 99° 2'. Q. E. D. 

WHAT IS THE GREATEST VARIATION Chapter 10 

IN THE INTERSECTIONS OF THE EQUATOR 
AND ECLIPTIC? 16 

My discussion of the variation in the obliquity of the ecliptic and equator will 
be confirmed in like manner and found to be accurate. For in Ptolemy we had for the 
second year of Antoninus [Pius] the corrected simple anomaly as 21 1 / 4 °, with which 
the greatest obliquity of 23° 51' 20" was found. From this situation to my obser¬ 
vation there are about 1387 years, during which the extent of the simple anomaly ao 
is computed as 144° 4', and at this time the obliquity is found to be about 
23° 28 a / B \ 

On this basis reproduce ABC as an arc of the ecliptic, or instead as a straight 
line on account of its small size. On ABC repeat the semicirclet of the simple 
anomaly with its pole at B, as before. Let A be the limit of the greatest, and C of a6 
the smallest, inclination, the difference between them being the object of our 
inquiry. Therefore take AE as an arc of 21 0 15' on the circlet. ED, the rest of the 
c quadrant, will be 68° 45'. EDF as a whole will be computed as 144° 4' and by 
subtraction DF will be 75° 19'. Drop EG and FK perpendicular to the diameter 
ABC. On account of the variation in the obliquity from Ptolemy to us, GK 30 
will be recognized as a great circle arc of 22' 56". But GB, being similar to a straight 
line, is half of the chord subtending twice ED or its equal, and is 932 units, of 
which AC as a diameter is 2000. Furthermore, KB, being half of the chord sub¬ 
tending twice DF, would be 967 of the same units. The sum GK becomes 1899 
units, of whichi4C is 2000. But when GK is reckoned as 22' 56", AC will be approx- ss 
imately 24', the difference between the greatest and smallest obliquity, the 
difference which we have been seeking. Clearly, therefore, the obliquity was 
greatest between Timocharis and Ptolemy, when it was fully 23° 52', and now 
it is approaching its minimum of 23° 28'. From this scheme there are also obtained 
any intermediate obliquities of these circles by the same method as was explained 40 
with regard to precession [III, 8]. 



140 



BOOK III CH. 11 


DETERMINING THE EPOCHS Chapter 11 

OF THE UNIFORM MOTIONS 
OF THE EQUINOXES AND ANOMALY 

Now that I have explained all these topics in this manner, it remains for me 
s to determine, with regard to the motions of the vernal equinox, the places which 
some [scientists] call the “epochs”, from which are taken the computations for 
any given time whatever. The absolute beginning of this calculation was established 
by Ptolemy [ Syntaxis , III, 7] as the start of the reign of Nabonassar of the Baby¬ 
lonians. Most [scholars], misled by the similarity of the name, have thought that 
io he was Nebuchadnezzar, who lived much later, as is shown by an examination 
of the chronology and by Ptolemy’s computation. According to historians, Na¬ 
bonassar as the ruler was followed by Shalmaneser, king of the Chaldeans. Prefer¬ 
ring a better known period, however, I thought it suitable to commence with the 
first Olympiad, which is found to have preceded Nabonassar by 28 years. It 
15 began with the summer solstice, when Sirius rose for the Greeks and the 
Olympic games were celebrated, as Censorinus and other recognized authorities 
have stated. Hence, according to a more precise chronological calculation, 
which is necessary for computing the heavenly motions, there are 27 years and 
247 days from the first Olympiad at noon on the first day of the Greek month 
20 Hecatombaeon until Nabonassar and noon on the first day of the Egyptian 
month Thoth. From that time to the death of Alexander there are 424 Egyptian 
years. From the death of Alexander there are 278 Egyptian years, 118 V 2 days, to 
the beginning of the years of Julius Caesar at midnight preceding 1 January, 
when Julius Caesar commenced the year which he instituted. As high priest, 
2 s he established this year when he was consul for the third time, his colleague 
being Marcus Aemilius Lepidus. Following this year, so ordained by Julius 
Caesar, the subsequent years are called “Julian”. From Caesar’s fourth consulship 
to Octavian Augustus, the Romans reckon 18 such years up to 1 January, although 
it was on 17 January that the son of the deified Julius Caesar, on the motion of 
so Munatius Plancus, was granted the title Emperor Augustus by the senate and the 
other citizens during his seventh consulship, his colleague being Marcus Vipsanius 
[Agrippa]. The Egyptians, however, because they passed under Roman rule 
after the death of Antony and Cleopatra two years earlier, count 15 years, 246 1 / 2 
days, to noon of the first day of the month Thoth, which was 30 August for the 
as Romans. Accordingly there are 27 years according to the Romans, but according 
to the Egyptians 29 of their years, 130 1 / 2 days, from Augustus to the years of 
Christ, which likewise begin in January. From that time to the second year of 
Antoninus [Pius] when Claudius Ptolemy catalogued the positions of the stars 
observed by himself, there are 138 Roman years, 55 days; the Egyptians 
4o add 34 days for these years. To this time from the first Olympiad there is a to¬ 
tal of 913 years, 101 days. In this period the uniform precession of the equi¬ 
noxes is 12° 44', and the simple anomaly is 95° 44'. But in the second year of 
Antoninus [Pius] as is known [Ptolemy, Syntaxis , VII, 5], the vernal equinox 
preceded the first of the stars in the head of the Ram by 6° 40'. Since the double 
46 anomaly was 42 1 f 2 ° [III, 9], the subtractive difference between the uniform and the 
apparent motion was 48'. When this difference is restored to the apparent motion 
of 6° 40', the mean place of the vernal equinox is established as 7° 28'. If we add 


141 



REVOLUTIONS 


the 360° of a circle to this place and subtract 12° 44' from the sum, we shall have 
for the first Olympiad, which began at noon on the first day of the Athenian month 
Hecatombaeon, the mean place of the vernal equinox at 354° 44', so that it then 
followed the first star of the Ram by 5° 16' [= 360°—354° 44']. Similarly, if 
95° 45' are subtracted from 21° 15' of the simple anomaly, the remainder for the 5 
same beginning of the Olympiads will be 285° 30' as the position of the simple 
anomaly. Again, by adding the motions accomplished during the various intervals, 
and always eliminating 360° as often as they accumulate, we shall have as the 
positions or epochs, for Alexander, 1°2' for the uniform motion, and 332° 52' 
for the simple anomaly; for Caesar, 4° 55' for the mean motion, and 2° 2' for io 
the anomaly; for Christ, 5° 32' as the position of the mean motion, and 6 ° 45' 
for the anomaly; and so on for the others we shall take the epochs of the motions 
for whatever beginning is chosen for an era. 

COMPUTING THE PRECESSION OF THE Chapter 12 

VERNAL EQUINOX AND THE OBLIQUITY u 

Then, whenever we want to obtain the position of the vernal equinox, if the 
years from the chosen starting point to the given time are nonuniform, like the 
Roman years which we commonly use, we shall convert them into uniform or 
Egyptian years. For in computing uniform motions, I shall use no years other 
than the Egyptian, for the reason which I mentioned [near the end of III, 6 ]. 20 

In case the number of years exceeds 60, we shall divide it into periods of 60 years. 
When we start to consult the Tables of the Motions [of the Equinoxes, following III, 

6 ] for these periods of 60 years, we shall at that time bypass as extraneous the first 
column occurring in the Motions. Beginning with the second column, that of the 
degrees, if there are any [entries], we shall take them as well as the remaining 25 
degrees and accompanying minutes sixtyfold. Then, entering the Tables a second 
time, for the years remaining [after the elimination of whole periods of 60 years] 
we shall take the clusters of 60° plus the degrees and minutes as they are recorded 
from the first column on. We shall do likewise with regard to the days and periods 
of 60 days when we wish to add to them uniform motions in accordance with the 30 
Tables of Days and Minutes. Nevertheless in this operation minutes of days, 
or even whole days, would be disregarded without any harm on account of the 
slowness of these motions, since it is a question in the daily motion only of seconds 
or sixtieths of seconds. When we have collected all these entries together with 
their epoch, by adding separately those of each kind and eliminating every group 3 s 
of six clusters of 60°, if there are more than 360°, for the given time we shall 
have the mean place of the vernal equinox as well as the distance by which it 
precedes the first star of the Ram, or by which the star follows the equinox. 

We shall obtain the anomaly too in the same way. With the simple anomaly, 
we shall find located in the last column of the Table of Prosthaphaereses [following 40 
III, 8 ] the proportional minutes, which we shall keep to one side. Then, with the 
double anomaly we shall find in the third column of the same Table the prostha- 
phaeresis, that is, the degrees and minutes by which the true motion differs 
from the mean motion. If the double anomaly is less than a semicircle, we shall 
subtract the prosthaphaeresis from the mean motion. But if the double anomaly 45 
has more than 180° and exceeds a semicircle, we shall add it to the mean motion. 


142 



BOOK III CH. 12 


This sum or difference will contain the true and apparent precession of the vernal 
equinox, or conversely the distance at that time of the first star of the Ram from 
the vernal equinox. But if you are looking for the position of any other star, add 
the longitude assigned to it in the Catalogue of the Stars. 

5 Since operations usually become clearer through examples, let us undertake 
to find the true place of the vernal equinox, the distance of the Spike of the Virgin 
from it, and the obliquity of the ecliptic for 16 April 1525 C.E. In 1524 Roman 
years, 106 days, from the be ginnin g of the years of Christ until this time, obviously 
there are 381 leap days, that is, 1 year, 16 days. In uniform years, the total becomes 
io 1525 years, 122 days, equal to 25 periods of 60 years plus 25 years, and two periods 
of 60 days plus 2 days. In the Table of the Uniform Motion [following III, 6] 25 
periods of 60 years correspond to 20° 55' 2"; 25 years, to 20' 55"; 2 periods of 
60 days, to 16"; and the remaining 2 days, to sixtieths of seconds. All these values, 
together with the epoch, which was 5° 32' [end of III, 11], amount to 26° 48' as 
is the mean precession of the vernal equinox. 

Similarly, in 25 periods of 60 years the motion of the simple anomaly has 
two clusters of 60° plus 37° 15'3"; in 25 years, 2°37' 15"; in two periods of 
60 days, 2' 4"; and in 2 days, 2". These values, together with the epoch, which 
is 6° 45' [end of III, 11], amount to two clusters of 60° plus 46° 40' as the 
20 simple anomaly. The proportional minutes corresponding to it in the last column 
of the Table of Prosthaphaereses [following III, 8] will be kept for the purpose of 
investigating the obliquity, and in this instance only 1' is found. Then with the 
double anomaly, which has 5 clusters of 60° plus 33° 20', I find a prostha- 
phaeresis of 32', which is additive because the double anomaly is greater than 
25 a semicircle. When this prosthaphaeresis is added to the mean motion, the true 
and apparent precession of the vernal equinox comes out as 21° 2 T. To this, final¬ 
ly, if I add 170°, the distance of the Spike of the Virgin from the first star of 
the Ram, its position [197° 21'] with reference to the vernal equinox will be to 
the east, at 17° 2T within the Balance, where it was found at about the time 
so of my observation [reported in III, 2]. 

The ecliptic’s obliquity and declinations are subject to the following rule. When 
the proportional minutes amount to 60, the increases recorded in the Table of Dec¬ 
linations [following II, 3], I mean, the differences between the maximum and mini¬ 
mum obliquity, are added as a block to the individual degrees of declination. But in 
35 this instance one of those [proportional] minutes adds only 24" to the obliquity. 
Therefore the declinations of the degrees of the ecliptic, as entered in the Table, 
remain unchanged at this time because the minimum obliquity is now approaching 
us, whereas at other times the declinations are more perceptibly variable. 

Thus, for example, if the simple anomaly is 99°, as it was 880 Egyptian years 
40 after Christ, it is linked with 25 proportional minutes. But 60' : 24' (24' being the 
difference between the greatest and smallest obliquity) = 25' : 10'. When these 
10' are added to 28', the sum is 23° 38', the obliquity as it existed at that time. 
Then if I also want to know the declination of any degree on the ecliptic, for 
example, 3 0 within the Bull, which is 33 0 from the equinox, in the Table [of Decli- 
45 nations of the Degrees of the Ecliptic, after II, 3], I find 12 0 32', with a difference of 
12'. But 60 : 25 = 12 : 5. When these 5' are added to the degrees of declination, 
the total is 12° 37' for 33° of the ecliptic. We can use the same method employed 
for the angles of intersection between the ecliptic and equator also for the right 


143 



REVOLUTIONS 


ascensions (unless we prefer the ratios of spherical triangles), except that we must 
always subtract from the right ascensions what is added to the angles of intersection, 
in order that all the results may come out chronologically more precise. 

THE LENGTH AND NONUNIFORMITY Chapter 13 

OF THE SOLAR YEAR « 

The statement that the equinoctial and solstitial precession (which, as I said 
[beginning of III, 3], results from the deflection of the earth’s axis) proceeds in 
this manner will be confirmed also by the a nn ual motion of the earth’s center, as 
this motion appears in the sun, the topic which I must now discuss. When 
computed from either of the equinoxes or solstices, the length of the year becomes 10 
a variable, as must of course follow, on account of the nonuniform shift in those 
cardinal points, these phenomena being interconnected. 

We must therefore distinguish the seasonal year from the sidereal year, and de¬ 
fine them. I term that year “natural” or “seasonal” which marks the four a nn ual 
seasons for us, but that year “sidereal” which returns to one of the fixed stars. The is 
natural year, which is also called “tropical”, is nonuniform, as the observations of 
the ancients make abundantly clear. For it contains a quarter of a day [V 4 d ] more 
than 365 whole days, according to the determinations made by Callippus, Aristar¬ 
chus of Samos, and Archimedes of Syracuse, who in the Athenian manner put the 
beginning of the year at the summer solstice. Claudius Ptolemy, however, being 20 
aware that the pinpointing of a solstice is difficult and uncertain, did not have 
enough confidence in their observations, and preferred to rely on Hipparchus. 
The latter left records not only of solar solstices but also of equinoxes in Rhodes, 
and declared that the 1 j i d lacked a small fraction. This was later established as 
V 3 00 d by Ptolemy in the following way [Syntaxis, III, 1]. 25 

He takes the autumnal equinox which Hipparchus observed very carefully 
at Alexandria in the 177th year after the death of Alexander the Great on the third 
intercalary day at midnight, which was followed by the fourth intercalary day 
according to the Egyptians. Then Ptolemy adduces an autumnal equinox observed 
by himself at Alexandria in the third year of Antoninus [Pius], which was the 463rd 30 
year after Alexander’s death, on the ninth day of Athyr, the third Egyptian month, 
about one hour after sunrise. Between this observation and Hipparchus’, accord¬ 
ingly, there were 285 Egyptian years, 70 days, 7 Vs hours. On the other hand, 
there should have been 71 days, 6 hours, if the tropical year had been 1 / i d more 
than [365] whole days. In 285 years, therefore, 19 / 20 d were lacking. Hence it follows 35 
that a whole day drops out in 300 years. 

Ptolemy derives the like conclusion also from the vernal equinox. For he recalls 
the one reported by Hipparchus in the 178th year after Alexander, on the 27th 
day of Mechir, the sixth Egyptian month, at sunrise. Ptolemy himself finds the 
vernal equinox in the 463rd year after Alexander, on the 7th day of Pachon, the 40 
ninth Egyptian month, a little more than an hour after noon. In 285 years, 19 / 20 d 
are similarly lacking. Aided by this information, Ptolemy measured the tropical 
year as 365 days, 14 minutes of a day, 48 seconds of a day. 

Subsequently at Raqqa in Syria with no less diligence Al-Battani observed 
the autumnal equinox in the 1206th year after the death of Alexander. He found 45 
that it occurred at about 7 2 /s hours during the night following the seventh day 


144 



BOOK III CH. 13 


of the month Pachon, that is, 4 3 / 5 hours before daylight on the eighth day [of 
Pachon]. Then he compared his own observation with the one made by Ptolemy 
in the third year of Antoninus [Pius] one hour after sunrise at Alexandria, which is 
10° [= 2 / 3 h ] west of Raqqa. He reduced Ptolemy’s observation to his own Raqqa 
5 meridian, where Ptolemy’s equinox would have had to occur 1 2 / 3 hours [l h + 2 / 3 h ] 
after sunrise. Therefore, in the interval of 743 [1206—463] uniform years there 
was a surplus of 178 days, 17 3 / s hours, instead of an accumulation of quarter-days 
totaling 185 3 / 4 days. Since 7 days, 2 / 6 of an hour [185 d 18 h — 178 d 17 3 / 5 h ] were missing 
it was apparent that the x / 4 d lacked 1 j 106 d . He accordingly divided 7 days, 2 / s of an 
io hour, by 743, in agreement with the number of years, the quotient being 13 min¬ 
utes, 36 seconds. Subtracting this quantity from 1 / 4 d , he asserted that the natural 
year contains 365 days, 5 hours, 46 minutes, 24 seconds [+13 m 36 s = 6 h ]. 

I too observed the autumnal equinox at Frombork, which we may call “Gy- 
nopolis”, in 1515 C.E. on 14 September. This was in the 1840th Egyptian is 
year after the death of Alexander, on the sixth day of the month Phaophi, x / 2 
hour after sunrise. However, Raqqa lies east of my area by about 25°, equal 
to 1 2 / 3 hours. Therefore, in the interval between my equinox and Al-Bat- 
tani’s, over and above 633 Egyptian years there were 153 days, 6 3 / 4 hours, 
instead of 158 days, 6 hours. From that observation by Ptolemy at Alexan- 
20 dria to the time of my observation, reduced to the same place, there are 1376 
Egyptian years, 332 days, x / 2 hour, since the difference between Alexandria and 
us is about an hour. Therefore, in 633 years from the time of Al-Battani to us, 
4 days, 22 3 / 4 hours, would have been lacking, and one day in 128 years. On the 
other hand, in 1376 years since Ptolemy, about 12 days would have been missing, 
25 and one day in 115 years. In both instances the year has again turned out to be 
nonuniform. ■ 

I also observed the vernal equinox which occurred in the following year, 
1516 C.E., 4 V 3 hours after the midnight preceding 11 March. From that vernal 
equinox of Ptolemy (the meridian of Alexandria being compared with ours) there 
30 are 1376 Egyptian years, 332 days, 16 x / 3 hours. Hence it is also clear that the 
intervals of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes are unequal. The solar year, taken 
in this way, is very far from being uniform. 

For in the case of the autumnal equinoxes, between Ptolemy and us (as was 
pointed out) by comparison with the uniform distribution of the years the x / 4 d lacked 
35 1 /ii5 d - This deficiency disagrees with Al-Battanj’s equinox by half a day. On the 
other hand, what holds true for the period from Al-Battani to us (when the x / 4 d 
must have lacked x / 128 d ) does not fit Ptolemy, for whom the computed result 
precedes his observed equinox by more than a whole day, and Hipparchus’ by 
more than two days. In like manner a computation based on the period from 
40 Ptolemy to Al-Battani exceeds Hipparchus’ equinox by two days. 

The uniform length of the solar year, therefore, is more correctly derived from 
the sphere of the fixed stars, as was first discovered by Thabit ibn Qurra. He 
found its length to be 365 days, plus 15 minutes of a day and 23 seconds of a day, 
or approximately 6 hours, 9 minutes, 12 seconds. He probably based his reasoning 
45 on the fact that when the equinoxes and solstices recurred more slowly, the year 
appeared longer than when they recurred more swiftly, in accordance with a defi¬ 
nite ratio, moreover. This could not happen unless a uniform length were available 
by comparison with the sphere of the fixed stars. Consequently we must not 


145 



REVOLUTIONS 


heed Ptolemy in this regard. He thought that it was ridiculous and outlandish for 
the annual uniform motion of the sun to be measured by its return to any of the 
fixed stars, and that this was no more appropriate than if it were done by 
someone with reference to Jupiter or Saturn [Syntaxis, III, 1]. Therefore the ex¬ 
planation is at'hand why the tropical year was longer before Ptolemy, whereas 5 
after him it became shorter in a variable diminution. 

But also in connection with the starry or sidereal year a variation can occur. 
Nevertheless, it is limited and far smaller than the one which I just explained. 
The reason is that this same motion of the earth’s center, which appears in the sun, 
is also nonuniform, with another twofold variation. The first of these variations 10 
is simple, having an annual period. The second, which by its alternations produces 
an inequality in the first, is perceived not at once but after a long passage of time. 
Therefore the computation of the uniform year is neither elementary nor easy to 
understand. For suppose that somebody wished to derive the uniform year merely 
from the definite distance of a star having a known position. This can be done is 
by using the astrolabe with the moon as intermediary, the procedure I explained 
in connection with Regulus in the Lion [II, 14]. Variation will not be completely 
avoided, unless at that time on account of the earth’s motion the sun either has 
no prosthaphaeresis or undergoes a similar and equal prosthaphaeresis at both 
cardinal points. If this does not happen, and if there is some variation in the 20 
nonuniformity of the cardinal points, it will be evident that a uniform revolution 
certainly does not occur in equal times. On the other hand, if at both cardinal 
points the entire variation is subtracted or added proportionally, the process will 
be perfect. 

Furthermore, an understanding of the nonuniformity requires prior knowledge 26 
of the mean motion, which we seek for that reason, being engaged therein like 
Archimedes in squaring the circle. Nevertheless, for the purpose of eventually 
reaching the solution of this problem, I find that there are altogether four causes 
of the apparent nonuniformity. The first is the nonuniformity in the precession 
of the equinoxes, which I have explained [III, 3]. The second is the inequality 30 
in the arcs of the ecliptic which the sun is seen to traverse, a nearly annual ine¬ 
quality. This is also subject to a variation by the third cause, which I shall call the 
“second inequality”. The last is the fourth, which shifts the higher and lower 
apsides of the earth’s center, as will be made clear below [III, 20]. Of all these 
[four causes], Ptolemy [Syntaxis, III, 4] knew only the second, which by itself could 35 
not have produced the annual nonuniformity, but does so, rather, when inter¬ 
mingled with the others. However, in order to demonstrate the difference be¬ 
tween uniformity and appearance in the sun, an absolutely precise measurement 
of the year seems unnecessary. On the contrary, for this demonstration it 
would be satisfactory to take as the length of the year 365 J / 4 days, in which 40 
the motion of the first inequality is completed. For, what falls so little short of a 
complete circle, disappears entirely when absorbed in a smaller magnitude. But for 
the sake of orderly procedure and ease of comprehension I now set forth the uni¬ 
form motions of the annual revolution of the earth’s center. Later I shall add to 
them by distinguishing between the uniform and apparent motions on the basis 45 
of the required proofs [III, 15]. 


146 



BOOK III CH. 14 


THE UNIFORM AND MEAN MOTIONS Chapter 14 

IN THE REVOLUTIONS OF THE EARTH’S CENTER 

The length of the uniform year, I have found, is only l 10 /^ day-seconds longer 
than Thabit ibn Qurra’s value [III, 13]. Thus it is 365 days plus 15 day-minutes, 
5 24 day-seconds, and 10 sixtieths of a day-second, equal to 6 uniform hours, 
9 minutes, 40 seconds, and the precise uniformity of the year is clearly linked 
with the sphere of the fixed stars. Therefore, by multiplying the 360° of a 
circle by 365 days, and dividing the product by 365 days, 15 day-minutes, 
24 10 / 6 o day-seconds, we shall have the motion in an Egyptian year as 5 x60°-)-59 o 
io 44 ' 49 " T" 4 "". In 60 similar years the motion is, after the elimination of 
whole circles, 5x60°-t-44° 49' 7" 4"'. Furthermore, if we divide the annual 
motion by 365 days, we shall have the daily motion as 59' 8 " 11'" 22"". By adding 
to this value the mean and uniform precession of the equinoxes [III, 6 ], we 
shall obtain also the uniform annual motion in a tropical year as 5x60°+ 
15 59° 45' 39" 19'" 9"", and the daily motion as 59' 8 " 19'" 37"". For this reason 
we may call the former solar motion “simple uniform”, to use the familiar ex¬ 
pression, and the latter motion “composite uniform”. I shall also set them out 
in Tables, as I have done for the precession of the equinoxes [following III, 6 ]. 
Appended to these Tables is the uniform solar motion in anomaly, a topic I shall 
ao discuss later on [III, 18]. 


147 



REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE SUN’S SIMPLE UNIFORM MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF 
SIXTY YEARS 


Christian Era 272°31' 






















BOOK III CH. 14 


TABLE OF THE SUN’S SIMPLE UNIFORM MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF SIXTY 
DAYS AND MINUTES OF A DAY 





Days 

Motion 


D 

■ 

B 

B 


o 

' 

0 

» 

1 

0 

0 

59 

8 

11 


31 

0 

30 

33 

13 

52 

1 

0 

1 

58 

16 

22 


32 

0 

31 

32 

22 

3 

B 

0 

2 

57 

24 

34 


33 

0 

32 

31 

30 

15 

M 

0 

3 

56 

32 

45 


34 

0 

33 

30 

38 

26 


0 

4 

55 

40 

56 


35 

0 

34 

29 

46 

37 


0 

5 

54 

49 

8 


36 

0 

35 

28 

54 

49 

11 

0 

6 

53 

57 

19 


37 

0 

36 

28 

3 

0 

8 

0 

7 

53 

5 

30 


38 

0 

37 

27 

11 

11 

9 

0 

8 

52 

13 

42 


39 

0 

38 

26 

19 

23 

10 

0 

9 

51 

21 

53 


40 

0 

39 

25 

27 

34 

11 

0 

10 

50 

30 

5 


41 

0 

40 

24 

35 

45 

12 

0 

11 

49 

38 

16 


42 

0 

41 

23 

43 

57 

13 

0 

12 

48 

46 

27 


43 

0 

42 

22 

52 

8 

14 

0 

13 

47 

54 

39 


44 

0 

43 

22 

0 

20 

15 

0 

14 

47 

2 

50 


45 

0 

44 

21 

8 

31 

16 

0 

15 

46 

11 

1 


46 

0 

45 

20 

16 

42 

17 

0 

16 

45 

19 

13 


47 

0 

46 

19 

24 

54 

18 

0 

17 

44 

27 

24 


48 

0 

47 

18 

33 

5 

19 

0 

18 

43 

35 

35 


49 

0 

48 

17 

41 

16 

20 

0 

19 

42 

43 

47 


50 

0 

49 

16 

49 

28 

21 

0 

20 

41 

51 

58 


51 

0 

50 

15 

57 

39 

22 

0 

21 

41 

0 

9 


52 

0 

51 

15 

5 

50 

23 

0 

22 

40 

8 

21 


53 

0 

52 

14 

14 

2 

24 

0 

23 

39 

16 

32 


54 

0 

53 

13 

22 

13 

25 

0 

24 

38 

24 

44 


55 

0 

54 

12 

30 

25 

26 

0 

25 

37 

32 

55 


56 

0 

55 

11 

38 

36 

27 

0 

26 

36 

41 

6 


57 

0 

56 

10 

46 

47 

28 

0 

27 

35 

49 

18 


58 

0 

57 

9 

54 

59 

29 

0 

28 

34 

57 

29 


59 

0 

58 

9 

3 

10 

30 

0 

29 

34 

5 

41 


60 

0 

59 

8 

11 

22 


149 
























REVOLUTIONS 






























































REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE SUN’S UNIFORM MOTION IN ANOMALY IN YEARS AND 
PERIODS OF SIXTY YEARS 


Christian Era 211 °19' 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 


O 

/ 

H 



Hi 

O 

/ 



1 

5 

59 

44 


46 


31 

5 

51 

56 

48 

11 

2 

5 

59 

28 


33 


32 

5 

51 

41 

12 

58 

3 

5 

59 

13 


20 


33 

5 

51 

25 

37 

45 

4 

5 

58 

57 

39 

7 


34 

5 

51 

10 

B 

32 

5 

5 

58 

42 

3 

54 


35 

5 

50 

54 


19 

6 

5 

58 

26 

28 

41 


36 

5 

50 

38 


6 

7 

5 

58 


53 

27 


37 

5 

50 

23 


52 

8 

5 

57 

55 

18 

14 


38 

5 

50 

7 


39 

9 

5 

57 

39 

43 

1 


39 

5 

49 

52 


26 

m 

5 

57 

24 

7 

48 


40 

5 

49 

36 

31 

13 

n 

5 

57 

8 

32 

35 


41 

5 

49 

20 

56 

0 

12 

5 

56 

52 

57 

22 


42 

5 

49 

5 

20 

47 

13 

5 

56 

37 

22 

8 


43 

5 

48 

49 

45 

33 

14 

5 

56 

21 

46 

55 


44 

5 

48 

34 

10 

20 

15 

5 

56 

6 

11 

42 


45 

5 

48 

18 

35 

7 

16 

5 

55 

50 

36 

29 


46 

5 

48 

2 

59 

54 

17 

5 

55 

35 

1 

16 


47 

5 

47 

47 

24 

41 

18 

5 

55 

19 

26 

3 


48 

5 

47 

31 

49 

28 

19 

5 

55 

3 

50 

49 


49 

5 

47 

16 

14 

14 

20 

5 

54 

48 

15 

36 


50 

5 

47 

0 

39 

1 

21 

5 

54 

32 

40 

23 


51 

5 

46 

45 

3 

48 

22 

5 

54 

17 

5 

10 


52 

5 

46 

29 

28 

35 

23 

5 

54 

1 

29 

57 


53 

5 

46 

13 

53 

22 

24 

5 

53 

45 

54 

44 


54 

5 

45 

58 

18 

9 

25 

5 

53 

30 

19 

30 


55 

5 

45 

42 

42 

55 

26 

5 

53 

14 

44 

17 


56 

5 

45 

27 

7 

42 

27 

5 

52 

59 

9 

4 


57 

5 

45 

11 

32 

29 

28 

5 

52 

43 

33 

51 


58 

5 

44 

55 

57 

16 

29 

5 

52 

27 

58 

38 


59 

5 

44 

40 

22 

3 

30 

5 

52 

12 

23 

25 


60 

5 

44 

24 

46 

50 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


85 


152 




























BOOK III CH. 14 


THE SUN’S ANOMALY IN DAYS AND PERIODS OF SIXTY DAYS 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 



/ 

tt 

m 

60° 

0 

/ 

n 

m 

1 



59 


7 


31 

0 

30 

33 

11 

48 

2 


1 

58 


14 


32 

0 

31 

32 

19 

55 

3 


2 

57 


22 


33 

0 

32 

31 

28 

3 

4 


3 

56 


29 


34 

0 

33 

30 

36 

10 

5 


4 

55 


36 


35 

0 

34 

29 

44 

17 

6 


5 

54 

48 

44 


36 

0 

35 

28 

52 

25 

7 


6 

53 

56 

51 


37 

0 

36 

28 

0 

32 

8 


7 

53 

4 

58 


38 

0 

37 

27 

8 

39 

9 


8 

52 

13 

6 


39 

0 

38 

26 

16 

47 

10 


9 

51 

21 

13 


40 

0 

39 

25 

24 

54 

11 



50 

29 

21 


41 

0 

40 

24 

33 

2 

12 


11 

49 

37 

28 


42 

0 

41 

23 

41 

9 

13 


12 

48 

45 

35 


43 

0 

42 

22 

49 

16 

14 


13 

47 

53 

43 


44 

0 

43 

21 

57 

24 

15 


14 

47 

1 

50 


45 

0 

44 

21 

5 

31 

16 


15 

46 

9 

57 


46 

0 

45 

20 

13 

38 

17 


16 

45 

18 

5 


47 

0 

46 

19 

21 

46 

18 


17 

44 

26 

12 


48 

0 

47 

18 

29 

53 

19 


18 

43 

34 

19 


49 

0 

48 

17 

38 

0 

20 


19 

42 

42 

27 


50 

0 

49 

16 

46 

8 

21 

0 

20 

41 

50 

34 


51 

0 

50 

15 

54 

15 

22 

0 

21 


58 

42 


52 

0 

51 

15 

2 

23 

23 

0 

22 


6 

49 


53 

0 

52 

14 

10 

30 

24 

0 

23 

39 

14 

56 


54 

0 

53 

13 

18 

37 

25 

0 

24 

38 

23 

4 


55 

0 

54 

12 

26 

45 

26 

0 

25 

37 

31 

11 


56 

0 

55 

11 

34 

52 

27 

0 

26 

36 

39 

18 


57 

0 

56 

10 

42 

59 

28 

0 

27 

35 

47 

26 


58 

0 

57 

9 

51 

7 

29 

0 

28 

34 

55 

33 


59 

0 

58 

8 

59 

14 

30 

0 

29 

34 

3 

41 


60 

0 

59 

8 

7 

22 


153 















REVOLUTIONS 


PRELIMINARY THEOREMS FOR PROVING Chapter 15 

THE NONUNIFORMITY OF THE SUN’S APPARENT MOTION 

For the sake of better comprehension of the sun’s apparent nonuniformity, 
however, I shall show even more clearly that with the sun at the universe’s midpoint, 
about which as center the earth revolves, if the distance between the sun and the 5 
earth is, as I have said [I, 5,10], imperceptible in comparison with the immen¬ 
sity of the sphere of the fixed stars, the sun will appear to move uniformly with 
respect to any given point or star on that sphere. 

Let AB be a great circle of the universe in the place of the ecliptic. Let C be 
its center, where the sun is located. With radius CD, the distance sun-earth, in 10 
comparison with which the height of the universe is immense, in that same plane 
of the ecliptic describe DE as the circle in which the annual revolution of the 
earth’s center is performed. I say that the sun will appear to move uniformly with 
respect to any given point or star on the circle AB. Let the given point be A, 
where the sun is seen from the earth. Let the earth be at D. Draw ACD. Now 15 
let the earth move through any arc DE. Draw AE and BE from E, the endpoint 
of the earth’s [motion]. Therefore the sun will now be seen from E at point B. 
Since AC is immense in comparison with CD or its equivalent CE, AE also will 
be immense as compared with CE. For, on AC take any point F, and join EF. 
Then from C and E, the endpoints of the base, two straight lines fall outside 20 
triangle EFC on point A. Therefore, by the converse of Euclid’s Elements, I, 21, 
angle FAE will be smaller than angle EFC. Consequently, when the straight 
lines are immensely extended, they will ultimately comprise CAE as an angle so 
acute that it can no longer be perceived. CAE constitutes the difference by which 
angle BCA exceeds angle AEC. These angles even seem equal because the as 
difference [between them] is so slight. The lines AC and AE seem parallel, and 
the sun seems to move uniformly with respect to any point on the sphere of the 
stars, just as if it revolved around E as center. Q. E. D. 



154 


BOOK III CH. 15 


[Deleted version: 

Its nonuniformity, however, is explained in two ways. Either the circular path of the earth’s 
center is not concentric with the sun or universe...] 

The sun’s [motion], however, is demonstrably nonuniform, because the motion 
5 of the earth’s center in its annual revolution does not occur precisely around the 
center of the sun. This can of course be explained in two ways, either by an 
eccentric circle, that is, a circle whose center is not identical with the sun’s center, 
or by an epicycle on a concentric circle [that is, a circle whose center is identical 
with the sun’s center, and functions as the epicycle’s deferent]. 

10 The explanation by means of an eccentric proceeds as follows. In the plane 
of the ecliptic let ABCD be an eccentric. Let its center E lie at no negligible 
distance from F, the center of the sun or of the universe. Let AEFD, the diameter 
of the eccentric, pass through both centers. Let A be the apogee, which in Latin is 
called the “higher apse”, the position farthest from the center of the universe, 
is On the other hand, let D be the perigee, which is the “iower apse”, the position 
nearest [to the center of the universe]. Then, while the earth moves uniform¬ 
ly on its circle ABCD about center E, from F (as I just said) its motion 
will appear nonuniform. For, if we take AB and CD as equal arcs, and draw the 
straight lines BE, CE, BF, and CF, angles AEB and CED will be equal, inter- 
20 cepting equal arcs around center E. However, the observed angle CFD, being 
an exterior angle, is greater than the interior angle CED. Therefore, angle CFD 
is also greater than angle AEB, which is equal to angle CED. But angle AEB, 
as an exterior angle, is likewise greater than the interior angle AFB. So much 
the more is angle CFD greater than angle AFB. But both were produced in equal 
25 times, since AB and CD are equal arcs. Therefore, the uniform motion around 
E will appear nonuniform around F. 

The same result may be seen more simply, because arc AB lies farther from F 
than does arc CD. For, according to Euclid’s Elements, III, 7 , with reference to the 
lines intercepting these arcs, AF and BF are longer than CF and DF. In optics 
30 it is proved that equal magnitudes appear larger when nearer than when farther 
away. Therefore, the proposition concerning the eccentric is established. 

[Marginal note, inserted in the wrong place, and later deleted, but restored by the editors: 

The proof is exactly the same, if the earth were at rest in F, and the sun moved in the circum¬ 
ference ABC, as in Ptolemy and other authors.] 

35 The same result will be accomplished also by an epicycle on a concentric. 
Let E, the center of the universe, where the sun is situated, also be the center of 
the concentric ABCD. In the same plane let A be the center of the epicycle FG. 
Through both centers draw the straight line CEAF, with the epicycle’s apogee 
at F and perigee at I. Clearly, then, uniform motion occurs in A, but the apparent 
40 nonuniformity in the epicycle FG. For, suppose that A moves in the direction 
of B, that is, in consequence, whereas the center of the earth moves from the apogee 
F in precedence. The motion of E will appear faster at the perigee, which is I, 
because the motions of both A and I are in the same direction. On the other 
hand, at the apogee, which is F, E will seem to be slower, because it is moved 
45 only by the overbalancing motion of two contrary [motions]. When the earth is 
situated at G, it will surpass the uniform motion, behind which it will lag when 
it is situated at K. In either case the difference will be the arc AG or AK, by 
which therefore the sun likewise will seem to move nonuniformly. 


155 


REVOLUTIONS 


Whatever is done by an epicycle, however, can be accomplished in the same 
way by an eccentric. This is described equal to the concentric and in the same 
plane by the planet as it travels on the epicycle, the distance from the eccentric’s 
center to the concentric’s center being the length of the epicycle’s radius. This 
happens, moreover, in three ways. s 

Suppose that the epicycle on the concentric and the planet on the epicycle 
execute revolutions that are equal but opposite in direction. Then the planet’s 
motion will trace a fixed eccentric, whose apogee and perigee have unchangeable 
positions. Thus, let ABC be a concentric; D, the center of the universe; and ADC, 
a diameter. Assume that when the epicycle is in A, the planet is in the epicycle’s 10 
apogee. Let this be G, and let the epicycle’s radius fall on the straight line DAG. 
Take AB as an arc of the concentric. With B as center, and with radius equal 
to AG, describe the epicycle EF. Draw DB and EB as a straight line. Take the 
arc EF similar to AB and in the opposite direction. Place the planet or the earth 
at F, and join BF. On AD take the line segment DK equal to BF. Then the is 
angles at EBF and BDA are equal, and therefore BF and DK are parallel and 
equal. But if straight lines are joined to equal and parallel straight lines, they also 
are parallel and equal, according to Euclid, I, 33 . Since DK and AG are taken 
to be equal, and AK is their common annex, GAK will be equal to AKD, and 
therefore equal also to KF. Hence, the circle described with K as center, and 20 
radius KAG, will pass through F. By the composite motion of AB and EF, F 
describes an eccentric equal to the concentric, and therefore also fixed. For while 
the epicycle executes revolutions equally with the concentric, the apsides of the 
eccentric so described must remain in the same place (since BF and AD are always 
parallel on account of the equality of the angles EBF and BDK [these words were 25 
later deleted]). 

But if the revolutions executed by the epicycle’s center and circumference 
are unequal, the planet’s motion will no longer trace a fixed eccentric. Instead, 
the eccentric’s center and apsides move in precedence or in consequence according 
as the planet’s motion is swifter or slower than the center of its epicycle. Thus, 30 
suppose that angle EBF is bigger than angle BDA, but angle BDM is constructed 
equal to angle EBF. It will likewise be shown that, if DL on line DM is taken 
equal to BF, the circle described with L as center and radius LMN, equal to AD, 
will pass through the planet at F. Hence, the planet’s composite motion obviously 
describes NF as the arc of an eccentric circle, whose apogee has meanwhile moved 35 
in precedence from point G through the arc GN. On the other hand, if the planet’s 
motion on the epicycle is slower [than the motion of the epicycle’s center], then 
the eccentric’s center will move in consequence as far as the epicycle’s center 
moves. For example, if angle EBF is smaller than angle BDA but equal to angle 
BDM, what I have said obviously happens. 40 

From all these analyses it is clear that the same apparent nonuniformity always 
occurs either through an epicycle on a concentric or through an eccentric equal 
to the concentric. There is no difference between them provided that the distance 
between their centers is equal to the epicycle’s radius. 

Hence it is not easy to decide which of them exists in the heavens. For his 45 
part Ptolemy believed that the model of the eccentric was adequate where he under¬ 
stood there was a simple inequality, and the positions of the apsides were fixed 
and unchangeable, as in the case of the sun, according to his thinking [Syntaxis, 


156 





BOOK III CH. 15-16 


III, 4]. But for the moon and the other five planets, which travel with a two¬ 
fold or manifold nonuniformity, he adopted eccentrepicycles. By means of these 
models, furthermore, it is easily shown that the greatest difference between the 
uniform and apparent motions is seen when the planet appears midway between 
5 the higher and lower apsides according to the eccentric model, but according to 
the epicyclic model when the planet touches the deferent, as Ptolemy makes 
clear [Syntaxis, III, 3]. 

The proof proceeds as follows in the case of the eccentric. Let it be ABCD, 
with E as center, and AEC as the diameter passing through the sun at F outside 
io the center. Through F draw BFD perpendicular [to diameter AEC] ; join BE and 
ED. Let A be the apogee; C, the perigee; B and D, the apparent midpoints between 
them. The exterior angle AEB [of triangle BEF], it is clear, comprises the uni¬ 
form motion, while the interior angle EFB comprises the apparent motion. The q 
difference between them is the angle EBF. I say that no angle greater than angle 
is B or angle D can be drawn from the circumference to the line EF. For, take B 
points G and H before and after B. Join GD, GE, GF, and HE, HF, HD. Then 
FG, which is nearer to the center, is longer than DF. Therefore, angle GDF 
will be bigger than angle DGF. But the angles EDG and EGD are equal (since 
the sides EG and ED falling on the base [DG] are equal). Therefore angle EDF, 

20 which is equal to angle EBF, is greater than angle EGF. In like manner DF 
also is longer than FH, and angle FHD is greater than angle FDH. But the 
whole angle EHD is equal to the whole angle EDH, since EH is equal to ED. 
Therefore the remainder, angle EDF, which is equal to angle EBF, is also greater 
than the remainder EHF. Hence nowhere will a greater angle be drawn to the 
25 line EF than from points B and D. Consequently, the greatest difference be¬ 
tween the uniform motion and the apparent motion occurs at the apparent 
midpoint between the apogee and the perigee. 

THE SUN’S APPARENT NONUNIFORMITY Chapter 16 

The foregoing are general proofs applicable not only to the solar phenomena 
30 but also to the nonuniformity of other bodies. For the present I shall take up the 
phenomena of the sun and the earth. Within that topic I shall first discuss what 
we have received from Ptolemy and other ancient authors, and then what we have 
learned from the more recent period and experience. 

Ptolemy found that there were 94 7a days from the vernal equinox to the 
35 [summer] solstice, and 92 x / 2 days from the [summer] solstice to the autumnal 
equinox [Syntaxis, III, 4]. On the basis of the [elapsed] time, the mean and 
uniform motion was 93° 9' in the first interval; and in the second interval, 91° 

IT. With these figures divide up the circle of the year. Let it be ABCD, with its 
center at E, AB = 93° 9' for the first interval of time, and BC = 91° IT for 
40 the second. Let the vernal equinox be observed from A; the summer solstice, I 
from B; the autumnal equinox, from C; and the remaining cardinal point, the M 
winter solstice, from D. Join AC and BD, which intersect each other at right c 
angles in F, where we place the sun. Then the arc ABC is greater than a semi¬ 
circle; also, AB is greater than BC. Hence Ptolemy inferred [Syntaxis, III, 4] 

45 that E, the center of the circle, lies between lines BF and FA; and the apogee, 
between the vernal equinox and the solar summer solstice. Now through the 


157 



REVOLUTIONS 


center E [and parallel] to AFC, draw IEG, which will intersect BFD in L. [Par¬ 
allel] to BFD, draw HEK, which will cross AF at M. In this way there will 
be constructed the rectangular parallelogram LEMF. Its diagonal FE, when 
extended in the straight line FEN, will mark the earth’s greatest distance from 
the sun, and the position of the apogee, in N. Then, since arc ABC is 184° 20' 5 
[=93° 9'+91° IT], AH, which is half of it, is 92° 10'. If this is subtracted from 
AGB, it leaves a remainder HB of 59' [= 93° 9'—92° 10']. Furthermore, 
when the [90] degrees of HG, a quadrant of the circle, are subtracted from 
AH [= 92° 10'], the remainder AG has 2° 10'. But half of the chord subtending 
twice the arc AG has 378 units, of which the radius has 10 , 000 , and is equal to 10 
LF. Half of the chord subtending twice the arc BH is LE, which has 172 of the 
same units. Therefore, two sides of the triangle ELF being given, the hypotenuse 
EF will have 414 of the same units of which the radius has 10 , 000 , or approx¬ 
imately V 24 of the radius NE. But EF : EL is the ratio of the radius NE to half 
of the chord subtending twice the arc NH. Therefore NH is given as 24 V 2 °, 15 
and so is angle NEH, to which LFE, the angle of the apparent [motion], is 
equal. Consequently, this was the distance by which the higher apse preceded 
the summer solstice before Ptolemy. 

On the other hand, IK is a quadrant of a circle. From it, subtract IC and DK, 
equal to AG [=2° 10'] and HB [=59']. The remainder CD has 86 ° 5T [=90° 20 
— 3° 9']. When this is subtracted from CDA [=175°40'= 360°—184° 20'], the 
remainder DA has 88 ° 49' [=175° 40'— 86 ° 51']. But 88 Vs days correspond to 
86°51'; and to 88°49', 90 days, plus Vs day = 3 hours. In these periods, in terms 
of the earth’s uniform motion, the sun seemed to pass from the autumnal equinox 
to the winter solstice, and to return from the winter solstice to the vernal 25 
equinox in what is left of the year. 

Ptolemy states [Syntaxis, III, 4] that he too found these values no different 
from what Hipparchus had reported before him. Accordingly, he thought that 
for the rest of time the higher apse would remain 24 V 2 0 before the summer sol¬ 
stice, and that the eccentricity I mentioned, 1 / 2i of the radius, would abide forever. 30 
Both values are now found to have changed with a perceptible difference. 

Al-Battani recorded 93 d 35 dm from the vernal equinox to the summer sol¬ 
stice, and to the autumnal equinox, 186 d 37 dm . From these figures he deduced 
by Ptolemy’s method an eccentricity no greater than 346 units, of which the 
radius is 10,000. Al-Zarkali the Spaniard agrees with Al-Battani in regard to 35 
the eccentricity, but reported the apogee 12° 10' before the solstice, whereas to 
Al-Battani it seemed to be 7° 43' before the same solstice. From these results the 
inference was drawn that another nonuniformity in the motion of the earth’s 
center still remains, as is confirmed also by the observations of our age. 

For during the ten or more years since I have devoted my attention to investi- 40 
gating these topics, and in particular in 1515 C.E., I have found that 186 d 5 
1 l 2 dm are completed between the vernal and autumnal equinoxes. To avoid an 
error in determining the solstices, which my predecessors are suspected by some 
scholars of having occasionally committed, in my research I added certain other 
solar positions which, in addition to the equinoxes, were not at all difficult to 4 s 
observe, such as the middle of the signs of the Bull, Virgin, Lion, Scorpion, 
and Water Bearer. Thus from the autumnal equinox to the middle of the Scorpion 
I found 45 d 16 dm , and 178 d 53 1 / 2 dm to the vernal equinox. 


158 



BOOK III CH. 16-17 


Now in the first interval the uniform motion is 44° 37', and 176° 19' in 
the second interval. With this information as a basis, reproduce the circle ABCD. 
Let A be the point from which the sun appeared at the vernal equinox; B, the 
point from which the autumnal equinox was observed; and C, the middle of the 
b Scorpion. Join AB and CD, which intersect each other in F, the center of the sun. 
Draw AC. Then arc CB is known, since it is 44° 37'. Therefore angle BAC is 
given in terms of 360° = 2 right angles. BFC, the angle of the apparent motion, 
is 45 ° in terms of 360 ° = 4 right angles; but on the basis of360 ° = 2 right angles, 
angle BFC = 90°. Hence the remainder, angle ACD [= BFC—BAC], which inter- 
io cepts the arc AD, is 45° 23' [= 90°— 44° 37']. But the entire portion ACB = 176° 

19'. When BC is subtracted [from ACB], the remainder AC = 131° 42' [= 176° 
19'— 44° 37']. When this figure is added to AD [= 45° 23'], the sum, arc 
CAD, = 177° 5 Va'. Therefore, since each segment ACB [= 176°19'] and CAD 
is less than a semicircle, the center is clearly contained in BD, the rest of the 
is circle. Let the center be E, and through F draw the diameter LEFG. Let L be 
the apogee, and G the perigee. Drop EK perpendicular to CFD. Now the chords 
subtending the given arcs are derived from the Table: AC — 182,494, and 
CFD = 199,934 units, of which the diameter = 200,000. Then the angles of 
triangle ACF are given. According to Theorem I on Plane Triangles [I, 13], 

20 the ratio of the sides will also be given: CF = 97,967 of the units of which 
AC = 182,494. Therefore FD [= CFD-CF= 199,934-97,967 = 101,967] ex¬ 
ceeds half [of CFD — 199,934-^2 or 99,967], the excess being FK = 2,000 of the 
same units [101,967— 99,967]. The segment CAD [^ 177°6'] is less than 
a semicircle by 2° 54'. Half of the chord subtending this arc is equal to EK 
26 and has 2534 units. Therefore, in triangle EFK the two sides FK and KE which 
form the right angle are given. Of the given sides and angles, EF will have 323 
units, of which EL has 10,000; and angle EFK has 51 2 / 3 °, when 360° = 4 right 
angles. Therefore, the whole angle AFL [= EFK+(AFD = BFC = 45°)] has 
96 2 / 3 °[= 51 2 / 3 ° +45°], and the remainder, angle BFL [= 180°— AFL] has 83 1 I S °. 

30 If EL has 60 units, EF will be approximately one unit, 56 minutes of a unit. This 
was the sun’s distance from the center of the circle, having now become barely 
Vsu whereas to Ptolemy it seemed to be 1 / 2i . Furthermore, the apogee, which then 
preceded the summer solstice by 24 1 / 2 °, now follows it by 6 2 / 3 °. 

EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST AND ANNUAL Chapter 17 
35 SOLAR INEQUALITY, TOGETHER WITH ITS 
PARTICULAR VARIATIONS 

Hence, since several variations are found in the solar inequality, I think that I 
should first set forth the annual variation, which is better known than the others. 

For this purpose, reproduce the circle ABC, with its center E, diameter AEC, apogee 
40 A, perigee C, and the sun atD. Now the greatest difference between the uniform 
[motion] and the apparent [motion] has been shown [III, 15] to occur at the appar¬ 
ent midpoint between the two apsides. For this reason, on AEC construct the 
perpendicular BD, intersecting the circumference in point B. Join BE. In the B 
right triangle BDE two sides are given, namely, BE, the radius of the circle, and 
45 DE, the distance from the sun to the center. Therefore the angles of the triangle 
will be given, among them angle DBE, the difference between BEA, the angle 


159 



REVOLUTIONS 


of the uniform [motion], and the right angle EDB, [which is the angle of the] 
apparent [motion]. 

However, to the extent that DE has increased and decreased, the whole shape 
of the triangle has changed. Thus, the angle B was 2° 23' before Ptolemy; 1° 59' 
at the time of Al-Battani and Al-Zarkali; and at present it is 1° 5T. According 5 
to Ptolemy [Syntaxis, III, 4], the arc AB, intercepted by the angle AEB, was 
92° 23', and BC 87° 37'; AB was 91° 59', and BC 88° T, according to Al-Bat¬ 
tani; at present, AB is 91° 51', BC 88° 9'. 

From these facts the remaining variations are clear. For, as in the second 
diagram, take any other arc AB, such that angle AEB, the supplementary angle 
BED, and the two sides BE and ED are given. By the Theorems on Plane Trian¬ 
gles, angle EBD of the prosthaphaeresis and the difference between the uniform 
and apparent [motions] will be given. These differences also must change on 
account of the variation in the side ED, which was just mentioned. 

ANALYSIS OF THE UNIFORM MOTION Chapter 18 « 

IN LONGITUDE 

The foregoing explanation of the annual solar inequality was based, not on 
the simple variation (as was made clear), but on a variation disclosed through the 
long passage of time to be intermingled with the simple variation. Later on [III, 20] 

I shall separate these variations from each other. Meanwhile, the mean and uniform 20 
motion of the earth’s center will be established with greater numerical accuracy, 
the better it is distinguished from the non unif orm variations, and the longer 
the period of time over which it extends. Now this investigation will proceed as 
follows. 

I took the autumnal equinox observed by Hipparchus at Alexandria in the 25 
32nd year of the 3rd Callippic period, which was the 177th year after the death 
of Alexander, as was mentioned above [III, 13], on the third of the five intercalary 
days at midnight, followed by the fourth day. But since Alexandria lies about one 
hour east of Cracow in longitude, the time [at Cracow] was about an hour before 
midnight. Therefore, according to the computation reported above, the position 30 

of the autumnal equinox in the sphere of the fixed stars was 176° 10' from the 
beginning of the Ram, and this was the apparent place of the sun, its distance 

from the higher apse being 114 1 / i ° [=24° 30'+90°]. To depict this situation, 
about center D draw ABC, the circle described by the center of the earth. Let 
ADC be the diameter, in which the sun is placed at E, with the apogee at A and 35 
the perigee at C. Let B be the point where the sun appeared to be at the autumnal 
equinox. Draw the straight lines BD and BE. Then angle DEB, the sun’s apparent 
distance from the apogee, is 144 1 / 2 °- At that time DE was 416 units, of which 
BD = 10,000. Therefore, according to Theorem IV [II, E] on Plane Triangles, 
in triangle BDE the angles are given. Angle DBE, the difference between angle 40 
BED and angle BDA, is 2°10'. But since angle BED = 114°30', angle BDA will 
be 116° 40' [=114° 30'+2° 10']. Therefore, the mean or uniform place of the sun 
is 178°20' [=176° 10'+2° 10'] from the beginning of the Ramin the sphere of the 
fixed stars. 

With this observation I compared the autumnal equinox which I observed 45 in 
Frombork on the same Cracow meridian in the year 1515 C.E. on 14 Septem- 


160 



BOOK III CH. 18-19 


ber, in the 1840th Egyptian year after the death of Alexander on the 6th day of 
Phaophi,the secondEgyptianmonth,half an hour after sunrise [III, 13]. At that time 
the place of the autumnal equinox, according to computation and observation, was 
152° 45' in the sphere of the fixed stars, at a distance of 83° 20' from the higher 
5 apse, according to the foregoing analysis [III, 16, end]. Construct the angle BEA = 

83° 20', with 180° = 2 right angles. In triangle [. BDE ], two sides are given: BD = 
10,000 units, and BE = 323 units. According to Theorem IV [II, E] on Plane 
Triangles, angle DBE will be about 1 0 50'. If a circle circumscribes triangle 
BDE, angle BED will intercept an arc of 166° 40', when 360° = 2 right angles. B 
io Side BD will be 19,864 units, of which the diameter = 20,000. In accordance with 
the given ratio of BD to DE, about 640 of the same units will be established as 
the length of DE, which subtends angle DBE = 3° 40' at the circumference, 
but 1 0 50' as a central angle [=3° 40' + 2]. This was the prosthaphaeresis and the 
difference between the uniform and apparent [motions]. By adding it to angle 
is BED = 83° 20', we shall have angle BDA and arc AB = 85° 10'[=83° 20'+1° 50'] 
as the distance of the uniform [motion] from the apogee. Hence the mean place 
of the sun in the sphere of the fixed stars is 154° 35' [= 152° 45'+1 ° 50']. Between 
the two observations there are 1662 Egyptian years, 37 days, 18 minutes of a day, 

45 seconds of a day. In addition to the complete revolutions, 1660 in number, 

20 the mean and uniform motion was about 336° 15', in agreement with the number 
which I set down in the Table of Uniform Motion [following III, 14]. 

ESTABLISHING THE POSITIONS AND EPOCHS Chapter 19 
FOR THE SUN’S UNIFORM MOTION 

From the death of Alexander the Great to Hipparchus’ observation the elapsed 
25 time is 176 years, 362 days, 27 1 / 2 minutes of a day, in which the mean motion 
is computed as 312° 43'. This figure is subtracted from the 178° 20' for Hippar¬ 
chus’ observation [III, 18], supplemented by the 360° of a circle. The remainder, 
225° 37' [360°+178° 20' = 538° 20'- 312° 43' = 225° 37'], will be the position 
for the meridian of Cracow and Frombork, the place of my observation, at noon 
so on the first day of Thoth, the first Egyptian month, for the epoch of the era 
commencing with the death of Alexander the Great. From that time to the epoch 
of the Roman era of Julius Caesar, in 278 years, 118 V 2 days, the mean motion, 
after [the elimination of] complete revolutions, is 46 ° 27'. When this figure is added 
to the number for Alexander’s position [225° 37'+ 46° 27'], the sum is 272° 4' 

35 for Caesar’s position at midnight preceding 1 January, the customary start of the 
Roman years and days. Then in 45 years, 12 days, or in 323 years, 130 V 2 days 
after Alexander the Great [278 y 118 V 2 d + 45 y 12 d ], comes Christ’s position at 
272 ° 31'. Christ was born in the 3rd year of the 194th Olympiad [193 x4 = 772+ 

3]. This amounts to 775 years, 12 V 2 days, from the beginning of the first Olym- 
40 piad to midnight preceding 1 January [in the year of Christ’s birth]. This likewise 
puts the position of the first Olympiad at 96° 16' at noon on the first day of the 
month Hecatombaeon, the present equivalent of this day being 1 July in the Roman 
calendar. In this way the epochs of the simple solar motion are related to the sphere 
of the fixed stars. Furthermore, the positions of the composite [motion] are 
4 5 obtained by applying the precession [of the equinoxes]. Corresponding to the 
simple positions, the composite positions are, for the Olympiads, 90° 59' [=96° 


161 



REVOLUTIONS 


16'- 5° 16'; III, 11, end]; Alexander, 226° 38' [=225 ° 37'+l° 2']; Caesar, 
276° 59' [=272° 4'+4° 55']; and Christ, 278° 2' [=272°31'+5° 32']. All these 
positions are reduced (as I mentioned) to the meridian of Cracow. 

THE SECOND AND TWOFOLD INEQUALITY Chapter 20 
IMPOSED ON THE SUN BY THE SHIFT * 

OF THE APSIDES 

The shift in the solar apse now presents a problem which is more acute because, 
whereas Ptolemy regarded the apse as fixed, others thought that it accompanied 
the motion of the sphere of the stars, in conformity with their doctrine that the 
fixed stars move too. Al-Zarkali believed in the nonuniformity of this [motion], io 
which even happened to regress. He relied on the following evidence. Al-Battani 
had found the apogee, as was mentioned above [III, 16], 7° 43' ahead of the sol¬ 
stice : in the 740 years since Ptolemy it had advanced nearly 17 ° [s24 0 30'—7° 43']. 

In the 193 years thereafter it seemed to Al-Zarkali to have retrogressed about 
4 x / 2 ° [sl2° 10'—7° 43']. He therefore believed that the center of the annual orbit is 
had an additional motion on a circlet. As a result, the apogee was deflected back 
and forth, while the distance from the center of the orbit to the center of the 
universe varied. 

[Al-Zarkali’s] idea was quite ingenious, but it has not been accepted because 
it is inconsistent with the other findings taken as a whole. Thus, consider the 20 
successive stages of that motion. For some time before Ptolemy it stood still. In 
740 years or thereabouts it progressed through 17°. Then in 200 years it retro¬ 
gressed 4° or 5°. Thereafter until our age it moved forward. The entire period 
has witnessed no other retrogression nor the several stationary points which must 
intervene at both limits when motions reverse their direction. [The absence of] 25 
these [retrogressions and stationary points] cannot possibly be understood in 
a regular and circular motion. Therefore many [specialists] believe that some error 
occurred in the observations of those [astronomers, that is, Al-Battani and Al- 
Zarkali]. Both [were] equally skillful and careful practitioners so that it is doubtful 
which one we should prefer to follow. so 

For my part I confess that nowhere is there a greater difficulty than in under¬ 
standing the solar apogee, where we infer large [quantities] from certain mi¬ 
nute and barely perceptible [magnitudes]. For near the perigee and apogee an 
entire degree produces a change of only 2', more or less, in the prosthaphaeresis. 

On the other hand, near the intermediate distances 5° or 6° are traversed for 1'. 35 
Hence a slight error can develop into a very large one. Accordingly, even in 
putting the apogee at 6 2 / 3 ° within the Crab [III, 16], I was not satisfied to 
trust the time-measuring instruments, unless my results were also confirmed 
by solar and lunar eclipses. For any error lurking in the instruments is undoubt¬ 
edly disclosed by the eclipses. It is highly probable, therefore, as we can de- 40 
duce from the general structure of the motion, that it is direct, yet nonuniform. 
For after that stationary [interval] from Hipparchus to Ptolemy the apogee 
appeared in a continuous, regular, and progressive advance until the present 
time. An exception occurred between Al-Battani and Al-Zarkali through a mistake 
(it is believed), since everything else seems to fit. For in a similar way the solar pros- 4 s 
thaphaeresis has likewise not yet stopped diminishing. Hence it seems to fol- 


162 



BOOK III CH. 20 


low the same circular pattern, and both nonuniformities are in phase with that 
first and simple anomaly of the obliquity of the ecliptic, or with a similar irregu¬ 
larity. 

To make this situation clearer, in the plane of the ecliptic draw the circle 
s AB, with its center at C, and its diameter ACB, on which put the solar globe at D 
as the center of the universe. With C as center, describe EF as another circle of 
small dimensions which does not contain the sun. On this circlet let the center of 
the annual revolution of the earth’s center be understood to move in a certain 
very slow advance. Together with the line AD, the circlet EF advances in conse- 
10 quence, whereas the center of the annual revolution moves along the circlet EF 
in precedence, both motions being quite slow. Therefore the center of the annual 
orbit will at one time be found at its greatest distance [from the sun], DE, and at 
another time at its least [distance], DF. Its motion will be slower at E, and faster at 
F. In the circlet’s intervening arcs [the center of the annual orbit] makes that dis- 
15 tance between the centers increase and decrease with time, and [it makes] the higher 
apse alternately precede and follow that apse or apogee which lies on line ACD 
and serves as the mean apogee. Thus, take the arc EG. With G as center, draw 
a circle equal to AB. Then the higher apse will lie on line DGK, and the distance 
DG will be shorter than DE, in accordance with Euclid, III, 8. These relations 
ao are demonstrated in this way by an eccentreccentric, and also by an epicyclepi- 
cyclet, as follows. 

Let AB be concentric with the universe and with the sun. Let ACB be the 
diameter on which the higher apse lies. With A as center, describe the epicycle 
DE. Again, with D as center, draw the epicyclet FG, on which the earth revolves., 
25 Let all [these constructions] lie in the same plane, that of the ecliptic. Let the first 



F 



163 




REVOLUTIONS 


epicycle move in consequence in about a year. Let the second epicycle, that is, 

D, likewise move in a year, but in precedence. Let the revolutions of both epi¬ 
cycles be equal with respect to line AC. Furthermore, let the center of the earth 
[by moving] away from F in precedence add a little to D. Hence, when the earth 
is at F, clearly it will make the solar apogee a maximum, and a minimum when it 5 
is at G. In the intervening arcs of the epicyclet FG, moreover, it will make the 
apogee precede or follow [the mean apogee], accelerate or decelerate, increase 
or decrease. Thus the motion appears nonuniform, as was previously demonstrated 
by the epicycleccentric. 

Now take the arc AI. With I as center, reconstruct the epicyclepicycle. Join 10 
Cl, and prolong it along the straight line CIK. Angle KID will be equal to AC I 
on account of the equality of the revolutions. Therefore, as I showed above [III, 
15], point D will describe around L as center and with eccentricity CL = DI 
an eccentric equal to the concentric AB. F will also trace its own eccentric, with 
eccentricity CLM — IDF ; and G likewise, with eccentricity IG = CN. Suppose 15 
that meanwhile the center of the earth has already traversed any arc FO on its 
own epicycle, the second one. O will now describe an eccentric whose center lies 
not on line AC, but on a line, such as LP, parallel to DO. Furthermore, if 01 and 
CP are joined, they will be equal [to each other], but smaller than IF and CM; 
and angle DIO [will be] equal to angle LCP, in accordance with Euclid, I, 8. To 20 
that extent the solar apogee on line CP will be seen to precede A. 

Hence it is also clear that the same thing happens with an eccentrepicycle. 
For from the previous [arrangement take] only that eccentric which is described 
by the epicyclet D around L as center. Let the center of the earth revolve along 
the arc FO under the aforementioned conditions, that is, a little beyond an annual *e 
revolution. Around P as center, it will trace a second circle, eccentric with respect 
to the first eccentric, and thereafter the same phenomena will recur. Since so 
many arrangements lead to the same result, I would not readily say which one is 
real, except that the perpetual agreement of the computations and phenomena 
compels the belief that it is one of them. 30 

HOW LARGE IS THE SECOND VARIATION Chapter 21 
IN THE SOLAR INEQUALITY? 

We have already seen [III, 20] that the second inequality follows the first and 
simple anomaly of the obliquity of the ecliptic, or something like it. Hence, unless 
impeded by some error of previous observers, we shall obtain its variations with 35 

precision. For by computation we have the simple anomaly as about 165° 39' in 
1515 C.E., and its beginning, by calculating backwards, in about 64 B. C. From 
that time until ours the total is 1580 years. When the anomaly began then, the 
eccentricity, I found, was at its maximum = 417 units, of which the radius = 
10,000. Our eccentricity, on the other hand, was shown to be 323 [units]. 40 

Now let AB be a straight line, on which B is the sun and the center of the uni¬ 
verse. Let the greatest eccentricity be AB; and the smallest, DB. With diameter 
AD, describe a circlet. On it take arc AC as the measure of the first, simple anomaly, 
which was 165° 39'. AB is given as 417 units, found at the beginning of the simple 
anomaly, that is, at A. On the other hand, at present BC is 323 units. Hence we 45 
shall have triangle ABC, with sides AB and BC given. One angle, CAD, also 


164 



BOOK III CH. 21-22 


[is given], because arc CD = 14° 21', being the remainder [when arc AC = 
165° 39' is subtracted] from the semicircle. Therefore, in accordance with the 
Theorems on Plane Triangles the remaining side/1C will be given, and also angle 
ABC, which is the difference between the apogee’s mean and nonuniform motions, 
fi Since AC subtends a given arc, diameter AD of circle ACD will also be given. 
For, from angle CAD = 14° 21', we shall have CB = 2486 units, of which the 
diameter of the circle circumscribing the triangle is 100,000. The ratio BC : AB 
gives AB = 3225 of the same units. AB intercepts the angle ACB = 341° 26'. 
The remainder, with 360° = 2 right angles, is the angle CBD = 4° 13', 
10 [= 360°—(341°26'+14 0 21' = 355°47')], which is intercepted by AC = 735 
units. Therefore, in units of which AB = 417, AC has been found to be about 
95 units. Since AC subtends a given arc, it will have a ratio to AD as the diame¬ 
ter. Therefore AD is given as 96 units, of which ADB = 417. DB, the remain¬ 
der [= ADB—AD = 417—96] =321 units, the minimum extent oftheeccen- 
15 tricity. Angle CBD, which was found to be 4° 13' at the circumference, but 2° 6 1 / 2 ' 
at the center, is the prosthaphaeresis to be subtracted from the uniform motion of 
AB around B as center. 

Now draw straight line BE tangent to the circle at point E. Take F as center, 
and join EF. In right triangle BEF, side EF is given as 48 units [= 1 / 2 x96 = diam- 
20 eter AD], and BDF as 369 units [FD = 48+321 = DB]. In units of which 
FDB as radius = 10,000, EF = 1300. This is half of the chord subtending twice 
the angle EBF and, with 360° = 4 right angles, is 7° 28', the greatest prostha¬ 
phaeresis between the uniform motion F and the apparent motion E. 

Hence all the other individual differences can be obtained. Thus, assume that 
25 angle AFE = 6°. We shall have a triangle with sides EF and FB given, as well 
as angle EFB. From this information the prosthaphaeresis EBF will emerge as 
41'. But if angle AFE = 12°, we shall have the prosthaphaeresis = 1°23'; if 
18°, then 2° 3'; and so on for the rest by this method, as was stated above in 
connection with the annual prosthaphaereses [III, 17]. 

80 HOW THE SOLAR APOGEE’S UNIFORM Chapter 22 

AND NONUNIFORM MOTIONS ARE DERIVED 

The time when the greatest eccentricity coincided with the beginning of the 
first and simple anomaly was the 3rd year of the 178th Olympiad and the 259th 
year after Alexander the Great, according to the Egyptians [64 B. C.j III, 21]. 
86 Hence the apogee’s true and mean positions were both at 5 1 / 2 ° within the Twins, 
that is, 65 Va° from the vernal equinox. The true equinoctial precession, which 
also coincided with the mean [precession] at that time, was 4° 38'. When this 
figure is subtracted from 65 Va°) the remainder, 60° 52' from the beginning of the 
Ram in the fixed stars, was the place of the apogee. Furthermore, the apogee’s 

40 place was found to be 6 2 / 3 ° within the Crab in the 2nd year of the 573rd Olympiad 
or 1515 C.E. The precession of the vernal equinox by computation was 

27 1 /4°. If this figure is subtracted from 96 2 / 3 °, the remainder is 69° 25'. The first 
anomaly at that time was 165° 39'. The prosthaphaeresis, by which the true place 
preceded the mean [place], was shown to have been 2° 7' [s2 0 6V 2 'j III> 21]. 
46 Therefore the mean place of the solar apogee was known to be 71° 32' [=69° 
25'+2° 7']. Hence in 1580 uniform Egyptian years the apogee’s mean and 


165 



REVOLUTIONS 


uniform motion was 10° 41' [=71° 32'-60°52']. When this figure is divided 
by the number of years, we shall have the annual rate as 24" 20"' 14"". 

DETERMINING THE SOLAR ANOMALY Chapter 23 

AND ESTABLISHING ITS POSITIONS 

If the foregoing figures are subtracted from the simple, annual motion, which s 
was 359° 44'49" 7"'4"" [III, 14], the remainder, 359° 44'24" 46'" 50"", will 
be the annual uniform motion of the anomaly. Furthermore, when this [remainder] 
is divided by 365, the daily rate will emerge as 59' 8 " 7'" 2"", in agreement with 
what was set out in the Tables above [following III, 14]. Hence we shall also 
have the positions of the recognized epochs, beginning with the first Olympiad. 10 
For, the mean solar apogee half an hour after sunrise on 14 September in the 2nd 
year of the 573rd Olympiad was shown to be at 71° 37', from which the 
mean solar distance was 83°3' [71°32+ 83° 3'= 154°35'; III, 18]. From 
the first Olympiad there are 2290 Egyptian years, 281 days, 46 day-minutes. 

In this time the motion in anomaly, after the elimination of whole circles, was is 
42° 49'. When this figure is subtracted from 83° 3', the remainder is 40° 14' as 
the position of the anomaly at the first Olympiad. In the same way as before, 
the place for the epoch of Alexander is 166°38'; for Caesar, 211° IT; and for 
Christ, 211° 19'. 

TABULAR PRESENTATION OF THE Chapter 24 20 

VARIATIONS IN THE UNIFORM 
AND APPARENT [SOLAR MOTIONS] 

In order to enhance the usefulness of what has been proved concerning the 
variations in the sun’s uniform and apparent [motions], I shall also set them out 
in a Table having sixty lines and six columns or rows. The first two columns will as 
contain the number [of degrees of the annual anomaly] in both semicircles, I mean, 
the ascending [from 0° to 180°] and descending [from 360° to 180°] semicircles, 
arranged at intervals of 3°, as I did above for the [prosthaphaereses of the] motions 
of the equinoxes [following III, 8 ]. The third column will record the degrees 
[and minutes] of the variation in the motion of the solar apogee or in the anomaly; so 
as correlated with every third degree, this variation rises to a maximum of 
about 7 72 The fourth column will be reserved for the proportional minutes, 
which are 60 at the maximum. They enter the reckoning in conjunction with 
[the sixth column’s] increase in the annual anomaly’s prosthaphaereses, when these 
are greater [than the prosthaphaereses arising from the minimum distance between as 
the sun and the center of the universe]. Since the largest increase for these [prostha¬ 
phaereses] is 32', a sixtieth part [thereof] will be 32". Then, in accordance with 
the size of the increases, which I shall derive from the eccentricity by the method 
explained above [III, 21], I shall put down the number of the sixtieths along¬ 
side every third degree. The fifth column will carry the annual and first variation’s «o 
individual prosthaphaereses, based on the sun’s least distance from the center [of 
the universe]. The sixth and last column will show the increases in those pros¬ 
thaphaereses which occur at the greatest eccentricity. The Table follows. 


166 



BOOK III CH. 24 


TABLE OF THE SOLAR PROSTHAPHAERESES 


Common 

Numbers 

Central 

Prosthaphaereses 

Proportional 

Orbital 

Prosthaphaereses 

In¬ 

creases 

Degree 

Degree 

Degree 

Minute 

Minutes 

Degree 

Minute 

Minute 

3 

357 

0 

21 

60 

0 

6 

i 

6 

354 

0 

41 

60 

0 

11 

3 

9 

351 

1 


60 

0 

17 

4 

12 

348 

1 


60 

0 

22 

6 

15 

345 

1 


60 

0 

27 

M-.I 

18 

342 

2 


59 

0 

33 

B 

21 

339 

2 

25 

59 

0 

38 

a 

24 

336 

2 

46 

59 

0 

43 

13 

27 

333 

3 

5 

58 

0 

48 

14 

30 

330 

3 

24 

57 

0 

53 

16 

33 

327 

3 

43 

57 

0 

58 

17 

36 

324 

H 

2 

56 

1 

3 

18 

39 

321 

D 

20 

55 

1 

7 

20 

42 

318 

B 

37 

54 

1 

12 

21 

45 

315 

if 

53 

53 

1 

16 

22 

48 

312 

5 

8 

51 

1 

20 

23 

51 

309 

5 

23 

50 

1 

24 

24 

54 

306 

5 

36 

49 

1 

28 

25 

57 

303 

5 

50 

47 

1 

31 

27 

60 

300 

6 


46 

1 

34 

28 

63 

297 

6 


44 

1 

37 

29 

66 

294 

6 

27 

42 

1 

39 

29 

69 

291 

6 

37 

41 

1 

42 

30 

72 

288 

6 

46 

40 

1 

44 

30 

75 

285 

6 

53 

39 

1 

46 

30 

78 

282 


1 

38 

1 

48 

31 

81 

279 

u 

8 

36 

1 

49 

31 

84 

276 

B 

14 

35 

1 

49 

31 

87 

273 

B 

20 

33 

1 

50 

31 

90 

270 

B 

25 

32 

1 

50 

32 


167 


















































REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE SOLAR PROSTHAPHAERESES 



















BOOK III CH. 25 


COMPUTING THE APPARENT SUN Chapter 25 

It is now quite clear, I believe, how the apparent position of the sun is computed 
from the foregoing [Table] for any given time. For that time, look for the true 
place of the vernal equinox or its precession together with the first, simple anom- 
5 aly, as I explained above [III, 12]. Then through the Tables of the Uniform 
Motion [following III, 14, find] the mean simple motion of the center of the earth 
(or the motion of the sun, as you may wish to call it) and the annual anomaly. Add 
these [figures] to their established epochs [as given in III, 23]. Then, alongside the 
first, simple anomaly and its number, or an adj acent number, as recorded in the first 
io or second column of the preceding Table, in the third column you will find the cor¬ 
responding prosthaphaeresis of the annual anomaly. Set the accompanying propor¬ 
tional minutes aside. If the raw [annual anomaly] is less than a semicircle or its num¬ 
ber occurs in the first column, add the prosthaphaeresis to the annual anomaly; oth¬ 
erwise, subtract [the prosthaphaeresis from the raw annual anomaly]. The remain- 
15 der or sum will be the adjusted solar anomaly. Then with it obtain the prosthaphae¬ 
resis of the annual orbit, which occupies the fifth column, together with the accom¬ 
panying increase. This increase, taken in conjunction with the proportional min¬ 
utes, previously set aside, amounts to a quantity which is always added to this 
[orbital] prosthaphaeresis. This [sum] will become the adjusted prosthaphaeresis, 
20 which is subtracted from the sun’s mean place if the number of the annual 
anomaly was found in the first column or was less than a semicircle. On the other 
hand, [the adjusted prosthaphaeresis] is added [to the sun’s mean place] if [the 
annual anomaly was] greater [than a semicircle] or occupied [a line in] the second 
column of [common] numbers. The remainder or sum thus obtained will define 
as the sun’s true place, as measured from the beginning of the constellation of the 
Ram. Finally, the true precession of the vernal equinox, if added [to the sun’s 
true place], will immediately also show the sun’s position in relation to the equinox, 
in zodiacal signs and degrees of the zodiac. 

If you wish to accomplish this result in another way, take the uniform composite 
30 [motion] instead of the simple motion. Perform all the aforementioned operations, 
except that you add or subtract, as the situation requires, only the prosthaphaeresis 
of the equinoctial precession instead of the precession itself. In this way the compu¬ 
tation of the apparent sun is obtained through the motion of the earth in agreement 
with ancient and modem records, so that in addition the future motion has pre- 
35 sumably already been foreseen. 

Nevertheless I am also not unaware that if anybody believed the center of the 
annual revolution to be stationary as the center of the universe, while the sun 
moved with two motions similar and equal to those which I explained in connec¬ 
tion with the center of the eccentric [III, 20], all the phenomena would appear 
40 as before - the same figures and the same proof. Nothing would be changed in 
them, especially the phenomena pertaining to the sun, except the position. For 
then the motion of the earth’s center around the center of the universe would be 
regular and simple (the two remaining motions being ascribed to the sun). For 
this reason there will still remain a doubt about which of these two positions is 
45 occupied by the center of the universe, as I said ambiguously at the beginning 
that the center of the universe is in the sun [I, 9, 10] or near it [I, 10]. I shall 
discuss this question further, however, in my treatment of the five planets [V, 4]. 


169 



REVOLUTIONS 


There I shall also decide it to the best of my ability, with the thought that it is 
enough if I adopt reliable and nowise untrustworthy computations for the apparent 
sun. 


THE NUCHTHEMERON, THAT IS, Chapter 26 

THE VARIABLE NATURAL DAY 5 

With regard to the sun, something still remains to be said about the variation 
in the natural day, the time which is embraced in the period of 24 equal hours 
and which we have used up to the present as the general and precise measurement 
of the heavenly motions. Such a day, however, is defined differently by different 
people: as the interval between two sunrises, by the Babylonians and ancient 10 
Hebrews; between two sunsets, by the Athenians; from midnight to midnight, 
by the Romans; and from noon to noon by the Egyptians. 

In this period, it is clear, the terrestrial globe completes its own rotation as 
well as what is added in the meantime by the annual revolution related to the 
apparent motion of the sun. But this addition is variable, as is shown in the first 15 
place by the sun’s variable apparent motion, and secondly by the natural day’s 
connection with the [rotation around the] poles of the equator, whereas the annual 
revolution [proceeds] along the ecliptic. For these reasons that apparent time 
cannot be the general and precise measurement of motion, since the days are not 
uniform with [the natural] day and with one another in every detail. It was there- ao 
fore necessary to select from these [days] some mean and uniform day which 
would permit uniform motion to be measured without uncertainty. 

Now around the poles of the earth in the course of an entire year 365 rotations 
take place. These are increased by approximately a whole additional rotation as 
the result of a daily prolongation due to the apparent advance of the sun. Therefore as 
the natural day exceeds the uniform [day] by 1/365 of that [additional rotation]. 
Consequently we must define the uniform day and distinguish it from the nonuni¬ 
form apparent [day]. Accordingly, I call that [day] which contains an entire rotation 
of the equator, plus as much as appears to be traversed by the sun in its uniform 
motion during that time, the “uniform day”. By contrast, [I call that] day “nonuni- so 
form and apparent” which comprises the 360° of a rotation of the equator, plus 
that which rises on the horizon or meridian together with the apparent advance 
of the sun. Although the difference between these [uniform and nonuniform] 
days is quite small and imperceptible at the outset, nevertheless when several 
days are taken together, [the difference] adds up and becomes perceptible, so 

Of this [phenomenon] there are two causes: the nonuniformity of the apparent 
sun, and the nonuniform rising of the oblique ecliptic. The first cause, which is 
due to the nonuniform and apparent motion of the sun, has already been made 
clear [III, 16-17]. For in the semicircle whose midpoint is the higher apse, halfway 
between the two mean apsides, in comparison with the degrees of the ecliptic 40 
4®/ 4 time-degrees were lacking, according to Ptolemy [Syntaxis, III, 9]. The 
same number was in excess in the other semicircle, which contained the lower 
apse. Hence the entire surplus of one semicircle over the other was 9 % time- 
degrees. 

But in the [case of the] second cause (the one connected with the risings and « 
settings) a very great difference occurs between the semicircles [containing] the 


170 



BOOK III CH. 26 


two solstices. This is [the difference] between the shortest and longest day. It 
varies very much, being special for every single region. On the other hand, [the 
difference] related to noon or midnight is everywhere confined within four limits. 
For, the 88° from 16° within the Bull to 14° within the Lion cross the meridian 
b in about 93 time-degrees. The 92 0 from 14 0 within the Lion to 16 ° within the Scor¬ 
pion cross [the meridian] in 87 time-degrees. Hence in the latter case 5 time- 
degrees are lacking [92 87 °], and in the former case the same number is in 

excess [93°-88°]. Thus the sum of the days in the first interval exceeds those in the 
second [interval] by 10 time-degrees = 2 / 3 of an hour. This happens similarly 
io in the other semicircle, where the situation is reversed within the remaining, 
diametrically opposite, limits. 

Now the astronomers decided to begin the natural day at noon or midnight, 
not at sunrise or sunset. For, the nonuniformity connected with the horizon is 
more complicated, since it extends over several hours. Moreover, it is not every- 
ls where the same, but varies in a complex way depending on the obliquity of 
the sphere. On the other hand, [the nonuniformity] related to the meridian is the 
same everywhere, and simpler. 

Consequently, the entire difference arising from the two aforementioned 
causes - the apparent nonuniform motion of the sun and the nonuniform crossing 
2o of the meridian - before Ptolemy, when the decrease started at the middle of the 
Water Bearer, and the increase at the beginning of the Scorpion, amounted to 
8 1 / 3 time-degrees [Syntaxis, III, 9]. At present, when the decrease extends 
from 20° within the Water Bearer or thereabouts to 10° within the Scorpion, and 
the increase [extends] from 10° within the Scorpion to 20° within the Water 
25 Bearer, [the difference] has contracted to 7° 48' time-degrees. For, these [phenom¬ 
ena] too change in time on account of the mutability of the perigee and the 
eccentricity. 

Finally, if the maximum variation in the precession of the equinoxes is also 
added to the foregoing, the entire inequality in the natural days can rise above 
3° 10 time-degrees in several years. Herein a third cause of the nonuniformity in the 
days has hitherto remained hidden. For, the rotation of the equator has been found 
uniform with reference to the mean and uniform equinox, not to the apparent 
equinoxes, which (as was quite clear) are not entirely uniform. For, twice ten time- 
degrees = F/g hours, by which longer days can sometimes exceed shorter days. 
35 In connection with the sun’s [apparent] annual motion and the relatively slow 
motion of the other planets, these [phenomena] could perhaps be neglected without 
any obvious error. But they should not be overlooked at all, on account of the 
moon’s swift motion, which can cause a discrepancy of 5 /e°- 

Now uniform time may be compared with apparent, nonuniform [time] by 
40 a method whereby all the variations are coordinated, as follows. Choose any time. 
For both limits of this time, I mean, the beginning and the end, look up the sun’s 
mean displacement from the mean equinox resulting from what I have called the 
sun’s composite uniform motion. Also [look up] the true apparent displacement 
from the true equinox. Determine how many time-degrees have crossed in right 
45 ascension at noon or midnight, or have intervened between [the right ascensions] 
from the first true place to the second true [place]. For if [the time-degrees] are 
equal to the degrees between both mean places, then the given apparent time 
will be equal to the mean [time]. But if the time-degrees are in excess, add the 


171 



REVOLUTIONS 


surplus to the given time. On the other hand, if [the time-degrees] are fewer, 
subtract the difference from the apparent time. By so doing, from the sum or 
remainder we shall obtain the time reduced to uniform [time], in taking four 
minutes of an hour or ten seconds of a sixtieth of a day [10 d8 ] for every time- 
degree. If the uniform time is given, however, and you want to know how much s 
apparent time is equivalent to it, follow the opposite procedure. 

Now for the first Olympiad we had the mean distance of the sun from the 
mean vernal equinox at noon on the first day of Hecatombaeon, the first Athenian 
month, as 90° 59' [III, 19], and from the apparent equinox as 0° 36' within the 
Crab. For the years since Christ, the sun’s mean motion is 8° 2' within the Goat io 
[= 278°2'; III, 19], while the true motion is 8°48' within the same sign. Therefore, 
in the right sphere from 0° 36' within the Crab to 8° 48' within the Goat 178 time- 
degrees 54' rise, exceeding the distance between the mean places by one time- 
degree 51' = 7 hour-minutes. The procedure is the same for the rest, by means 
of which a very precise examination can be made of the motion of the moon, with is 
which the next Book deals. 


172 



Book Four 


INTRODUCTION 

In the preceding Book to the best of my limited ability I explained the phenom- 
5 ena caused by the motion of the earth around the sun, and through the same 
procedure I intend to analyze the motions of all the planets. Therefore the moon’s 
motion confronts me now. This must be so, because it is principally through the 
moon, which takes part in the day and the night, that the positions of any asters 
whatever are found and verified. Secondly, of all [the heavenly bodies] only the 
10 moon relates its revolutions as a whole, even though they are very irregular, to 
the center of the earth, to which it is in the highest degree akin. Therefore the 
moon, taken by itself, gives no indication that the earth moves, except perhaps in 
its daily rotation. All the more for that reason it was believed that the earth was 
the center of the universe and the common center of all the revolutions. In ex- 
i5 pounding the moon’s motion I do not disagree with the ancients’ belief that it 
takes place around the earth. But I shall also present certain features at variance 
with what we have received from our predecessors and in closer agreement with 
one another. By means of those features I may determine the lunar motion too 
with greater certainty, as far as possible, in order that its secrets may be more 
20 clearly understood. 

THE HYPOTHESES CONCERNING Chapter 1 

THE LUNAR CIRCLES, ACCORDING 
TO THE BELIEF OF THE ANCIENTS 

A property of the moon’s motion is that it follows, not the middle circle of the 
26 zodiac, but its own circle, which is inclined to the middle circle, bisects it, is in 
turn bisected by it, and crosses it into either latitude. These phenomena are very 
much like the tropics in the annual motion of the sun since, of course, what the 
year is to the sun, the month is to the moon. The mean places of the intersections 
are called “ecliptics” [by some astronomers] and “nodes” by others. The con- 
30 junctions and oppositions of the sun and moon which take place in these points 
are called “ecliptic”. For apart from these points, where eclipses of the sun and 
moon can occur, the two circles have no other points in common. For when the 
moon is diverted to other places, the result is that [these two luminaries] do not 
block each other’s light; on the contrary, as they pass on, they do not obstruct 
36 each other. 

Furthermore, this tilted lunar circle, together with those four cardinal points 
belonging to it, moves uniformly around the center of the earth nearly 3' a day, 
completing a revolution in the nineteenth year. In this circle and its plane the moon 
is seen moving always eastward. But sometimes its motion is very slight, and at 
40 other times very great. For it is slower, the higher it is; and faster, the nearer it 
is to the earth. This variation could be noticed more easily in the moon than 
in any other body on account of its proximity [to the earth]. 


173 



REVOLUTIONS 


This phenomenon was understood to occur through an epicycle. As the moon 
traveled along the upper [part of the epicycle’s] circumference, its speed was less 
than the uniform speed; on the other hand, in traversing the lower [part of the 
epicycle’s circumference], its speed exceeded the uniform speed. The results 
achieved by an epicycle, however, can be accomplished by an eccentric also, as 8 
has been proved [III, 15 ]. But an epicycle was chosen because the moon was seen 
to exhibit a twofold nonuniformity. For when it was in the epicycle’s higher or 
lower apse, no departure from the uniform motion was apparent. On the other 
hand, when it was near the epicycle’s intersections [with the deferent, the difference 
from the uniform motion occurred] not in a single way. On the contrary, it was far 10 
greater at the waxing and waning half moon than when the moon was full or new; 
and this variation occurred in a definite and regular pattern. For this reason it 
was believed that the deferent on which the epicycle moved was not concentric with 
the earth. On the contrary, an eccentrepicycle [was accepted]. The moon moved 
on the epicycle in accordance with the following rule: at every mean opposition w 
and conjunction of the sun and moon, the epicycle was in the apogee of 
the eccentric, whereas the epicycle was in the perigee of the eccentric when the 
moon was halfway [between opposition and conjunction], at a quadrant’s [distance 
from them]. The result was a conception of two uniform motions around the center 
of the earth in opposite directions, namely, an epicycle moving eastward, and the 20 
eccentric’s center and apsides moving westward, with the line of the sun’s mean 
place always halfway between both. In this way the epicycle traverses the eccentric 
twice a month. 

To put these arrangements before the eyes, let the tilted lunar circle concentric 
with the earth be ABCD, quadrisected by the diameters AEC and BED. Let 25 
the center of the earth be E. Let the mean conjunction of the sun and moon lie on 
the line AC, and let the apogee of the eccentric, whose center is F, and the center 
of the epicycle AfiVbe in the same place at the same time. Now let the eccentric’s 
apogee move westward as much as the epicycle moves eastward, while they both 
uniformly execute around E equal monthly revolutions as measured by the mean so 

M 



174 


BOOK IV CH. 1-2 


conjunctions with or oppositions to the sun. Let AEC , the line of the sun’s mean 
place, always be midway between them, and let the moon also move westward 
from the epicycle’s apogee. With matters so arranged, the phenomena are thought 
to be in order. For in half a month’s time the epicycle moves half a circle away 
5 from the sun, but completes an entire revolution from the eccentric’s apogee. 
As a result, in half of this time, which is about half moon, the epicycle and the 
eccentric’s apogee are opposite each other along diameter BD, and the epicycle 
on the eccentric is at its perigee, as in point G. There, having come closer to the 
earth, it enlarges the nonuniformity’s variations. For of equal magnitudes viewed 
10 at unequal distances, the one nearer to the eye looks bigger. The variations will 
therefore be smallest when the epicycle is in A, but greatest when the epicycle 
is in G. For MN, the diameter of the epicycle, will have the smallest ratio to line 
AE, but a larger ratio to GE than to all the other lines found in other places. 
For GE is the shortest of all the lines that can be drawn from the center of the 
is earth to the eccentric circle, and the longest of them is AE or its equivalent DE. 

THE DEFECT IN THOSE ASSUMPTIONS Chapter 2 

This combination of circles was assumed by our predecessors to be in agreement 
with the lunar phenomena. But if we analyze the situation more carefully, we shall 
find this hypothesis neither suitable enough nor adequate, as we can prove by 
20 reason and by the senses. For while our predecessors declare that the motion of 
the epicycle’s center is unif orm around the center of the earth, they must also 
admit that it is nonuniform on its own eccentric (which it describes). 

For example, take angle AEB = 45 °, that is, half of a right angle, and equal 
to AED, so that the whole angle BED is a right angle. Put the epicycle’s center 
25 in G, and join GF. GFD, being an exterior angle, obviously is greater than GEF, 
the opposite interior angle. Also unequal, therefore, are arcs DAB and DG, even 
though they are both described in the same time. Hence, since DAB is a quadrant, 
DG, which meanwhile is described by the epicycle’s center, is greater than a quad' 
rant. But at half moon both DAB and DG were shown to be semicircles [IV, 1 , 


A 



175 



REVOLUTIONS 


end]. Therefore, the epicycle’s motion on the eccentric described by it is non- 
uniform. But if this is so, what shall we say about the axiom that the heavenly 
bodies’ motion is uniform and only apparently seems nonuniform, if the epicycle’s 
apparently uniform motion is really nonuniform and its occurrence absolutely 
contradicts an established principle and assumption? But suppose you say that s 
the epicycle moves uniformly with respect to the earth’s center, and that this 
is enough to safeguard uniformity. Then what sort of uniformity will that be on 
an extraneous circle on which the epicycle’s motion does not occur, whereas it 
does occur on the epicycle’s own eccentric? 

I am likewise disturbed about the moon’s uniform motion on the epicycle. 10 
My predecessors decided to interpret it as unrelated to the earth’s center, to which 
uniform motion as measured by the epicycle’s center should properly be related, 
to wit, through line EGM. But [they related the moon’s uniform motion on the 
epicycle] to a certain other point. Halfway between it and the eccentric’s center lay 
the earth, and line IGH served as the indicator of the moon’s uniform motion on is 
the epicycle. By itself, this also is enough to prove the nonuniformity of this mo¬ 
tion, a conclusion required by the phenomena which follow in part from this 
hypothesis. Thus, the moon’s motion on its epicycle is also nonuniform. If we 
now want to base the apparent nonuniformity on [really] nonuniform motions, 
it is evident what the nature of our reasoning will be. For will we do anything 20 
but furnish an opportunity to those who malign this science? 

Secondly, experience and our senses themselves show us that the lunar par¬ 
allaxes are different from those indicated by the ratio of the circles. The parallaxes, 
which are called “commutations”, occur on account of the perceptible size of 
the earth in comparison with the proximity of the moon. For, straight lines drawn 25 
from the earth’s surface and center to the moon do not appear parallel, but intersect 
each other at a detectable angle on the body of the moon. They must therefore 
produce a difference in the appearance of the moon. It seems to be in one place 
to those who view it at an angle from the earth’s curvature and in a different place 
to those who inspect the moon [along a line] from the earth’s center or point 30 
directly below [the moon]. Hence these parallaxes vary in accordance with the 
distance from the earth to the moon. By agreement of all astronomers, the greatest 
distance is 64 Vs units, of which the earth’s radius = 1 . According to our prede¬ 
cessors’ model, the smallest distance should be 33 units, 33 '. As a result the moon 
would approach us nearly halfway. The resulting ratio would require the parallaxes 35 
at the smallest and greatest distances to differ from each other by almost 1 : 2 . 

I observe, however, that the parallaxes occurring in the waxing and waning half 
moon, even when it is in the epicycle’s perigee, differ very little or not at all from 
the parallaxes occurring in solar and lunar eclipses, as I shall prove satisfactorily 
at the proper place [IV, 22 ]. But the error is evinced most of all by the body of 40 
the moon, whose diameter would similarly look twice as large and half as large. 
Now, circles are to each other as the squares of their diameters. Thus, the moon 
would generally look four times larger, on the supposition that it shone with its 
full disk, in quadrature, when nearest to the earth, than when in opposition to 
the sun. But since [in quadrature] it glows with half its disk, it would nevertheless 45 
emit twice the light which the full moon would show if it were in that position. Al¬ 
though the contrary is self-evident, if anybody is dissatisfied with ordinary vision and 
wants to observe with a Hipparchan dioptra or any other instrument for measuring 


176 



BOOK IV CH. 2-3 


the moon’s diameter, he will find that it varies only as much as required by the 
epicycle without that eccentric. Therefore, while investigating the fixed stars 
through the place of the moon, Menelaus and Timocharis did not hesitate to use 
at all times for the moon’s diameter the same value of which the moon was 
5 usually seen to occupy. 

A DIFFERENT OPINION Chapter 3 

ABOUT THE MOON’S MOTION 

It is accordingly quite clear that the epicycle looks bigger and smaller not on 
account of an eccentric but on account of some other system of circles. Let AB 
10 be an epicycle, which I shall call the first and larger epicycle. Let C be its center, 
and D the center of the earth, from which draw the straight line DC to the epicycle’s 
higher apse [A]. With .<4 as center, describe another epicyclet EF, of small dimensions. 
Let all these constructions lie in the same plane, that of the moon’s tilted circle. 
Let C move eastward, but A westward. On the other hand, from F in the upper 
is part of EF let the moon move eastward while maintaining the following pattern: 
when line DC is aligned with the sun’s mean place, the moon is always nearest 
to center C, that is, in point 2 j; at the quadratures, however, it is farthest [from 
center C] in F. 

I say that the lunar phenomena agree with this model. For it follows [from 
ao this model] that the moon traverses the epicyclet EF twice a month, during which 
time C returns once to the sun. When new and full, the moon will be seen to trace 
its smallest circle, namely, the one with radius CE. On the other hand, in the 
quadratures it will describe its largest circle, with radius CF. Thus, it will also 
make the differences between uniform and apparent motion smaller in the former 
25 positions and larger in the latter positions, while it passes through similar but 
unequal arcs around center C. The [first] epicycle’s center C will always be on 
a circle concentric with the earth. The moon will therefore display parallaxes 
which do not vary very much, but are connected only with the epicycle. This will 
at once provide the reason why the body of the moon is also seen virtually un- 
30 changed. All the other phenomena related to the moon’s motion will emerge 
just as they are observed. 

I shall demonstrate this agreement later on by means of my hypothesis, although 
the same phenomena can once more be produced by eccentrics, as I did with regard 
to the sun, if the required ratio is maintained [III, 15 ]. I shall begin, however, as 
35 I did above, [III, 13 - 14 ], with the uniform motions, without which the nonuniform 
motions cannot be ascertained. But here no mean problem arises because of the 
aforementioned parallaxes. On account of them the moon’s place cannot be observed 
by astrolabes and any other instruments whatever. But in this area too nature’s 
kindliness has been attentive to human desires, inasmuch as the moon’s place is 
40 determined more reliably through its eclipses than through the use of instruments, 
and without any suspicion of error. For while the rest of the universe is bright 
and full of daylight, night is clearly nothing but the earth’s shadow, which extends 
in the shape of a cone and ends in a point. When the moon encounters this shadow, 
it is darkened, and when it is immersed in the midst of the darkness it is indubitably 
45 known to have reached the place opposite the sun. On the other hand, solar 
eclipses, which are caused by the interposition of the moon [between the earth 


177 



REVOLUTIONS 


and the sun], do not provide precise evidence of the moon’s place. For at that time 
we happen to see a conjunction of the sun and moon which, as regards the center 
of the earth, either has already passed beyond or has not yet occurred, on account 
of the aforementioned parallax. Therefore we do not see the same solar eclipse 
equal in extent and duration in all countries, nor similar in its details. In lunar 5 
eclipses, on the other hand, no such obstacle presents itself. They are everywhere 
identical, since the axis of that darkening shadow is cast by the earth from [the 
direction of] the sun through its own center. Lunar eclipses are therefore most 
suitable for ascertaining the moon’s motion with the most highly certain compu¬ 
tation. 10 

THE MOON’S REVOLUTIONS, Chapter 4 

AND THE DETAILS OF ITS MOTIONS 

Among the earliest astronomers who strove to transmit numerical information 
about this subject to posterity there is found Meton the Athenian, who flourished 
in about the 87th Olympiad. He declared that 235 months were completed in is 
19 solar years. This great period is accordingly called the Metonic enneadekaeteris, 
that is, 19-year cycle. This number was so popular that it was displayed in the 
market place at Athens and other very famous cities. Even up to the present time 
it is widely accepted because it is believed to fix the beginning and end of the 
months in a precise order, and also to make the solar year of 365 V 4 days com- 20 
mensurable with the months. From it [came] the Callippic period of 76 years, 
in which 1 day is intercalated 19 times, and which is labelled the “Callippic cycle”. 
But Hipparchus ingeniously discovered that in 304 years a whole day was in excess, 
which was corrected only by shortening the solar year by Vsoo °f a day. Hence 
some astronomers named that extensive period in which 3760 months were com- 25 
pleted the “Hipparchan cycle”. 

These computations are stated too simply and too crudely when it is also 
a question of the cycles of the anomaly and latitude. These topics were therefore 
investigated further by Hipparchus [Syntaxis, IV, 2-3]. For he compared the records 
of his very careful observations of lunar eclipses with those which he received from 30 
the Babylonians. He determined the period in which the cycles of the months and of 
the anomaly were completed at the same time to be 345 Egyptian years, 82 days, 1 
hour. In that interval 4267 months and 4573 cycles of the anomaly were completed. 
When the indicated number of days, to wit, 126007 days, 1 hour, is divided by the 
number of months, 1 month is found = 29 days 3T 50" 8'" 9"" 20'"". This 35 
result also made clear the motion in any time. For when the 360° of a monthly 
revolution are divided by the duration of a month, the daily motion of the moon 
away from the sun is 12° 11'26" 41'" 20"" 18'"". This number, multiplied by 
365, makes the annual motion 129° 37' 21" 28'" 29"" in addition to 12 revolutions. 
Furthermore, 4267 months and 4573 revolutions of the anomaly are factorable 40 
numbers having 17 as a common factor. Reduced to their lowest terms, they stand 
in the ratio 251 : 269. This will give us, in accordance with Euclid, V, 15, the 
ratio of the moon’s motion to the motion of the anomaly. When we multiply the 
moon’s motion by 269 and divide the product by 251, we shall obtain the annual 
motion of the anomaly, after 13 complete revolutions, as 88° 43' 8" 40'" 20"". 45 
Therefore, the daily motion will be 13° 3' 53" 56'" 29"". 


178 



BOOK IV CH. 4 


The cycle of latitude has a different rhythm, for it does not coincide with the 
precise interval in which the anomaly returns. We know that a lunar latitude has 
recurred only when a later lunar eclipse is in all respects similar and equal to an 
earlier eclipse so that, for instance, on the same side both darkened areas are equal, 
s I mean in extent and duration. This happens when the moon’s distances from the 
higher or lower apse are equal. For at that time the moon is known to have passed 
through equal shadows in equal times. Such a recurrence, according to Hipparchus, 
happens in 5458 months, corresponding to 5923 cycles of latitude. This ratio 
also made clear the detailed latitudinal motion in years and days, like the other 
io motions. For when we multiply the moon’s motion away from the sun by 5923 
months, and divide the product by 5458, we shall have the moon’s latitudinal 
motion in a year, after 13 revolutions, as 148° 42' 46" 49'" 3"", and in a day 
as 13° 13' 45" 39'" 40"". In this way Hipparchus computed the moon’s uniform 
motions, which nobody before him had approached more closely. Nevertheless, 
is later centuries showed that they were still not determined with complete accuracy. 
For Ptolemy found the same mean motion away from the sun as Hipparchus. Yet 
Ptolemy’s value for the annual motion in anomaly was 1" IT" 39"" lower than 
Hipparchus’, but for the annual motion in latitude 53'" 41"" higher. After the 
passage of more time I found that Hipparchus’ [value for the] mean annual 
2° motion was 1" 2'" 49"" too low, whereas for the anomaly he was only 24'" 49"" 
short. For the motion in latitude he is 1" T" 42"" too high. Therefore the moon’s 
annual uniform motion differs from the earth’s by 129° 37'22" 32'" 40""; its 
motion in anomaly by 88° 43'9" 5'" 9""; and its motion in latitude by 
148° 42'45" 17'" 21"". 


179 



REVOLUTIONS 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF SIXTY YEARS 

Christian Era 209° 58' 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 

1 


Motion 


o 

/ 

Jf 

m 

60° 

O 

/ 

n 

m 

1 

2 

9 

37 

22 

36 


31 

0 

58 

18 

40 

48 

2 

4 

19 

14 

45 

12 


32 

3 

7 

56 

3 

25 

3 

0 

28 

52 

7 

49 


33 

5 

17 

33 

26 

1 

4 

I 

38 

29 


25 


34 

1 

27 

10 

48 

38 

5 

n 

48 

6 

53 



35 

3 

36 

48 

11 

14 

6 

0 

57 

44 

15 

H 


36 

5 

46 

25 

33 

51 

7 

■H 

7 

21 

38 

D 


37 

1 

56 

2 

56 

27 

8 

'H 

16 

59 


51 


38 

4 

5 

40 

19 

3 

9 


26 

36 

23 

27 


39 

0 

15 

17 

41 

40 

o 

1 

36 

13 

46 

4 


40 

2 

24 

55 

4 

16 

11 


45 

51 

8 

40 


41 

4 

34 

32 

26 

53 

12 


55 

28 

31 

17 


42 

0 

44 


49 

29 

13 


5 

5 

53 

53 


43 

2 

53 


12 

5 

14 

0 

14 

43 

16 

29 


44 

5 

3 

24 

34 

42 

15 

¥ 

24 

20 

39 

6 


45 

1 

13 

1 

57 

18 

16 

U 

33 

58 

1 

42 


46 

3 

22 

39 

19 

55 

17 

0 

43 

35 

24 

19 


47 

5 

32 

16 

42 

31 

18 

1 

53 

12 

46 

55 


48 

1 


54 

5 

8 

19 

n 

2 

50 

9 

31 


49 

3 


31 

27 

44 

20 

H 

12 

27 

32 

8 


50 

0 


8 

50 

20 

21 

H 

22 

4 

54 

44 


51 

2 


46 

12 

57 

22 

■ 

31 

42 

17 

21 


52 

4 

20 

23 

35 

33 

23 

■ 

41 

19 

39 

57 


53 

0 

30 

0 

58 

10 

24 

3 

50 

57 

2 

34 


54 

2 

39 

38 

20 

46 

25 

0 

0 

34 

25 

10 


55 

4 

49 

15 

43 

22 

26 

1 

10 

11 

47 

46 


56 

0 

58 

53 

5 

59 

27 

II 

19 

49 

10 

23 


57 

3 

8 

30 

28 

35 

28 

0 

29 

26 

32 

59 


58 

5 

18 

7 

51 

12 

29 

1 

39 

3 

55 

36 


59 

1 



13 

48 

30 

B 

48 

41 

18 

12 


60 

3 



36 

25 


180 

































BOOK IV CH. 4 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF S 
MINUTES 

IXTY DAYS, 

AND DAY- 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

O 

/ 

0 

B 


60° 

B 

/ 

0 

m 

1 

0 

12 

11 

26 

■ 


31 

6 


54 


26 

2 

0 

24 

22 

53 



32 

6 

30 

6 


8 

3 

0 

36 

34 

20 

B 


33 

6 

42 

17 

40 

49 

4 

0 

48 

45 

46 

1 


34 

6 

54 

29 

7 

31 

5 

1 

0 

57 

13 

27 


35 

7 

6 

40 

34 

12 

6 

1 

13 

8 

40 

9 


36 

7 

18 

52 

0 

54 

7 

1 

25 

20 

6 

50 


37 

7 

31 

3 

27 

35 

8 

1 

37 

31 

33 

32 


38 

7 

43 

14 

54 

17 

9 

1 

49 

43 

0 

13 


39 

7 

55 

26 

20 

58 

10 

2 

1 

54 

26 

55 


40 

8 

7 

37 

47 

40 

11 

2 

14 

5 

53 

36 


41 

8 

19 

49 

14 

21 

12 

2 

26 

17 

20 

18 


42 

8 

32 

0 

41 

3 

13 

2 

38 

28 

47 

1 


43 

8 

44 

12 

7 

44 

14 

2 

50 

40 

13 

1 


44 

8 

56 

23 

34 

26 

15 

3 


51 

40 



45 

9 

8 

35 

1 

7 

16 

3 


3 

7 



46 

9 

20 

46 

27 

49 

17 

3 

27 

14 

33 

45 


47 

9 

32 

57 

54 

30 

18 

3 

39 

26 

0 

27 


48 

9 

45 

9 

21 

12 

19 

3 

51 

37 

27 

8 


49 

9 

57 

20 

47 

53 

20 

4 

3 

48 

53 

50 


50 

10 

9 

32 

14 

35 

21 

4 

16 

0 

20 

31 


51 

10 

21 

43 

41 

16 

22 

4 

28 

11 

47 

13 


52 

10 

33 

55 

7 

58 

23 

4 


23 

13 

54 


53 

10 

46 

6 

34 

40 

24 

4 

• 1 

34 

40 

36 


54 

10 

58 

18 

1 

21 

25 

5 


46 

7 

17 


55 

11 

10 

29 

28 

2 

26 

5 


57 

33 

59 


56 

11 

22 

40 

54 

43 

27 

5 


9 

0 

40 


57 

11 

34 

52 

21 

25 

28 

5 


20 

27 

22 


58 

11 

47 

3 

48 

7 

29 

5 

53 

31 

54 

m 


59 

11 

59 

15 

14 

48 

30 

6 

5 

43 

20 

n 


60 

12 

11 

26 

41 

31 


181 



















REVOLUTIONS 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN ANOMALY IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF SIXTY YEARS 


Christian Era 207° 7' 


Years 

Motion 



Motion 

o 

O 

VO 

O 

/ 


m 


O 

o 

VO 

O 

/ 

H 

m 

1 

l 

28 

43 

9 

7 


31 

3 

50 


42 

44 

2 

2 

57 

26 

18 

14 


32 

5 

19 


51 

52 

3 

4 

26 

9 

27 

21 


33 

0 

47 


0 

59 

4 

5 

54 

52 

36 

29 


34 

2 

16 



6 

5 

1 

23 

35 

45 

36 


35 

3 

45 


19 

13 

6 

2 

52 

18 

54 

43 


36 

5 

13 

53 

28 

21 

7 

4 

21 

2 

3 

50 


37 

0 

42 

36 

37 

28 

8 

5 

49 

45 

12 

58 


38 


a 

19 

46 

35 

9 

1 

18 

28 

22 

5 


39 


40 

2 

55 

42 

10 

2 

47 

11 

31 

12 




8 

46 

4 

50 

11 

4 

15 

54 

40 

19 


41 

0 

37 

29 

13 

57 

12 

5 

44 

37 

49 

27 


42 

2 

6 

12 

23 

4 

13 

1 

13 

20 

58 

34 


43 

3 

34 

55 

32 

11 

14 

2 

42 

4 

7 

41 


44 

5 

3 

38 

41 

19 

15 

4 

10 

47 

16 

48 


45 

0 

32 

21 

50 

26 

16 

5 

39 

30 

25 

56 


46 


1 

4 

59 

33 

17 

1 

8 

13 

35 

3 


n 

H 

29 

48 

8 

40 

18 

2 

36 

56 

44 

10 



M 

58 

31 

17 

48 

19 

4 

5 

39 

53 

17 


fa 

0 

27 

14 

26 

55 

20 

5 

34 

23 

2 

25 


50 


55 

57 

36 

2 

21 

1 

3 

6 

11 

32 


51 


24 

40 

45 

9 

22 

2 

31 

49 

20 

39 


52 


53 

23 

54 

17 

23 

4 

0 

32 

29 

46 


53 


22 

7 

3 

24 

24 

5 

29 

15 

38 

54 


54 


50 

50 

12 

31 

25 

0 

57 

58 

48 

1 


55 


19 

33 

21 

38 

26 

2 

26 

41 

57 

8 


56 

4 

48 

16 

30 

46 

27 

3 

55 

25 

6 

15 


57 

0 

16 

59 

39 

53 

28 

5 

24 

8 

15 

23 


58 

1 

45 

42 

49 

0 

29 

0 

52 

51 

24 

30 


59 

3 

14 

25 

58 

7 

30 

2 

21 

34 

33 

37 


60 

4 

43 

9 

7 

15 


5 


10 


IS 


20 


25 


86 


182 



































BOOK IV CH. 4 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN ANOMALY IN DAYS, PERIODS OF SIXTY DAYS, AND 
DAY-MINUTES 

Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

m 

O 

/ 

n 




• 

/ 

n 

m 

1 

B 

13 

3 

53 

56 


31 

6 

45 


52 

11 

2 


26 

7 

47 

53 


32 

6 

58 

4 

46 

8 

3 

B 

39 

11 

41 

49 


33 

7 

11 

8 


4 

4 

m 

52 

15 

35 

46 


34 

7 

24 

12 

34 

1 

5 

i 

5 

19 

29 

42 


35 

7 

37 

16 

27 

57 

6 

i 

18 

23 

23 

39 


36 

7 



21 

54 

7 

i 

31 

27 

17 

35 


37 

8 

3 

24 

15 


8 

i 

44 

31 

11 

32 


38 

8 

16 

28 

9 

47 

9 

i 

57 

35 

5 

28 


39 

8 

29 

32 

3 

43 

10 

2 


38 

59 

25 



8 

42 

35 

57 


11 

2 

23 

42 

53 

21 


41 

8 

55 

39 

51 

36 

12 

2 

36 

46 

47 

18 


42 

9 

8 

43 

45 

33 

13 

2 

49 


41 

14 


43 

9 

21 

47 

39 

29 

14 

3 

2 

54 

35 

11 


44 

9 

34 

51 

33 

26 

15 

3 

15 

58 

29 

7 


45 

9 

47 

55 

27 

22 

16 

3 

29 

2 

23 

4 


46 



59 

21 

19 

17 

3 

42 

6 

17 

0 


47 


14 

3 

15 

15 

18 

3 

55 



57 


48 


27 

7 

9 

12 

19 

4 

8 

14 

4 

53 


49 



11 

3 

8 

20 

4 

21 

17 

58 

50 



1 

53 

14 

57 

5 

21 

4 

34 

21 

52 

46 


51 

11 

6 

18 

51 

1 

22 

4 

47 

25 

46 

43 


52 

11 

19 

22 

44 

58 

23 

5 


29 

40 

39 


53 

11 

32 

26 

38 

54 

24 

5 

13 

33 

34 

36 


54 

11 

45 


32 

51 

25 

5 

26 

37 

28 

32 


55 

11 

58 

34 

26 

47 

26 

5 

39 

41 

22 

29 


56 

12 

11 

38 

20 

44 

27 

5 

52 

45 

16 

25 


57 

12 

24 

42 

14 

40 

28 

6 

5 

49 

10 

22 


58 

12 

37 

46 

8 

37 

29 

6 

18 

53 

4 

18 


59 

12 



2 

33 

30 

6 

31 

56 

58 

15 


B 

13 

3 

53 

56 

30 


83 

























REVOLUTIONS 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN LATITUDE IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF SIXTY YEARS 









Christian Era 129° 45' 

Years 

Motion 


Years 


Motion 



60° 

O 

/ 

It 

m 


60° 

O 

/ 

It 

m 

B 

2 

28 

42 

45 

17 


31 

B 

50 

5 

23 

B 


4 

57 

25 

30 

34 


32 


18 

48 

9 

m 

B 

1 

26 

8 

15 

52 


33 

3 

47 

30 

54 

32 

H 

3 

54 

51 


9 


34 

0 

16 

13 

39 

1 

5 

0 

23 

33 


26 


35 

2 

44 

56 

25 

I 

6 

2 

52 

16 


44 


36 

5 

13 

39 

10 


7 

5 

20 

59 


1 


37 

1 

42 

21 

55 


8 

1 

49 

42 


18 


38 

4 

11 

4 

40 

58 

9 

4 

18 

24 

47 

36 


39 

0 

39 

47 

26 

16 

10 

0 

47 

7 

32 

53 


40 

3 

8 

30 

11 

33 

11 

3 

15 

50 

18 

10 


41 

5 

37 

12 

56 

50 

12 

5 

44 

33 


28 


42 

2 

5 

55 

42 

8 

13 

2 

13 

15 


45 


43 

4 

34 

38 

27 

25 

14 

4 

41 

58 


2 


44 

1 

3 

21 

12 

42 

15 

1 

10 

41 


20 


45 

3 

32 

3 

58 

0 

16 

3 

39 

24 


37 


46 

0 

0 

46 

43 

17 

17 

0 

8 

6 

49 

54 


47 

2 

29 

29 

28 

34 

18 

2 

36 

49 

35 

12 


48 

4 

58 

12 

13 

52 

19 

5 

5 

32 

20 

29 


49 

1 

26 

54 

59 

8 

20 

1 

34 

15 

5 

46 


50 

3 

55 

37 

44 

26 

21 

4 

2 

57 

51 

4 


51 

0 

24 

20 

29 

44 

22 

0 

31 

40 

36 

21 


52 

2 

53 

3 

15 

1 

23 

3 

0 

23 

21 

38 


53 

5 

21 

46 

0 

18 

24 

5 

29 

6 

6 

56 


54 

1 

50 

28 

45 

36 

25 

1 

57 

48 

52 

13 


55 

4 

19 

11 

30 

53 

26 

4 

26 

31 

37 

30 


56 

0 

47 

54 

16 

10 

27 

0 

55 

14 

22 

48 


57 

3 

16 

37 

1 

28 

28 

3 

23 

57 

8 

5 


58 

5 

45 

19 

46 

45 

29 

5 

52 

39 

53 

22 


59 

2 

14 

2 

32 

2 

30 

2 

21 

22 

38 



60 

4 

42 

45 

17 

21 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


184 


























BOOK IV CH. 4 


THE MOON’S MOTION IN LATITUDE IN DAYS, PERIODS OF SIXTY DAYS, AND 
DAY-MINUTES 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

B 

/ 

// 

m 

60° 

O 

t 

ft 

' 

1 

0 

13 

13 

45 

39 


31 

6 

50 

6 

35 

20 

2 

0 

26 

27 

31 

18 


32 

7 

3 

20 

20 

59 

3 

0 

39 

41 

16 

58 


33 

7 

16 

34 

6 

39 

4 

0 

52 

55 

2 

37 


34 

7 

29 

47 

52 

18 

5 

1 

6 

8 

48 

16 


35 

7 

43 

1 

37 

58 

6 

1 

19 

22 

33 

56 


36 

7 

56 

15 

23 

37 

7 

1 

32 

36 

19 

35 


37 

8 

9 

29 

9 

16 

8 

1 

45 

50 

5 

14 


38 

8 

22 

42 

54 

56 

9 

1 

59 

3 

50 

54 


39 

8 

35 

56 

40 

35 

10 

2 

12 

17 

36 

33 


40 

8 

49 

10 

26 

14 

11 

2 

25 

31 

22 

13 


41 

9 

2 

24 

11 

54 

12 

2 

38 

45 

7 

52 


42 

9 

15 

37 

57 

33 

13 

2 

51 

58 

53 

31 


43 

9 

28 

51 

43 

13 

14 

3 

5 

12 

39 

11 


44 

9 

42 

5 

28 

52 

15 

3 

18 

26 

24 

50 


45 

9 

55 

19 

14 

31 

16 

3 

31 

40 

10 

29 


46 

10 

8 

33 

0 

11 

17 

3 

44 

53 

56 

9 


47 

10 

21 

46 

45 

50 

18 

3 

58 

7 

41 

48 


48 

10 

35 

0 

31 

29 

19 

4 

11 

21 

27 

28 


49 

10 

48 

14 

17 

9 

20 

4 

24 

35 

13 

7 


50 

11 

1 

28 

2 

48 

21 

4 

37 

48 

58 

46 


51 

11 

14 

41 

48 

28 

22 

4 

51 

2 

44 

26 


52 

11 

27 

55 

34 

7 

23 

5 

4 

16 

30 

5 


53 

11 

41 

9 

19 

46 

24 

5 

17 

30 

15 

44 


54 

11 

54 

23 

5 

26 

25 

5 

30 

44 

1 

24 


55 

12 

7 

36 

51 

5 

26 

5 

43 

57 

47 

3 


56 

12 


50 

36 

44 

27 

5 

57 

11 

32 

43 


57 

12 

34 

4 

22 

24 

28 

6 

10 

25 

18 

22 


58 

12 

47 

18 

8 

3 

29 

6 

23 

39 

4 

1 


59 

13 


31 

53 

43 

30 

6 

36 

52 

49 

41 


60 

13 

13 

45 

39 

22 


185 





















REVOLUTIONS 


EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST LUNAR Chapter 5 

INEQUALITY, WHICH OCCURS 
AT NEW AND FULL MOON 


I have set forth the moon’s uniform motions to the extent that I have been 
able to familiarize myself with them up to the present time. Now I must tackle s 
the theory of the nonuniformity, which I shall expound by means of an epicycle. 
I shall begin with that inequality which occurs in conjunctions with and oppositions to 
the sun. With regard to this inequality the ancient astronomers used sets of three 
lunar eclipses with marvelous skill. I too shall follow this path which they have 
prepared for us. I shall take three eclipses carefully observed by Ptolemy. 10 I 
shall compare them with three other no less carefully observed eclipses, in order to 
test whether the uniform motions set forth above are correct. In expounding them 
I shall imitate the ancients by treating the mean motions of the sun and moon 
from the place of the vernal equinox as uniform. For, the irregularity which occurs 
on account of the nonuniform precession of the equinoxes is not perceived is in so 
short a time, even though it is ten years. 

For his first eclipse Ptolemy [Syntaxis, IV, 6] takes the one which occurred in 
Emperor Hadrian’s 17th year after the end of the 20th day of the month Pauni 
according to the Egyptian calendar. This was 133 C.E., 6 May = the day be-fore 
the Nones of May. The eclipse was total. Its midtime was s /i of a uniform 20 
hour before midnight at Alexandria. But at Frombork or Cracow it would have 
been 1 s / 4 hours before the midnight which was followed by 7 May. The sun 
was at 13 V 4 ° within the Bull, but at 12° 21' within the Bull according to its 
mean motion. 

Ptolemy says that the second eclipse occurred in Hadrian’s 19th year after 25 
the end of the second day of Choiach, the fourth Egyptian month. This was 20 Octo-ber 
134 C.E. The darkened area spread from the north over 5 / 6 of the moon’s 
diameter. The midtime preceded midnight by 1 uniform hour at Alexandria, 
but by 2 hours at Cracow. The sun was at 25 Ye 0 within the sign of the Balance, 

but at 26° 43' within the same sign according to its mean motion. 30 

The third eclipse occurred in Hadrian’s year 20, after the end of the 19th day of 
Pharmuthi, the eighth Egyptian month. This was after the end of 6 March 136 
C.E. The moon was again in shadow in the north up to half of its diameter. The 
midtime was 4 uniform hours at Alexandria, but at Cracow 3 hours, after the 
midnight followed by 7 March. The sun was then at 14° 5' within the Fishes, 35 but 
at 11° 44' within the Fishes according to its mean motion. 

During the time between the first eclipse and the second the moon clearly 
traveled as far as the sun did in its apparent motion, that is (I mean, after whole 
circles are eliminated), 161 °55'; and 138° 55' between the second eclipse and the 
third. In the first interval there were 1 -year, 166 days, 23 % uniform hours « 
according to the appearances, but 23 6 /s hours after correction. In the second 
interval there were 1 year, 137 days, 5 hours simply, but 5 Y 2 hours correctly. 
The combined uniform motion of the sun and moon in the first period, after the 
elimination of [complete] circles, was 169° 37', and the [moon’s] motion in 
anomaly was 110° 21'. In the second interval, similarly, the [combined] uniform 46 
motion of the sun and moon was 137° 34', while the [moon’s] motion in anom- 


186 



BOOK IV CH. 5 


aly was 81° 36'. Clearly, then, in the first interval 110° 21' of the epicycle 
subtract 7° 42'from the moon’s mean motion; and in the second interval 81° 
36' [of the epicycle] add 1°21' [to the moon’s mean motion]. 

Now that this information has been set forth, draw the lunar epicycle ABC. 
s On it let the first eclipse be at A, the second at B, and the last at C. Let the moon’s 
motion be taken also in that direction, westward in the upper part [of the epicycle]. 
Let arc AB = 110° 21' which, as I said, subtracts 7° 42' [from the moon’s mean 
motion on the ecliptic]. Let BC = 81° 36', which adds 1°21' [to the moon’s 
mean motion on the ecliptic]. CA } the rest of the circle [360°-(110° 21'+ 81° 
10 36')], will be 168° 3', which adds the remaining 6° 21' [of the prosthaphaeresis; 
1°21'+6°2T = 7° 42']. The epicycle’s higher apse is not in arcs BC and CA, 
since they are additive and less than a semicircle. Therefore it must be found 
in AB. 

Now take D as the earth’s center, around which the epicycle moves uniformly, 
is From D draw lines DA, DB, and DC to the points of the eclipses. Join BC, BE, 
and CE. Since arc AB subtends 7° 42' of the ecliptic, angle ADB will be 7° 42' 
with 180° = 2 right angles, but 15° 24' [= 2 x 7° 42'] with 360° = 2 right angles. 
In similar degrees, angle AEB = 110° 21' at the circumference, and it is an angle 
exterior to triangle BDE. Hence angle EBD is given as94°57'[=110 o 2T-15°24']. 
20 But when the angles of a triangle are given, the sides are given, and DE = 147,396 
units, and BE = 26,798 units, of which the diameter of the circle circumscribing 
the triangle = 200,000. Furthermore, since arc AEC subtends 6°21' on the 
ecliptic, angle EDC will be 6° 21' with 180° = 2 right angles, but 12° 42' with 
360° = 2 right angles. In those degrees angle AEC = 191° 57' [= 110°21'+ 
25 81°36']. Being an angle exterior to triangle CDF, it leaves, after the subtraction 
of angle D, the third angle ECD = 179° 15' [=191° 57'-12° 42'] in the same 
degrees. Therefore sides DE and CE are given as 199,996 and 22,120 units, of 
which the diameter of the circumscribed circle = 200,000. But in the units of 
which DE = 147,396 and BE = 26,798, CE = 16,302. Once again, therefore, in 
30 triangle BEC two sides, BE and EC, are given, and angle E = 81° 36' = arc 
BC. Hence we shall also have the third side BC = 17,960 of those same units, 
in accordance with the theorems in Plane Triangles. When the epicycle’s 
diameter = 200,000 units, chord BC, which subtends [an arc of] 81° 36', will be 
130,684 units. As for the other lines in the given ratio, in such units ED = 
35 1,072,684 and CE = 118,637, while its arc CE = 12° 46' 10". But by con¬ 
struction arc CEA = 168° 3'. Therefore the remainder EA = 95° 16' 50" 
[= 168°3'-72°46' 10"], and its subtending chord = 147,786 units. Hence the 
whole line AED = 1,220,470 of the same units [= 147,786+1,072,684]. But since 
segment EA is less than a semicircle, the epicycle’s center will not be in it, but 
40 in the remainder ABCE. 

Let the epicycle’s center be K. Through both apsides draw DMKL. Let L 
be the higher apse, and M the lower apse. Clearly, in accordance with Euclid, III, 
30, the rectangle formed by AD x DE = the rectangle formed by LD x DM. 
But K is the midpoint of the circle’s diameter LM, of which DM is an extension 
45 in a straight line. Therefore rectangle LD X DM+ (KM) 2 = ( DK ) a . Consequently 
DK is given in length as 1,148,556 units, of which LK = 100,000. Hence, in 
units of which DKL = 100,000, LK will be 8706, and this is the epicycle’s 
radius. 


187 



REVOLUTIONS 


L 



After completing these steps, draw KNO perpendicular to AD. The ratio 
of KD, DE, and EA to one another is given in units of which LK = 100,000. 

In those same units NE = V 2 (AE [= 147,786]) = 73,893. Therefore the whole line 
DEN = 1,146,577 [=DE+EN= 1,072,684+73,893]. But in triangle DKN two 
sides, DK and ND, are given, and N is a right angle. Therefore, central angle 5 
NKD = 86 ° 38 x / 2 ' = arc MEO. LAO, the rest of the semicircle = 93° 21 V 2 ' 

[= 180°-86° 38 i/a']. From LAO subtract AO = V 2 (AOE [= 95° 16' 50"]) = 

47° 38 V 2 \ The remainder LA = 45° 43' [= 93° 21 V 2 '-47° 38 V 2 ']. This is the 
moon’s anomaly or its distance from the; epicycle’s higher apse in the first eclipse. 

But the whole of AB = 110° 21'. Therefore the remainder LB = the anomaly io 
in the second eclipse = 64° 38' [= 110° 21'-45° 43']. The whole arc LBC = 

146° 14' [= 64° 38'+81° 36'], where the third eclipse occurred. Now, with 360° = 

4 right angles, angle DKN = 86 ° 38'. When this is subtracted from a right angle, 
obviously the remaining angle KDN = 3° 22' [=90°-86°38'].Thisistheprostha- 
phaeresis added by the anomaly in the first eclipse. But the whole angle ADB = is 
7° 42'. Therefore the remainder LDB = 4° 20'. This is what arc LB subtracts 
from the moon’s uniform motion in the second eclipse. Angle BDC = 1 0 2T. 
Therefore the remainder CDM = 2° 59', the prosthaphaeresis subtracted by arc 
LBC in the third eclipse. Therefore the moon’s mean place, that is, center 

K, in the first eclipse was 9° 53' [= 13°15'—3°22'] within the Scorpion, because so 
its apparent place was within the Scorpion at 13° 15', I mean, exactly as much 
as the sun’s place within the Bull, diametrically opposite. In the same way in the 

second eclipse the moon’s.mean motion was at 29 1 / 2 0 within the Ram [= Balance 
25 1 / 8 o + 180°+4°20'], and in the third eclipse at 17° 4' within the Virgin 
[= Fishes 14°5'+180°+2°59']. The moon’s uniform distances from the sun were 25 t 
177° 33' in the first eclipse; 182° 47' in the second; and 185° 20' in the last 
eclipse. The foregoing was Ptolemy’s procedure [Syntaxis, IV, 6 ]. 

Following his example, let me now proceed to the second set of three lunar 
eclipses, which I observed very carefully, like him. The first one occurred at the 
end of 6 October 1511 C.E. The moon began to be eclipsed 1 x /s uniform hours 30 
before midnight, and was fully illuminated again 2 Vs hours after midnight. 
Thus, the middle of the eclipse was 7 /i 2 of an hour after the midnight followed by 
7 October = the Nones of October. This was a total eclipse of the moon, when 

the sun was at 22° 25' within the Balance, but at 24° 13' within the Balance according 
to its uniform motion. 35 

I observed the second eclipse at the end of 5 September 1522 C.E. This too was a 
total eclipse. It began at 2 / 6 of a uniform hour before midnight, but its 
midtime was 1 V 3 hours after the midnight followed by 6 September = the 
eighth day before the Ides of September. The sun was at 22V 5 0 within the Virgin, 
but at 23° 59' within the Virgin according to its uniform motion. 

The third eclipse occurred after the end of 25 August 1523 C.E. It began 2 
Vs hours after midnight. The midtime [of this eclipse], which also was total, 
was 4 5 /l2 hours after the midnight followed by 26 August. The sun was at 

11° 21' within the Virgin, but at 13° 2' within the Virgin according to its mean 
motion. 45 

Once again, the distance traversed by the true places of the sun and moon 
between the first eclipse and the second obviously was 329° 47'; and between the 
second eclipse and the third, 349 0 9'. The time from the first eclipse to the second 


188 


BOOK IV CH. 5 


is 10 uniform years, 337 days, plus 3 / 4 of an hour according to apparent time, 
but 4 /s of an hour according to corrected uniform time. From the second eclipse 
to the third, there were 354 days, plus 3 hours and 5 minutes, but 3 hours, 9 min¬ 
utes, according to uniform time. In the first interval the combined mean mo- 
5 tion of the sun and moon, after the elimination of [complete] circles, amounts to 
334° 47'; and the [moon’s] motion in anomaly to 250 ° 36', with about 5° to be 
subtracted from the uniform motion [334°47'—329°47']. In the second interval 
the [combined] mean motion of the sun and moon is 346° 10'; and the [lunar] 
anomaly, 306° 43', with 2° 59' to be added to the mean motion [+346°10'= 349 c 9']. 
io Now let ABC be the epicycle. Let A be the place of the moon at the middle 
of the first eclipse; B of the second; and C, of the third. Let the epicycle be regarded 
as moving from C to B, and from B to A; that is, westward in its upper circum¬ 
ference, and eastward in its lower circumference. Let arc ACB = 250° 36', 
subtracting, as I said, 5 0 from the moon’s mean motion in the first period of time, 
is Let arc BAC = 306° 43', adding 2° 59' to the moon’s mean motion. As a remainder, 
therefore, arc AC = 197° 19', subtracting the remaining 2° 1'. Since AC is greater 
than a semicircle and is subtractive, it must contain the higher apse. For this 
cannot be in BA or CBA, each of which is less than a semicircle and additive, 
whereas the diminishing motion occurs near the apogee. 

20 Opposite it take D as the center of the earth. Join AD, DB, DEC, AB, AE, 
and EB. As regards triangle DBE, exterior angle CEB is given = 53° 17' = arc 
CB, the remainder when BAC is subtracted from the circle. Angle BDE at the 
center = 2° 59', but at the circumference = 5° 58'. Therefore the remaining 
angle EBD = 47° 19' [= 53°17'— 5°58']. Consequently side BE = 1042 units, 
25 and side DE = 8024 units, of which the radius of the circle circumscribing 
the triangle = 10,000. In like manner angle AEC = 197° 19', since it intercepts 
arc AC. At the center angle ADC = 2° 1', but = 4° 2' at the circumference. 
Therefore in triangle [ADE\ the remaining angle DAE = 193° 17', with 
360° = 2 right angles. Consequently the sides are also given. In units of which 
30 the radius of the circle circumscribing triangle ADE = 10,000, AE = 702, 
and DE = 19,865. But in units of which DE = 8024, and EB = 1042, 
AE = 283. 

Once more, then, we have a triangle ABE, in which two sides, AE and EB, 
are given, and the whole angle AEB = 250° 36', when 360° = 2 right angles. 
35 Hence, in accordance with the theorems on Plane Triangles, AB = 1227 units, 
of which EB = 1042. We have thus obtained the ratio of these three lines, AB, 
EB, and ED. In units of which the epicycle’s radius = 10,000, and the given 
arc AB subtends 16,323, this ratio will also make known that ED = 106,751 and 
EB = 13,853. Hence arc EB is also given — 87° 41'. When this is added to BC 
4<> [= 53° 17'], the total EBC = 140° 58'. Its subtending chord CE = 18,851 
units, and CED as a whole = 125,602 units [= ED+CE = 106751+18,851]. 

Now emplace the epicycle’s center, which must fall in segment EAC, since 
this is greater than a semicircle. Let the center be F. Prolong DIFG in a straight 
line through both apsides, I the lower, and G the higher. Once more, obviously, 
45 rectangle CD x DE = rectangle GD x DI. But rectangle GD x Z)/+(F/) 2 = 
(DF) 2 . Therefore in length D/i 7 is given = 116,226 units, of which FG = 10,000. 
Then, in units of which DF = 100,000, FG = 8,604 units, in agreement with 
what I find reported since Ptolemy by most other astronomers before me. 


189 



REVOLUTIONS 


Now from center F drop FL perpendicular to EC, and extend it in straight 
line FLM, which will bisect CE in point L. Straight line ED = 106,751 units. 
Half of CE = LE = 9426 units. The sum, DEL = 116,177 units, of which 
FG = 10,000, and DF = 116,226. Therefore in triangle DFL two sides, DF 
and DL, are given. Angle DFL = 88° 2T is also given, and the remaining angle s 
FDL = 1° 39'. Arc IEM is likewise = 88° 21'. MC = »/, EEC [= 140° 58'] = 
70° 29'. IMC as a whole = 158° 50' [= 88° 21'+70° 29']. The rest of the semi¬ 
circle = GC = 21° 10' [= 180°-158° 50']. 

This was the moon’s distance from the epicycle’s apogee, or the place of the 
anomaly in the third eclipse; in the second eclipse, GCB = 74° 27' [= GC+ io 
CB = 21°10'-f 53°17']; and in the first eclipse, the whole arc GBA = 183° 5T 
[= GB+BA = 74°27'+(109°24' = 360°-250°36')]. Furthermore, in the third 
eclipse IDE as a central angle = 1°39', which is the subtractive prosthaphaeresis. 

In the second eclipse the whole angle IDB, also a subtractive prosthaphaeresis, = 

4° 38', for it consists of GDC = 1°39' and CDB = 2° 59'. Therefore, when is 
IDB is subtracted from the whole angle ADB = 5°, the remainder is ADI = 
22', which are added to the uniform motion in the first eclipse. Therefore, the 
moon’s uniform place in the first eclipse was 22 ° 3' within the Ram, but its apparent 
place was 22° 25', as many degrees as the sun had in the Balance, the opposite 
sign. So also in the second eclipse the moon’s mean place was at 26° 50' within 20 
the Fishes; and in the third eclipse at 13° within the Fishes. The moon’s mean 
motion, by which it is separated from the earth’s annual motion, in the first 
eclipse was 177° 51'; in the second, 182° 51'; and in the third, 179° 58'. 

VERIFICATION OF THE STATEMENTS Chapter 6 

ABOUT THE MOON’S UNIFORM MOTIONS 25 

IN LONGITUDE AND ANOMALY 

What has been said about the lunar eclipses will also permit us to test whether 
the above statements about the moon’s uniform motions are correct. In the first 
set of eclipses, the moon’s distance from the sun in the second eclipse was shown to 
be 182° 47', and the anomaly was 64° 38'. In the later set of eclipses in our 30 
time, in the second eclipse the moon’s motion away from the sun was 182° 51', 
and the anomaly was 74° 27'. Clearly, in the intervening period there are 17,166 
complete months plus about 4 minutes, while the motion in anomaly was 9° 
49' [= 74° 27'- 64° 38'], after the elimination of complete circles. From 
Hadrian’s year 19, in the Egyptian month Choiach, on the 2nd day, 2 hours 
before 35 the midnight followed by the third day of the month, until 1 : 20 A. M., 5 
Septem-ber 1522 C .E., there are 1388 Egyptian years, 302 days, plus 3 x /s hours in 
apparent time = 3 h 34 m in uniform time. In this interval, after the complete 
revo-lutions in 17,165 uniform months, there would have been 359° 38' 
according to Hipparchus and Ptolemy. On the other hand, the anomaly was 9° 39' 
according 40 to Hipparchus but according to Ptolemy 9° 11'. For both of them 
the moon’s motion is deficient by 26' [= 360°4' -359°38'], while the anomaly 
lacks 38' in Ptolemy’s case [ = 9°49' -9°1 1 '], and in Hipparchus’ case 
10' [9°49' —9°39']. When these shortages are added, the results agree with the 
computations set out above. 



BOOK IV CH. 7-8 


THE EPOCHS OF THE LUNAR Chapter 7 

LONGITUDE AND ANOMALY 

Here too, as before [III, 23], I must determine the positions of the lunar longi¬ 
tude and anomaly at the established beginnings of eras: the Olympiads, Alexander’s, 
s Caesar’s, Christ’s, and any other which may be desired. Of the three ancient 
eclipses, let us consider the second one, which occurred in Hadrian’s year 19, on 
the 2nd day of the Egyptian month Choiach, 1 uniform hour before midnight 
at Alexandria = 2 hours before midnight for us on the meridian of Cracow. From 
the beginning of the Christian era to this moment, we shall find 133 Egyptian 
io years, 325 days, plus 22 hours simply, but 21 hours, 37 minutes exactly. During 
this time the moon’s motion, according to my computation, is 332° 49', and the 
motion in anomaly is 217° 32'. When each of these figures is subtracted from the 
corresponding figure found in the eclipse, the remainder for the moon’s mean 
distance from the sun is 209° 58', and 207° 7' for the anomaly, at the be ginnin g 
is of the Christian era at midnight preceding 1 January. 

Prior to this Christian epoch there are 193 Olympiads, 2 years, 194 */* days = 
775 Egyptian years, 12 days, plus V 2 day, but 12 hours, 11 minutes in exact time. 
Similarly, from the death of Alexander to the birth of Christ there are reckoned 
323 Egyptian years, 130 days, plus 7® day in apparent time, but 12 hours, 16min- 
20 utes, in exact time. From Caesar to Christ there are 45 Egyptian years, 12 days, 
in which the computations for uniform and apparent time are in agreement. 

The motions corresponding to these differences of time are subtracted, each 
in its own category, from the places for Christ. For noon on the 1st day of the 
month Hecatombaeon of the 1st Olympiad, we shall have the moon’s uniform 
25 distance from the sun as 39° 48', and the anomaly as 46° 20'; for Alexander’s 
era, at noon on the first day of the month Thoth, the moon’s distance from the 
sun as 310° 44', and the anomaly as 85° 41'; for Julius Caesar’s era, at midnight 
before 1 January, the moon’s distance from the sun as 350 ° 39', and the anomaly 
as 17° 58'. All these values [are reduced] to the meridian of Cracow. For Gyno- 
30 polis, which is commonly called Frombork, where I generally made my observa¬ 
tions, is located at the mouths of the Vistula River and lies on the meridian of 
Cracow, as I learn from lunar and solar eclipses observed simultaneously in both 
places. Macedonia’s Dyrrhachium, which was called Epidamnus in antiquity, 
is also located on this meridian. 

35 THE MOON’S SECOND INEQUALITY, Chapter 8 

AND THE RATIO OF THE FIRST EPICYCLE 
TO THE SECOND 

Thus the moon’s uniform motions together with its first inequality have been 
explained. Now I must investigate the ratio of the first epicycle to the second, and 
40 of both to their distance from the center of the earth. The greatest inequality 
[between the moon’s mean and apparent motions] is found, as I said, halfway 
[between the higher apse and the lower] at the quadratures, when the waxing or 
waning moon is at the half. This inequality attains 7 2 / 3 °, as reported also by the 
ancients [Ptolemy, Syntaxis , V, 3]. For they observed the time when the half 
45 moon approached most closely to the epicycle’s mean distance. This [occurred] 
near the tangent drawn from the center of the earth, as could easily be perceived 


191 



REVOLUTIONS 


through the computation explained above. Since the moon was then about 90° of 
the ecliptic from its rising or setting, they avoided the error which could be 
produced in the longitudinal motion by parallax. For at that time the circle 
passing through the horizon’s zenith intersects the ecliptic at right angles, and 
permits no variation in longitude, but the variation occurs entirely in latitude. 5 
Therefore they determined the moon’s distance from the sun with the help of an 
instrument, the astrolabe. After the comparison was made, the moon was found 
to vary from its uniform motion by 7 2 / 3 °, as I said, instead of 5°. 

Now draw epicycle AB, with center C. From D, the center of the earth, draw 
the straight line DBCA. Let the epicycle’s apogee be A, and its perigee B. Draw 10 
DE tangent to the epicycle, and join CE. At the tangent there is the greatest pros- 
thaphaeresis. In this case let it be 7° 40' = angle BDE. CED is a right angle, 
being at the point of tangency with the circle AB. Therefore CE will be 1334 units, 
of which radius CD = 10,000. But at full and new moon this distance was much 
smaller, since it was about 861 of the same units. Divide CE, letting CF = 860 15 
units. Around the same center [C], F will [mark] the circumference which was 
traced by the new and full moon. Therefore the remainder FE = 474 units 
[= 1334 - 860] will be the diameter of the second epicycle. Bisect FE at its midpoint 
G. The whole line CFG = 1097 units [=CF-\-FG] is the radius of the circle de¬ 
scribed by the center of the second epicycle. Hence the ratio CG: GE = 1097 :237 ao 
in units of which CD = 10,000. 


A 



192 



BOOK IV CH. 9-10 


THE REMAINING VARIATION, IN WHICH Chapter 9 
THE MOON IS SEEN MOVING NONUNIFORMLY 
AWAY FROM THE [FIRST] EPICYCLE’S HIGHER APSE 

The foregoing demonstration also permits us to understand how the moon 
5 moves nonuniformly on its first epicycle, the greatest inequality occurring when 
it is crescent or gibbous as well as half full. Once more let AB be the first epicycle, 
described by the mean motion of the second epicycle’s center. Let the first epicycle’s 
center be C, its higher apse A, and its lower apse B. Take point E anywhere on 
the circumference, and join CE. Let CE : EF = 1097 :237. With E as center, 
i° and radius EF, describe the second epicycle. Draw straight lines CL and CM 
tangent to it on both sides. Let the epicyclet move from A to E, that is, westward 
in the upper circumference [of the first epicycle]. Let the moon move from F 
to L, also westward. The motion AE being uniform, the second epicycle’s motion 
through FL clearly adds arc FL to the uniform motion, and subtracts therefrom 
13 when it passes through MF. In triangle CEL, L is a right angle. EL = 237 units, 
of which CE = 1097. In units of which CE = 10,000, EL = 2160. It subtends 
angle ECL which, according to the Table, = 12° 28' = angle MCF, since the 
triangles [ECL and ECM] are similar and equal. This is the greatest inequality 
of the moon’s departure from the higher apse of the first epicycle. This happens 
ao when the moon in its mean motion deviates by 38° 46' to either side of the line 
of the earth’s mean motion. Thus these greatest prosthaphaereses quite clearly 
occur when the moon is at the mean distance of 38° 46' from the sun and is at 
the same distance to either side of the mean opposition. 

HOW THE MOON’S APPARENT MOTION Chapter 10 

25 IS DERIVED FROM THE GIVEN UNIFORM MOTIONS 

Having so disposed of all these topics, I now wish to show by way of a diagram 
how those uniform motions of the moon yield the apparent motion equal to the 
given uniform motions. I choose an example from Hipparchus’ observations, 
by which at the same time the theory may be confirmed by experience [Pto- 
so lemy, Syntaxis, V, 5]. 

In the 197th year after the death of Alexander, on the 17th day of Pauni, 
which is the 10th Egyptian month, at 9 x / 3 hours of the day, Hipparchus in Rhodes, 
observing the sun and moon with an astrolabe, found them 48 V10° apart, with 
the moon following the sun. He thought that the sun’s place was 10 9 /io° within 
35 the Crab, and therefore the moon was at 29° within the Lion. At that time 29° 
within the Scorpion was rising, and 10° within the Virgin was culminating in 
Rhodes, where the elevation of the north pole is 36° [Ptolemy, Syntaxis, II, 2]. 
From this situation it was clear that the moon, located about 90° of the ecliptic 
from the horizon, at that time underwent no parallax in longitude or at any rate 
4° an imperceptible parallax. This observation was performed on that 17th day in the 
afternoon, at 3 1 / 3 hours = 4 uniform hours at Rhodes. This would have been 3 x / 6 
uniform hours at Cracow, since Rhodes is Ve of an hour nearer to us than Alex¬ 
andria is. From the death of Alexander there were 196 years, 286 days, plus 
3 Ve simple hours, but about 3 1 / 3 equal hours. At that time the sun in its mean 
45 motion reached 12° 3' within the Crab, but in its apparent motion 10° 40' within 


193 



REVOLUTIONS 


the Crab. Hence it is evident that the moon really was at 28° 37' within the Lion. 
The moon’s uniform motion in its monthly revolution was 45° 5', and in anom¬ 
aly away from the higher apse 333°, according to my calculation. 

With this example before us, let us draw the first epicycle AB, with its center 
at C. Extend its diameter ACB in a straight line ABD to the center of the earth. 5 
On the epicycle take arc ABE = 333°. Join CE, and divide it at F, so that EF = 
237 units, of which EC = 1097. With E as center, and radius EF, describe epi- 
cyclepicyclet FG. Let the moon be at point G, with arc FG = 90° 10' = twice 
the uniform motion away from the sun = 45° 5'. Join CG, EG, and DG. In 
triangle CEG two sides are given, CE = 1097, and EG = EF = 237, with angle io 
GEC = 90° 10'. Hence, in accordance with the theorems on Plane Triangles, 
the remaining side CG is given = 1123 of the same units, and so is angle ECG = 

12° 1T. This makes clear also arc El and the anomaly’s additive prosthaphaeresis, 
with the whole of ABEI = 345° 11' [ABE^El = 333°+12° 11']. The remaining 
angle GCA = 14° 49' L= 360°-345° 11'] = the moon’s true distance from the is 
higher apse of epicycle AB, and angle BCG = 165° 11' [=180°-14°49']. Con¬ 
sequently, also in triangle GDC two sides are given, GC = 1123 units, of which 
CD = 10,000, as well as angle GCD = 165° IT. From them we obtain also 
angle CDG = 1 ° 29' and the prosthaphaeresis, which was added to the moon’s 
mean motion. As a result the moon’s true distance from the sun’s mean motion = 20 
46° 34' [= 45° 5'+l° 29'], and the moon’s apparent place at 28° 37' within the Lion 
differed from the sun’s true place by 47° 57' = 9' less than in Hipparchus’ 
observation [48° 6 '-47° 57' = 9']. 

However, let nobody for this reason suspect that either his investigation or 
my computation was faulty. Although there is a slight discrepancy, I shall nev- 25 
ertheless show that neither he nor I committed an error, and that this is how 
things really were. For let us remember that the circle traversed by the moon is 
tilted. Then we shall also admit that in the ecliptic it produces some inequality in 
longitude, especially near the regions which lie midway between both limits, the 
northern and the southern, and both nodes. This situation is very much like the 30 
obliquity of the ecliptic and equator, as I explained in connection with the nonuni¬ 
formity of the natural day [III, 26]. So also, if we transfer these ratios to the lunar 
circle, which Ptolemy asserted is inclined to the ecliptic [Syntaxis, V, 5], we shall 
find that in those places these ratios make a difference on the ecliptic of 7' in longi¬ 
tude, which when doubled = 14'. This occurs as an addition and a subtraction 35 
in like manner. For, since the sun and moon are a quadrant apart, if the northern 
or southern limit of latitude is midway between them, then the arc intercepted on 
the ecliptic is 14' larger than a quadrant of the moon’s circle. On the contrary, 
in the other quadrant, in which the nodes are the midpoints, the circles through 
the poles of the ecliptic intercept the same quantity less than a quadrant. This 40 
is the situation in the present case. The moon was about halfway between the 
southern limit and its ascending intersection with the ecliptic (the intersection 
which the modems call the “head of the Dragon”). The sun had already passed 
the other intersection, the descending one (which the modems call the “tail 
[of the Dragon]”). There is no wonder, therefore, if that lunar distance of 47° 57' 45 
on its tilted circle increased at least 7' when related to the ecliptic, apart from 
the fact that the sun, in approaching its setting, also contributed some subtractive 
parallax. These topics will be discussed more fully in the explanation of the paral- 


194 



BOOK TV CH. 10-11 


laxes [IV, 16]. Thus that distance of 48° 6' between the luminaries, which Hip¬ 
parchus had obtained instrumentally, accords with my computation with remark¬ 
able closeness and, as it were, by agreement. 

TABULAR PRESENTATION OF THE LUNAR Chapter 11 
5 PROSTHAPHAERESES OR NORMALIZATIONS 

The method of computing the lunar motions, I believe, is understood in general 
from the present example. In triangle CEG two sides, GE and CE, always remain 
the same. Through angle GEC, which constantly changes, but nevertheless is 
given, we obtain the remaining side GC, together with angle ECG, which is the 
io prosthaphaeresis for normalizing the anomaly. Secondly, when two sides, DC 
and CG, in triangle CDG , as well as angle DCE are determined numerically, by 
the same procedure angle D at the center of the earth becomes known [as the 
difference] between the uniform and the true motions. 

In order to make this information even handier, I shall construct a table of 
is the prosthaphaereses in six columns. After two [columns containing the] common 
numbers of the deferent, the third column will show the prosthaphaereses which 
arise from the epicyclet’s twice-monthly rotation and vary the uniformity of the 
first anomaly. Then, leaving the next column temporarily vacant to receive 
numbers later, I shall concern myself with the fifth column. In it I shall enter 
20 the first and larger epicycle’s prosthaphaereses which occur at mean conjunctions 
and oppositions of the sun and moon. The biggest of these prosthaphaereses is 
4° 56'. In the next to the last column are placed the numbers by which the prostha¬ 
phaereses occurring at half moon exceed the prosthaphaereses in column 4. Of 
these numbers, the largest is 2° 44' [=7° 40'- 4° 56']. For the purpose of ascer- 
25 taining the other numbers in excess, the proportional minutes have been worked 
out according to the following ratio. [The maximum number in excess] 2° 44' 
was treated as 60' in relation to any other excess occurring at the epicyclet’s point 
of tangency [with the line drawn from the center of the earth]. Thus, in the same 
example [IV, 10], we had line CG = 1123 units of which CD = 10,000. This makes 
30 the largest prosthaphaeresis at the epicyclet’s point of tangency 6° 29', exceeding 
that first maximum by 1 0 33' [+4° 56' = 6° 29']. But 2° 44' : 1° 33' = 60' : 34'. 
Therefore we have the ratio of the excess occurring in the epicyclet’s semicircle 
to the excess caused by the given arc of 90° 10'. Accordingly, opposite 90° in the 
Table, I shall write 34'. In this way for every arc of the same circle entered in the 
35 Table we shall find the proportional minutes, which are to be recorded in the 
vacant fourth column. Finally, in the last column I added the northern and south¬ 
ern degrees of latitude, which I shall discuss below [IV, 13-14]. For, the con¬ 
venience of the procedure and practice with it convinced me to preserve this 
arrangement. 


195 



REVOLUTIONS 










































BOOK IV CH. 11 


































REVOLUTIONS 


COMPUTING THE MOON’S MOTION Chapter 12 

The method of computing the apparent lunar [motion] is clear from the fore¬ 
going demonstrations, and is as follows. The proposed time for which we seek 
the moon’s place will be reduced to uniform time. Through it, just as we did in 
the case of the sun [III, 25], we shall derive the [moon’s] mean motions in longi- s 
tude, anomaly, and also latitude, which I shall soon explain [IV, 13], from the 
given epoch of Christ or any other [given epoch]. We shall establish the place of 
each motion at the proposed time. Then, in the Table we shall look up the moon’s 
uniform elongation or twice its distance from the sun. We shall note the appro¬ 
priate prosthaphaeresis in column 3, and the accompanying proportional minutes. 10 
If the number with which we started is found in column 1 or is less than 180°, 
we shall add the prosthaphaeresis to the lunar anomaly. But if that number is 
greater than 180° or is in column 2, the prosthaphaeresis will be subtracted 
from the anomaly. Thus we shall obtain the normalized anomaly of the moon, 
and its true distance from the [first epicycle’s] higher apse. With this we shall 15 
consult the Table again and take the prosthaphaeresis in column 5 corresponding 
to it, as well as the excess which follows in column 6. This excess is added by the 
second epicycle to the first. Its proportional part, computed from the ratio of 
the minutes found to 60 [minutes], is always added to this prosthaphaeresis. The 
sum thus obtained is subtracted from the mean motion in longitude and latitude, ^ 
provided that the normalized anomaly is less than 180° or a semicircle, and it is 
added if the anomaly is greater [than 180°]. In this way we shall obtain the moon’s 
true distance from the sun’s mean place, and its normalizedmotion in latitude. There 
will therefore be no uncertainty about the moon’s true distance either from the 
first star in the Ram through the sun’s simple motion, or from the vernal equinox 25 
through its composite motion, affected by the precession of the equinox. Finally, 
through the normalized motion in latitude in the Table’s seventh and last column 
we shall have the degrees of latitude by which the moon has deviated from the 
ecliptic. This latitude will be northern when the motion in longitude is found 
in the first part of the Table, that is, if it is less than 90° or greater than 270°. 30 
Otherwise its latitude will be southern. Up to 180°, therefore, the moon will 
descend from the north, and then ascend from its southern limit until it has 
completed the remaining degrees of the circle. To that extent the moon’s apparent 
motion in a certain way has as many functions connected with the earth’s center 
as the earth’s center has with the sun. 3S 

HOW THE MOON’S MOTION IN LATITUDE Chapter 13 
IS ANALYZED AND DEMONSTRATED 

Now I must give an account also of the moon’s motion in latitude, which seems 
harder to find because more circumstances block the way. For, as I said before 
[IV, 4], suppose that two lunar eclipses are similar and equal in all respects; that 40 
is, the darkened areas occupy the same northern or southern position; the moon is 
near the same ascending or descending node; and its distance from the earth or 
from the higher apse is equal. If these two eclipses so agree, the moon is known 
to have completed whole circles of latitude in its true motion. For, the earth’s 
shadow is conical. If a right cone is cut by a plane parallel to its base, the section 46 


198 



BOOK IV CH. 13 


is a circle. This is smaller at a greater distance from the base, and greater at 
a smaller distance from the base, and accordingly equal at an equal distance. Thus, 
at equal distances from the earth, the moon passes through equal circles of the 
shadow, and presents equal disks of itself to our sight. As a result, when it displays 
5 equal parts on the same side at equal distances from the center of the shadow, it 
informs us that the latitudes are equal. From this it necessarily follows that the 
moon has returned to an earlier place in latitude, and that its distances from the 
same node are also equal at those times, especially if the place of both bodies like¬ 
wise agrees. For, an approach and withdrawal of the moon or of the earth change 
10 the whole size of the shadow. Yet the change is slight and barely ascertainable. 
Therefore, as was said with regard to the sun [III, 20], the longer the interval 
that has elapsed between the two eclipses, the more precisely will we be able to 
obtain the moon’s motion in latitude. But two eclipses agreeing in these respects 
are rarely found (I for one have not encountered any thus far), 
is Nevertheless, I am aware that there is also another method by which this 
can be done. For suppose that while the other conditions remain, the moon is 
eclipsed on opposite sides and near opposite nodes. This will indicate that in the 
second eclipse the moon reached the place diametrically opposite the place of the 
first eclipse, and described a semicircle in addition to whole circles. This would 
20 seem to be satisfactory for the investigation of this topic. Accordingly, I have 
found two eclipses related to each other almost exactly in this way. 

The first one occurred in the 7th year of Ptolemy Philometor = 150th year 
after Alexander, in Phamenoth, the 7th Egyptian month, after the 27th day, 
during the night followed by the 28th, as Claudius [Ptolemy] says [Syntaxis, VI, 5]. 
25 The moon was eclipsed from the beginning of the 8 th hour until the end of 
the 10th hour, in seasonal hours of the night at Alexandria. The eclipse, near the 
descending node, at its greatest extent darkened 7/12ths of the moon’s diameter 
from the north. The midtime of the eclipse, therefore, was 2 seasonal hours (ac¬ 
cording to Ptolemy) after midnight = 2 x / 3 uniform hours, since the sun was at 
30 6° within the Bull. At Cracow it would have been 1 x / 3 hours [uniform time]. 

I observed the second eclipse on that same meridian of Cracow on 2 June 
1509 C.E., when the sun was at 21 ° within the Twins. The eclipse’s midtime 
was 11 % uniform hours after noon of that day. About 8/12ths of the moon’s 
diameter on its southern side were darkened. The eclipse occurred near the 
35 ascending node. 

From the beginning of Alexander’s era, therefore, [until the first eclipse] 
there are 149 Egyptian years, 206 days, plus 14 x / 3 hours at Alexandria. At Cracow, 
however, there would have been 13 x / 3 hours, local time, but 13 x / 2 hours, uniform 
time. At that moment the uniform place of the anomaly, according to my compu- 
40 tation in almost exact agreement with Ptolemy’s [= 163°40'], was 163° 33', and 
the prosthaphaeresis was 1 ° 23', by which the moon’s true place was less than 
its uniform [place]. From the same established epoch of Alexander to the second 
eclipse there are 1832 Egyptian years, 295 days, plus 11 hours, 45 minutes, ap¬ 
parent time = 11 hours, 55 minutes, uniform time. Hence the moon’s uniform 
45 motion was 182° 18'; the place of the anomaly = 159° 55' = 161° 13', normalized; 
the prosthaphaeresis, by which the uniform motion was less than the apparent, 
was 1° 44'. 

In both eclipses, therefore, the moon was clearly at an equal distance from 


199 



REVOLUTIONS 


the earth, and the sun was nearly at its apogee in both cases, but there was a dif¬ 
ference of one digit between the darkened areas. The moon’s diameter usually 
occupies about 1 / 2 °, as I shall show later on [IV, 18]. One digit = V^th of the 
diameter = 2 1 / 2 ', corresponding to about 1 / 2 ° on the moon’s tilted circle near the 
nodes. In the second eclipse the moon was 1 / 2 ° farther away from the ascending 5 
node than from the descending node in the first eclipse. Hence, the moon’s true 
motion in latitude after complete revolutions quite evidently was 179 1 j 2 °. But 
between the first and second eclipse the lunar anomaly added to the uniform 
motion 21', by which one prosthaphaeresis exceeds the other [1° 44'-1° 23']. 
We shall therefore have the moon’s uniform motion in latitude as 179° 5T 10 
[= 179°30'+2T] after complete circles. The interval between the two eclipses 
was 1683 years, 88 days, 22 hours, 25 minutes, apparent time, in agreement with 
uniform time. In this period, after 22,577 uniform revolutions were completed, 
there are 179° 5T, in agreement with the value which I just mentioned. 

THE PLACES OF THE MOON’S Chapter 14 * 

ANOMALY IN LATITUDE 

In order to determine the places of this motion too at the previously accepted 
epochs, here also I have taken two lunar eclipses. These occurred, not at the same 
node nor, as in the previous instances [IV, 13], in diametrically opposite regions, 
but in the same region, northern or southern (all the other conditions being met, 20 
as I said). By following Ptolemy’s procedure [Syntaxis, IV, 9], with these eclipses 
we shall attain our goal without error. 

The first eclipse, which I used for investigating other lunar motions also 
[IV, 5], was the one which I said was observed by Claudius Ptolemy in Hadrian’s 
year 19, toward the end of the 2nd day of the month Choiach, one uniform hour 25 
before the midnight which was followed by the 3rd day at Alexandria. At Cracow 
it would have been 2 hours before midnight. At mid-eclipse s / 6 of the diameter = 

10 digits were darkened in the north. The sun was at 25° 10' within the Balance. 
The place of the moon’s anomaly was 64° 38', and its subtractive prosthaphaeresis 
was 4° 20'. The eclipse occurred near the descending node. 30 

I observed the second eclipse, also with great care, at Rome on 6 November 
1500 C.E., two hours after the midnight which initiated 6 November. At Cracow, 

which lies 5° to the east, it was 2 Vs hours after midnight. The sun was at 23° 16' 
within the Scorpion. Once again, ten digits in the north were darkened. From the 
death of Alexander there is a total of 1824 Egyptian years, 84 days, plus 14 hours, 35 
20 minutes, apparent time, but 14 hours, 16 minutes, uniform time. The moon’s 
mean motion was at 174° 14'; the lunar anomaly was at 294° 44', normalized 
at 291° 35'. The additive prosthaphaeresis was 4° 28'. 

Also in these two eclipses, clearly, the moon’s distances from the higher apse 
were almost equal. In both cases the sun was near its middle apse, and the size 40 
of the shadows was equal [10 digits]. These facts indicate that the moon’s 
latitude was southern and equal, and therefore the moon’s distances from the 
nodes were equal, in the latter case ascending, but in the former case descend¬ 
ing. Between the two eclipses there are 1366 Egyptian years, 358 days, plus 
4 hours, 20 minutes, apparent time, but 4 hours, 24 minutes, uniform time, 45 
during which the mean motion in latitude is 159° 55'. 


200 



BOOK IV CH. 14 



D 


Now in the moon’s tilted circle let the diameter AB be the intersection with 
the ecliptic. Let C be the northern limit, and D the southern; A the descending 
node, and B the ascending node. In the southern region take two equal arcs, 
AF and BE, for the first eclipse at point F, and the second at point E. Furthermore, 
6 let FK be the subtractive prosthaphaeresis at the first eclipse, and EL the additive 
prosthaphaeresis at the second. Arc KL = 159° 55'. To it add FK = 4° 20' 
and EL = 4° 28'. The whole arc FKLE = 168° 43', and the rest of the semicir¬ 
cle = 11° 17'. Half of this = 5° 39' = AF = BE, the moon’s true distances 
from the nodes A and B, and therefore AFK = 9° 59' [= 4° 20'+5° 39']. Hence 
10 it is also clear that CAFK = the distance of the latitude’s mean place from the 
northern limit = 99°59' [=90°+ 9° 59']. From the death of Alexander to the time 
of this observation by Ptolemy in this place there are 457 Egyptian years, 91 days, 
plus 10 hours by apparent time, but 9 hours, 54 minutes, by uniform time. In this 
interval the mean motion in latitude is 50° 59'. When this figure is subtracted 
is from 99° 59', the remainder is 49° for noon on the first day of Thoth, the first 
Egyptian month, at the epoch of Alexander, but on the meridian of Cracow. 

Hence, the places of the moon’s motion in latitude, starting from the northern 
limit, which I took as the origin of the motion, are given for all the other epochs 
according to the differences in the intervals. From the 1st Olympiad to the death 
20 of Alexander there are 451 Egyptian years, 247 days, from which 7 minutes 
are subtracted to normalize the time. In this period the motion in latitude = 
136° 57'. Furthermore, from the 1st Olympiad to Caesar there are 730 Egyptian 
years, 12 hours,to which 10 minutes are added to normalize the time. In this period 
the uniform motion = 206° 53'. From then to Christ there are 45 years, 12 days. 
25 From 49° subtract 136° 57' by supplying the 360° of a circle; the remainder = 
212° V for noon on the first day of the month Hecatombaeon [in the first year] 
of the first Olympiad. Again, to this figure add 206° 53'; the sum [272°3'-l- 
206°53' = 478°56'—360°] = 118° 56' for the midnight preceding 1 January 
of the Julian epoch. Finally, add 10° 49'; the sum = 129° 45', the place for 
30 the Christian epoch, likewise at midnight preceding 1 January. 


201 



REVOLUTIONS 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE Chapter 15 

PARALLACTIC INSTRUMENT 

The moon’s greatest latitude, corresponding to the angle of intersection 
between its circle and the ecliptic, = 5°, with the circle = 360°. An opportunity 
to make this observation was not vouchsafed by fate to me, hampered by lunar 5 
parallaxes, as it was to Claudius Ptolemy. For at Alexandria, where the north 
pole’s elevation =30° 58', he focused on the moon’s imminent closest approach 
to the zenith, that is, when it was at the beginning of the Crab and at its northern 
limit, which he was able to determine numerically in advance [Syntaxis, V, 12]. 
With the help of a certain device, which he calls the “parallactic instrument”, io 
constructed for the purpose of determining the moon’s parallaxes, at that time 
he found its minimum distance from the zenith to be only 2 Vs 0 - Had this distance 
been affected by any parallax, this would necessarily have been quite small for 
so short a distance. Then, subtracting 2 1 / 8 ° from 30° 58' leaves a remainder of 
28° 50 Va'- This figure exceeds the greatest obliquity of the ecliptic (which was i 5 
then 23° 51' 20'') by about 5 whole degrees. This lunar latitude, finally, is found 
to agree with the other details up to the present. 

The parallactic instrument consists of three rulers. Two of them are of equal 
length, at least 4 cubits, while the third is somewhat larger. This [longer ruler] 
and one of the two shorter rulers are joined to either end of the third ruler by ^ 
pins or pegs so fitted in careful perforations that while the rulers can move in the 
same plane, they do not wobble at all in those joints. From the center of the joint 
of the longer ruler produce a straight line down its entire length. On this straight 
line measure a segment as exactly as possible equal to the distance between the 
joints. Divide this segment into 1000 equal units, or more, if possible. With the 25 
same units continue this division on the rest of the ruler until you reach 1414 
units. These constitute the side of the square inscribed in a circle whose radius = 
1000 units. The rest of this ruler may be cut off as superfluous. From the center of 
the joint on the other ruler also draw a line equal to those 1000 units, or to the 
distance between the centers of the joints. To a side of this ruler attach eyepieces so 
through which sight passes, as is customary with the dioptra. Arrange these 
eyepieces so that the lines of sight do not deviate at all from the line already drawn 
along the ruler, but are equally distant from it. Be sure also that when this line 
is moved toward the longer ruler, its end can touch the graduated line. In this 
way the rulers form an isosceles triangle, whose base will be in the units of the 35 
graduated line. Then a very well squared and polished pole is erected and made 
firm. To the pole fasten the ruler with the two joints by means of hinges, on which 
the instrument can rotate like a door. But the straight line passing through the 
centers of the ruler’s joints is always vertical and, as though it were the axis of 
the horizon, points toward the zenith. Therefore, when you are looking for a star’s 40 
distance from the zenith, keep the star in view along a straight line through the 
ruler’s eyepieces. By placing the ruler with the graduated line underneath, you 
will find out how many units, of which the diameter of a circle = 20,000, subtend 
the angle between [the line of] sight and the axis of the horizon. From the Table 
[of Lines Subtended] you will obtain the desired arc of the great circle between 45 
the star and the zenith. 


202 



BOOK rv CH. 16 


HOW THE LUNAR PARALLAXES ARE OBTAINED Chapter 16 

With this instrument, as I said [IV, 15], Ptolemy learned that the moon’s 
greatest latitude = 5°. Then, turning his attention to ascertaining its parallax, 
he says [Syntaxis, V, 13] that he found this at Alexandria to be 1° 7'; the sun 
5 was at 5° 28' within the Balance; the moon’s mean distance from the sun = 
78° 13'; the uniform anomaly = 262° 20'; the motion in latitude = 354° 40'; 
the additive prosthaphaeresis =7°26'; therefore the moon’s place was 3° 9' 
within the Goat; the normalized motion in latitude = 2° 6 '; the moon’s northern 
latitude = 4° 59'; its declination from the equator = 23° 49'; and the latitude 
10 of Alexandria = 30° 58'. Near the meridian, he says, the moon was seen through 
the instrument at 50° 55' from the zenith, that is, 1 ° 7' more than required by com¬ 
putation. With this information, in accordance with the ancients’ [lunar] theory 
of an eccentrepicycle, he shows that the moon’s distance from the center of the 
earth at that time was 39 units, 45 minutes, with the radius of the earth = 1 unit. 
15 Then he demonstrates what follows from the ratio of the circles. For instance, 
the moon’s greatest distance from the earth (which they say occurs at new and full 
moon in the apogee of the epicycle) is 64 units plus 10 minutes = l/ 6 th of a unit. 
But the moon’s least distance [from the earth] (which occurs at the quadratures), 
when the half moon is in the perigee of the epicycle, is only 33 units, 33 minutes. 
20 Hence he also evaluated the parallaxes which occur about 90° from the zenith: 
the smallest = 53' 34", but the largest = 1° 43' (as may be seen more fully from 
what he deduced therefrom). 

But now to those who wish to consider the matter, it is clear that the situation 
is quite different, as I have frequently found. Nevertheless I shall review two obser- 
25 vations which again establish that my lunar theory is more precise than theirs to 
the extent that it is found to agree better with the phenomena and to leave no 
residue of doubt. 

On 27 September 1522 C.E., 5 2 /a uniform hours after noon, about sunset 
at Frombork through the parallactic instrument I caught the center of the moon 

30 on the meridian, and found its distance from the zenith = 82° 50'. From the 
beginning of the Christian era to this moment there were 1522 Egyptian years, 
284 days, plus 17 2 / 3 hours by apparent time, but 17 hours, 24 minutes by uniform 
time. Therefore the apparent place of the sun was computed to be 13° 29' within 
the Balance; the moon’s uniform distance from the sun = 87° 6 '; the uniform 
36 anomaly = 357° 39'; the true anomaly = 358° 40'; and the additive [prostha¬ 
phaeresis] = 7'. Thus the moon’s true place = 12° 33' within the Goat. The 
mean motion in latitude from the northern limit = 197° T; the true motion 
in latitude = 197° 8 ' [= 197°T+7']; the moon’s southern latitude = 4° 47'; the 
declination from the equator = 27° 41'; and the latitude of my place of ob- 
40 servation = 54° 19'. When this is added to the lunar declination, it makes the 
[moon’s] true distance from the zenith = 82° [= 54° 19'+27° 41']. Therefore 
the remaining 50' [of 82° 50', the apparent zenith distance] were the parallax, 
which should have been 1 0 17' according to Ptolemy’s doctrine. 

Moreover, I made another observation in the same place at 6 P. M. on 7 August 

45 1524 C.E., and through the same instrument I saw the moon at 81 ° 55' from the 
zenith. From the beginning of the Christian era until this hour there were 1524 
Egyptian years, 234 days, 18 hours [by apparent time], and 18 hours by uniform 


203 



REVOLUTIONS 


time also. The sun’s place was computed to be 24° 14' within the Lion; the moon’s 
mean distance from the sun = 97° 5'; the uniform anomaly = 242° 10'; the 
corrected anomaly = 239° 40', adding about 7° to the mean motion. Therefore 
the moon’s true place = 9° 39' within the Archer; the mean motion in latitude = 
193° 19';thetrue [motion in latitude] = 200° 17'; the moon’s southern latitude = 5 
4° 4T; and its southern declination = 26° 36'. When this is added to the latitude 
of the place of the observation =54° 19', the sum = the moon’s distance from 
the pole of the horizon = 80° 55' [= 26° 36'+54° 19']. But it appeared to 
be 81° 55'. Therefore the surplus of 1° was transferred to the lunar parallax 
which, according to Ptolemy and the ideas of my predecessors, should have been 10 
1°38', a calculation required by consistency with the implications of their 
theory. 

A DEMONSTRATION OF THE MOON’S Chapter 17 

DISTANCES FROM THE EARTH, 

AND OF THEIR RATIO IN UNITS 16 

OF WHICH THE EARTH’S RADIUS = 1 

From the foregoing information the size of the moon’s distance from the 
earth will now be clear. Without this distance a definite value cannot be attached 
to the parallaxes, since these two quantities are related to each other. The distance 
will be determined as follows. 20 


D 



Let AB be a great circle of the earth, with its center at C. Around C describe 
another circle DE, in comparison with which the size of the earth’s [circle] is 
significant. Let D be the pole of the horizon. Put the center of the moon at E, 
where DE, its distance from the zenith, is known. In the first observation [of IV, 

16] angle DAE = 82° 50'; ACE was computed to be only 82°; and AEC, the 25 
difference between them = 50' = the parallax. Accordingly we have triangle 
ACE with its angles given, and therefore its sides are given. For, since angle CAE 
is given [= 97°10' = 180°— 82°50'], side CE = 99,219 units, of which the diame¬ 
ter of the circle circumscribed around triangle AEC = 100,000. In such units 
AC = 1454 s 1/68 CE [= about 68 units], of which the earth’s radius AC = 1. 30 
This was the moon’s distance from the earth’s center in the first observation. 

But in the second [observation of IV, 16] the apparent angle DAE = 81° 55'; the 
computed angle ACE = 80° 55'; and the difference, angle AEC = 60'. Therefore 
side EC = 99,027 units, and AC = 1891 units, of which the diameter of the circle 
circumscribed around the triangle = 100,000. Thus CE, the moon’s distance as 


204 



BOOK IV CH. 17-18 


[from the earth’s center] = 56 units, 42 minutes, of which the earth’s radius 
AC = 1. 

Now let the moon’s greater epicycle be ABC, with center D. Take E as the 
earth’s center, from which draw the straight line EBDA as far as the apogee A, 
5 while the perigee is at B. Measure arc ABC = 242° 10' in accordance with the 
computed uniform lunar anomaly [in Copernicus’ 2nd observation in IV, 16]. 
With center C, describe the second epicycle FGK. On it let arc FGK = 194° 10' = 
twice the moon’s distance from the sun [= 2 X 97° 5']. Join DK, which subtracts 
2° 27' from the anomaly, leaving KDB = the angle of the normalized anomaly = 
10 59° 43'. The whole angle CDB =62° 10' [= 59° 43'+2° 27'], being the excess over 
a semicircle [since ABC = 242°10' = 62°10'+180°]. Angle BEK = 7°. In 
triangle KDE, therefore, the angles are given in degrees of which 180° = 2 right 
angles. The ratio of the sides is also given: DE = 91,856 units, and EK = 86,354 
units, of which the diameter of the circle circumscribing triangle KDE = 100,000. 
is But in units of which DE = 100,000, KE = 94,010. It was shown above, how¬ 
ever, that DF = 8600 units, and the whole line DFG = 13,340 units. In this 
given ratio, as was demonstrated [above in IV, 17], EK = 56 42 / 80 units, of which 
the earth’s radius = 1 unit. It therefore follows that in the same units DE = 
60 18 /603 DF = 5 11 / 60 , DFG = 8 2 / 60 , and likewise the whole of EDG, if it were 
20 extended in a straight line = 68 1 / s units [60 p 18'+ 8 p 2'] = the greatest height 
of the half moon. Subtracting DG from ED [60 p 18'-8 p 2'] leaves a remainder 
of 52 17 / 6 o as the half moon’s smallest distance [from the earth]. So also the whole 
of EDF, the height occurring at full and new moon = 65 % units at its maximum 
[60 p 18'+ 5° IT = 65° 30'], and at its minimum = 55 8 / 60 units, after DF has 
25 been subtracted [60 p 18'-5 p IT]. We should not be disturbed because the greatest 
distance of the full and new moon [from the earth] is thought to be 64 10 / 60 
units by others [IV, 16], especially by those who could become only partially fa¬ 
miliar with the lunar parallaxes on account of the location of their residences. 
I have been permitted to understand them more completely by the moon’s 
30 closer proximity to the horizon, near which its parallaxes reach their full value, 
as is clear. Yet I have found that the parallaxes vary by no more than T on 
account of this difference. 

THE DIAMETER OF THE MOON Chapter 18 

AND OF THE EARTH’S SHADOW AT THE PLACE 
35 WHERE THE MOON PASSES THROUGH IT 

Since the apparent diameters of the moon and of the shadow also vary with 
the moon’s distance from the earth, a discussion of these topics too is important. 
To be sure, the diameters of the sun and moon are measured correctly by Hip¬ 
parchus’ dioptra. Nevertheless, this is done much more accurately in the case of 
40 the moon, it is believed, through some special lunar eclipses in which the moon 
is equally distant from its higher or lower apse. This is especially true if at those 
times the sun too is similarly situated, so that the circle of shadow through which 
the moon passes on both occasions is found equal, except that the darkened areas 
occupy unequal regions. Obviously, when the areas in shadow, and the lunar 
45 latitudes, are compared with each other, the difference shows how great an arc 
around the earth’s center is subtended by the moon’s diameter. When this is 


205 



REVOLUTIONS 


known, the radius of the shadow is also obtained quickly, as will be made clearer 
by an example. 

Thus, suppose that at the middle of an earlier eclipse 3 digits or twelfths of 
the lunar diameter were darkened while the moon’s latitude was 47' 54", whereas 
in a second eclipse 10 digits [were darkened] when the latitude was 29' 37". 5 
The difference between the darkened areas is 7 digits [= 10-3], and between the 
latitudes is 18'17" [= 47'54"-29'37"], as comparedwith the proportion of 12 digits 
to 3T 20", subtending the diameter of the moon. In the middle of the first eclipse, 
therefore, the center of the moon clearly was outside the shadow by a quarter 
[the darkened area being 3 digits] of the diameter =7'50" of latitude [= 31'20"-r- io 
4]. If this figure is subtracted from the 47' 54" of the total latitude, the remainder = 

40'4" [= 47'54"-7' 50"] =the radius of the shadow. Likewise, in the second 
eclipse the shadow occupied, in addition to the moon’s latitude, 1 / 3 of the lunar 
diameter [the darkened area being 10 digits = */ 12 (= V 3 ) more than 72 ] = 

10' 27" [s 3T 20"-r3]. To this add 29' 37", and the sum is again 40' 4" = the 15 
radius of the shadow. Ptolemy believes that when the sun is in conjunction or 
opposition with the moon at its greatest distance from the earth, the lunar diam¬ 
eter = 31 1 / 3 '. He says that with Hipparchus’ dioptra he found the sun’s diam¬ 
eter to be the same, but the diameter of the shadow = 1°21 1 / 3 . He thought 
that the ratio between these values = 13:5=2 3 / 5 : 1 [Syntaxis, V, 14]. 20 


HOW TO DEMONSTRATE AT THE SAME TIME Chapter 19 
THE DISTANCES OF THE SUN AND MOON 
FROM THE EARTH, THEIR DIAMETERS, 

THE DIAMETER OF THE SHADOW 

WHERE THE MOON PASSES THROUGH IT, 85 

AND THE AXIS OF THE SHADOW 

The sun too undergoes some parallax. Since this is slight, it is not easily per¬ 
ceived, except that the distances of the sun and moon from the earth, their diam¬ 
eters, the diameter of the shadow where the moon passes through it, and the 
axis of the shadow are mutually interrelated. Therefore these quantities disclose 30 
one another in analytical demonstrations. First, I shall review Ptolemy’s 
conclusions about these quantities and his procedure for demonstrating them 
[Syntaxis, V, 15]. From this material I shall select what seems entirely correct. 

He assumes that the sun’s apparent diameter =31 73 7 j the value which he 
uses invariably. With it he equates the diameter of the full and new moon when 35 
it is at apogee. This, he says, is a distance of 64 10/60 p , with the earth’s radius = 
l p . Hence he demonstrated the rest in the following way. 

Let ABC be a circle of the solar globe through its center D. Let EFG be a circle 
of the terrestrial globe, at its greatest distance from the sun, through its own 
center K. Let AG and CE be straight lines tangent to both circles and, when they 40 
are extended, let them meet at S, the apex of the shadow. Draw the straight line 
DKS through the centers of the sun and earth. Also draw AK and KC. Join AC 
and GEj which should not differ at all from diameters on account of their enormous 
distance. On DKS take LK = KM at the distance of the full and new moon at 
apogee = 64 10 / 60 p , when EK = l p , in Ptolemy’s opinion. Let QMR be the 45 


206 



BOOK IV CH. 19 


diameter of the shadow where the moon passes through it under these same 
conditions. Let NLO be the moon’s diameter perpendicular to DK, and extend 
it as LOP. 

The first problem is to find the ratio DK : KE. With 4 right angles = 360°, 

5 angle NKO = 31 V 3 '; half of it = LKO = 15 2 / 3 '. L is a right angle. Therefore, a 
the angles of triangle LKO being given, the ratio of sides KL : LO is given. 

As a length LO = 17' 33", when LK = 64 p 10' or KE = l p . Since LO : MR = 

5 : 13, MR = 45' 38" in the same units. LOP and MR are parallel to KE at equal 
distances from it. Therefore LOP+MR = 2KE. Subtracting MR+LO [45' 38"+ 

10 17'33" = l p 3' 11"] from 2 KE [= 2 p ] leaves as a remainder OP = 56'49". 
According to Euclid, VI, 2, EC : PC = KC : OC = KD : LD = KE : OP = 

60' : 56' 49". Similarly LD is given = 56' 49", when the whole of DLK = l p . 
Therefore the remainder KL = 3' IT [= l p —56' 49"]. But in units of which KL = 

64 p 10' and FK = l p , the whole of KD = 1210 p . It has already been established 
iB that in such units MR = 45' 38". This makes clear the ratios KE : MR 
[60':45'38"] and KMS: MS. Also in the whole of KMS, KM = 14' 22" 

[= 60'—45'38"]. Alternately, in units of which KM = 64 p 10', the whole of 
KMS = 268 p = the axis of the shadow. The foregoing is what Ptolemy did. 

But after Ptolemy other astronomers found that the foregoing conclusions did 
2° not agree well enough with the phenomena, and reported other findings about 
these topics. Yet they admit that the greatest distance of the full and new moon 
from the earth = 64 p 10', and the apparent diameter of the sun at apogee = 

31 x / 3 '. They also concede that the shadow’s diameter where the moon passes 
through it = 13 : 5 [in relation to the moon’s diameter], as Ptolemy asserted. 

25 Nevertheless they deny that the moon’s apparent diameter at that 
time is larger than 29 1 / a > . Therefore they put the shadow’s diameter at 
about 1 0 16 3 / 4 '. Hence they believe it follows that the distance of the sun at apogee 
from the earth = 1146 p , and the shadow’s axis = 254 p , where the earth’s radius = 
l p . They designate [Al-Battani], the scientist from Raqqa, as the originator of these 
so values, which nevertheless cannot be coordinated in any way. 

With the intention of adjusting and correcting them, I put the apparent 
diameter of the sun at apogee = 3T 40", since it must now be somewhat bigger 
than before Ptolemy; [the apparent diameter] of the full or new moon when it is 
at its higher apse = 30'; the diameter of the shadow, where the moon passes 
35 through it, = 80 3 / s ', because the ratio between them is recognized to be slightly 
bigger than 5 : 13, say, 150 : 403 [s5 : 13 2 / 5 ]; the entire sun at apogee is not 
covered by the moon, unless the latter’s distance from the earth is less than 62 
earth-radii; and the greatest distance from the earth to the moon in conjunction 
with or opposition to the sun = 65 x / 2 earth-radii [IV, 17]. For when these values are 
40 assumed, they seem to be precisely in harmony not only with one another but also 
with other phenomena, and in agreement with the visible solar and lunar eclipses. 
Thus, in accordance with the foregoing demonstration, we shall have, in units 
and minutes whereof KE, the earth’s radius, = 1 unit, LO = 17' 8"; therefore 
MR =46' l"[s 17'8" x 2.7];consequently OP = 56'51"[=2 p -(17'8"+46'l")]; 

45 with LK = 65 ^p, the whole of DLK — the distance from the earth to the sun 
at apogee = 1179 p ; and KMS = the axis of the shadow = 265 p . 


207 



REVOLUTIONS 


THE SIZE OF THESE THREE HEAVENLY Chapter 20 

BODIES, SUN, MOON, AND EARTH, 

AND A COMPARISON OF THEIR SIZES 

Consequently it is also clear that KL = KD/ 18, and LO = DC/18. But 
18 x LO = 5 p 27', with KE = l p . Alternately, since SK : KE = 265 : 1, s 
similarly the whole of SKD : DC = 1444 : 5 p 27', since these [sides] are [related 
to each other in the same] proportion. This will be the ratio of the diameters of 
the sun and earth. Spheres are to each other as the cubes of their diameters. Hence 
(5 p 27') 3 = 161 7 /8 j the factor by which the sun exceeds the terrestrial globe. 

Furthermore, the moon’s radius = 17'9", whereof KE = l p . Therefore 10 
the ratio of the earth’s diameter to the moon’s diameter = 7 : 2 = 3 x / 2 : 1 
[a convenient fraction for 3.498:1]. When this is raised to the third power, it 
shows that the earth is 42 7 /s times larger than the moon, and therefore the sun 
is 6937 times larger than the moon. 

THE APPARENT DIAMETER Chapter 21 15 

AND PARALLAXES OF THE SUN 

The same magnitudes appear smaller when they are farther away than when 
they are closer. It therefore happens that the sun, moon, and earth’s shadow 
vary with their different distances from the earth, no less than the parallaxes 
vary. All these variations are easily determined for any distance whatever on the 20 
basis of the foregoing results. This is clear, in the first place, in the case of the sun. 
For I have shown [III, 21] that the earth’s greatest distance from it = 10,322 p , 
whereof the radius of the circle of the annual revolution = 10,000 p . The earth’s 
closest approach [to the sun] = 9678 p [= 10,000 - 322] in the other part of the diame¬ 
ter [of the circle of the annual revolution]. Therefore, with the higher apse = 1179 25 
earth-radii [III, 19], the lower apse = 1105, and the mean apse = 1142. Dividing 
1,000,000 by 1179, in the right triangle we shall have 848 p subtending the smallest 
angle = 2' 55" of the greatest parallax, which occurs near the horizon. Similarly, 
dividing 1,000,000 by 1105 = the least distance, we obtain 905 p , subtending an 
angle of 3' 7" = the largest parallax at the lower apse. But it has been shown 30 
[IV, 20] that the sun’s diameter = 5 27 / 6 0 earth-diameters, and at the higher 
apse appears = 31' 48". For, 1179 : 5 27 / 60 = 2,000,000 : 9245 = the diameter 
of the circle : the side subtending 31' 48". Consequently at the least distance = 
1105 earth-radii, [the sun’s apparent diameter] = 33' 54". The difference between 
these values [33' 54"-3 T 48"] is therefore 2' 6", but between the parallaxes only 35 
12" [3' 7"-2' 55"]. Ptolemy [.SyMtatfis, V, 17] deemed both these differences 
negligible on account of their smallness, on the ground that the senses do not 
easily perceive T or 2', and such perception is even less feasible in the case of 
seconds. Therefore, if everywhere we put the sun’s greatest parallax = 3', we 
shall seem to have committed no error. But I shall take the sun’s mean apparent « 
diameters from its mean distances, or (as some astronomers do) from the sun’s 
apparent hourly motion, which they think is to its diameter as 5 : 66 = 1 : 13 Vs- 
For, the hourly motion is nearly proportional to the sun’s distance. 


208 



BOOK IV CH. 22-23 


THE MOON’S VARYING Chapter 22 

APPARENT DIAMETER 
AND ITS PARALLAXES 

A greater variation of both [apparent diameter and parallaxes] is evident in 
5 the moon as the nearest heavenly body. For, when it is new and full, its greatest 
distance from the earth = 65 1 / 1 earth-radii, and on the basis of the foregoing 
demonstrations [IV, 17], its least distance = 55 8 / 80 . For the half moon, the greatest 
distance = 68 n [ eo , and the least distance = 52 l7 /eo earth-radii. Therefore, when 
we divide the radius of the [earth’s] circumference by the distance earth-moon, 
io at those four limits we shall obtain the parallaxes of the rising or setting moon: 
when it is most remote, 50' 18" for the half moon, and 52' 24" for the full and 
new moon; when these are at their nearest, 62' 21", and 65' 45" for the half 
moon at its nearest. 

From these parallaxes the moon’s apparent diameters also become clear, 
is For, as has been shown [IV, 20], the ratio earth-diameter : moon-diameter =7:2. 
Likewise, earth-radius : moon-diameter = 7:4, and this is also the ratio of 
the parallaxes to the moon’s apparent diameters. For, the straight lines enclosing 
the angles of the greater parallaxes and of the apparent diameters at the same 
passage of the moon do not differ from one another at all. The angles are nearly 
20 proportional to the chords subtending them, nor is there any perceptible difference 
between them. This compact summary makes it clear that at the first limit 
of the parallaxes enumerated above, the moon’s apparent diameter = 28 8 / 4 '; 
at the second limit, about 30'; at the third limit, 35' 38"; and at the last limit, 
37' 34". This last value would have been nearly 1 0 according to the theory of Ptol- 
26 emy and others, and the moon, with half [of its surface] shining at that time, 
would have to cast as much light on the earth as the full moon. 

TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE EARTH’S Chapter 23 

SHADOW VARY? 

I also said above [IV, 19] that the ratio of the shadow’s diameter to the moon’s 
30 diameter = 403 : 150. Therefore, at full and new moon with the sun at apogee, 
the smallest shadow-diameter = 80' 36", the greatest = 95' 44", and the greatest 
difference = 15' 8" [=95' 44"- 80' 36"]. Even when the moon passes through the 
same place, the earth’s different distances from the sun also cause the earth’s 
shadow to vary in the following way. 

35 Again, as in the preceding diagram, draw straight line DKS through the 
centers of the sun and of the earth, as well as tangent CES. Join DC and KE. 
As has been shown, when distance DK =1179 earth-radii, and KM = 62 earth- 
radii, MR = the radius of the shadow = 46 1 / eQ ' of the earth-radius KE; MKR, 
made by joining K and R = the angle of the apparent [radius of the earth’s shad- 
40 ow] = 42' 32"; and KMS = the axis of the shadow = 265 earth-radii. 

But when the earth is nearest to the sun, with DK = 1105 earth-radii, we shall 
compute the earth’s shadow at the same [place of the] moon’s passage as follows. 
Draw EZ parallel to DK. CZ : ZE = EK : KS. But CZ = 4 27 /eo earth-radii, 
and ZE = 1105 earth-radii. For, ZE and the remainder DZ [= CD - CZ = 
45 5 27 /go - 4 27 /«o = 1] are equal to DK and KE [= 1], since KZ is a parallelogram. 


209 



REVOLUTIONS 


Hence KS = 248 19 / 60 earth-radii. But KM = 62 earth-radii, and therefore 
the remainder MS = 186 19 / 60 earth-radii [= 248p 19'-62p], But since SM : MR = 
SK : KE, therefore MR = 45 of an earth-radius, and MKR = the angle 
of the apparent [radius of the earth’s shadow] = 41'35". 

For this reason it happens that at the same place of the moon’s crossing the 5 
approach and withdrawal of the sun and earth cause the shadow’s diameter to 
vary at the most, with KE = l p , by Voo’j which is seen as 57", when 360° = 

4 right angles. Furthermore, the ratio of the shadow’s diameter to the moon’s 
diameter in the first case [46' 1"] was greater, in the second case [45'1"] less than 
13 : 5, which was a sort of mean value. Therefore we shall commit a negligible 10 
error if we use the same value everywhere, thereby saving work and following the 
opinion of the ancients. 



TABULAR PRESENTATION OF THE Chapter 24 

INDIVIDUAL SOLAR AND LUNAR 

PARALLAXES IN THE CIRCLE » 

WHICH PASSES THROUGH 
THE POLES OF THE HORIZON 

Now there will be no uncertainty in ascertaining every single solar and lunar 
parallax too. Reproduce AB as [an arc of] the earth’s circumference [passing] 
through [the earth’s] center C and the point below the zenith. In the same plane 20 
let DE be the moon’s circle; FG, the sun’s circle; CDF, the line through the 
point below the zenith; and CEG, the line on which the true places of the sun 
and moon are taken. Draw AG and AE as the lines of sight to those places. 

Then the solar parallax is indicated by angle AGC , and the lunar parallax by 
angle AEC. Moreover, the difference between the solar and lunar [parallaxes] 25 
is measured by angle GAE = the difference between angles AGC and AEC. Now 
let us take ACG as the angle to which we wish to compare those [other angles], 
and let ACG be, for example, 30°. According to the theorems on Plane Triangles, 
when we put line CG = 1142p whereof AC — Ip, clearly angle AGC = the 
difference between the sun’s true and apparent altitudes = 1 V 2 '. But when so 
angle ACG = 60°, AGC = 2' 36". Similarly for the other [values of angle ACG , 
the solar parallaxes] will be obvious. 

But in the case of the moon [we use] its four limits. For, suppose that we take 
angle DCE or arc DE = 30°, with 360° = 4 right angles, when the moon is at 


210 


BOOK IV CH. 24 


its greatest distance from the earth, with CE = 68 p 21' whereof CA = l p , as 
I said [IV, 22]. Then we shall have triangle ACE , in which two sides AC and CE 
are given, as well as angle ACE. From this information we shall find AEC = the 
parallax angle = 25' 28". When CE = 65 1 / 2 P , angle AEC = 26' 36". Similarly 
5 at the third limit, when CE = 55 p 8', the parallax angle AEC = 31' 42". Finally, 
at the [moon’s] least distance [from the earth], when CE = 52 p 17', angle AEC = 
33' 27". Moreover, when arc DE = 60°, the parallaxes will be, in the same order, 
first, 43'55"; second, 45'51"; third, 54 72'; an d fourth, 57 1 I 2 ’. 

I shall write down all these values in the order of the following Table. For 
io greater convenience in use I shall extend it, like the others, to a series of 30 rows, 
but at intervals of 6°. These degrees are to be understood as twice the number 
of degrees reckoned from the zenith to a maximum of 90°. I have arranged the 
Table in 9 columns. The 1st and 2nd columns will contain the common numbers 
of the circle. In the 3rd column I shall put the solar parallaxes. After them come 
is the lunar parallaxes [in columns 4-9]. The 4th column will show the differences 
by which the smallest parallaxes, occurring when the half moon is at apogee, 
are less than those in the following column, which occur at full and new moon. 
The 6th column will exhibit the parallaxes produced by the full or new moon 
at perigee. The minutes which follow [in the 7th column] are the differences by 
2° which the parallaxes of the half moon when it is nearest to us exceed those in their 
vicinity. Then the last two remaining columns are reserved for the proportional 
minutes, by which the parallaxes between those four limits can be computed. 
I shall explain these minutes also, first those near the apogee, and then those which 
fall between the first [two] limits [with the moon at apogee in the quadratures 
25 and in the syzygies, respectively]. The explanation proceeds as follows. 

I say let circle AB be the moon’s first epicycle, with center C. Taking D as 
the center of the earth, draw the straight line DBCA. With apogee A as center, 
describe the second epicycle EFG. Take arc EG = 60°. Join AG and CG. Straight 
line CE = 5 u / 6 o earth-radii, as was shown above [IV, 17]. Moreover, DC = 
30 60 18 / 6 o earth-radii, and EF = 2 5 7 6 o earth-radii. Therefore, in triangle ACG, 
side GA = l p 25', side AC = 6 p 36', and angle CAG, included between these 
sides, is also given. Hence, in accordance with the theorems on Plane Triangles, 
the third side CG = 6 p 7' in the same units. Consequently the whole of DCG, 
if formed into a straight line, or its equivalent DCL = 66 p 25' [= 60 p 18'+ 6 p 7']. 
35 But DCE = 65 V 2 p [=60 P 18'+5 P 11']. Hence the remainder [DCL-DCE] —EL s 
557a' [=66 p 25' - 65 p 30']. Through this given ratio, when DCE = 60 p , EF = 2 p 
37', and EL = 46' in the same units. Accordingly, on the basis of EF = 60', as 
the excess EL s 18'. I shall enter this value in the 8th column of the Table 
opposite 60° [in the 1st column]. 

40 I shall make a similar demonstration for the perigee B. With it as a center, 
reproduce the second epicycle MNO, with angle MBN = 60°. As before, triangle 
BCN will have its sides and angles given. Likewise the excess MP s 55 72 '} 
with an earth-radius = l p . In those units DBM = 55 p 8'. However, if DBM = 60 p , 
in those units MBO = 3 p 7', and the excess MP = 55'. But3 p 7' : 55' = 60 : 18, 
45 and [we have] the same results as before [in the case of the apogee], though 
they are a few seconds apart. I shall follow this procedure also in the other cases, 
with which I shall fill up the 8th column in the Table. But if, instead of these 
values, we use those enumerated in the [column of proportional minutes in the] 


211 



REVOLUTIONS 


Table of Prosthaphaereses [after IV, 11], we shall not be committing any error, 
since they are almost identical and very small quantities are involved. 

Remaining [to be considered] are the proportional minutes for the middle 
limits, that is, between the second and third. Now let the full and new moon 
describe the first epicycle AB, with center C. Take D as the center of the earth, 5 
and draw straight line DBCA. Starting from apogee A, take an arc, for example, 
AE = 60°. Join DE and CE. We shall have triangle DCE , of which two sides are 
given: CD = 60 p 19', and CE = 5 p IT. So is interior angle DCE = 180°- ACE. 
According to the theorems on Triangles, DE = 63 p 4'. But the whole of DBA = 

65 V 2 p , exceeding ED by 2 p 27' [s65 p 30'- 63 p 4']. But [2xCE =] AB = 10 
10 p 22' : 2 p 27' = 60 : 14, which may be entered in the Table [in the 9th column] 
opposite 60°. With this as an example I have completed what was left, and I have 
finished the Table, which follows. I have added another Table of the Radii of the 
Sun, Moon, and Earth’s Shadow in order that they may be available as far as 
possible. is 


212 



BOOK IV CH. 24 


TABLE OF SOLAR AND LUNAR PARALLAXES 


5 

Common 

Numbers 

Solar 

Parallaxes 

Difference to 

be Subtracted 
from the Lu¬ 
nar [Parallax at 
the] Second 1 
Limit [in 
Order to Ob¬ 
tain the Par¬ 
allax at] the 
First Limit 

Lunar 

Parallax 

at the 

Second 

Limit 

Lunar 

Parallax 

at the 

Third 

Limit 

Difference to 
be Added to 
the Lunar 
Parallax at the 
Third Limit in 
Order to Ob¬ 
tain the Par¬ 
allax at the 
Fourth Limit 

Propc 

Minute 

irtional 

:s of the 

Smaller 

Epicycle 

Larger 

Epicycle 

o 

O 

' 

H 

' 

* 


H 

' 

tt 

r 

' ! 


6 

354 

0 

10 

0 

7 

2 

46 

3 

18 

0 

12 

0 

0 

10 

12 

348 

0 

19 

0 

14 

5 

33 

6 

36 

0 

23 

1 

0 


18 

342 

0 

29 

0 

21 

8 

19 

9 

53 

0 

34 

3 

1 


24 

336 

0 

38 

0 

28 

11 

4 

13 

10 

0 

45 

4 

2 


30 

330 

0 

47 

0 

35 

13 

49 

16 

26 

0 

56 

5 

3 


36 

324 

0 

56 

0 

42 

16 

32 

19 

40 

1 

6 

7 

5 

15 

42 

318 

1 

5 

0 

48 

19 

5 

22 

47 

1 

16 

10 

7 


48 

312 

1 

13 

0 

55 

21 

39 

25 

47 

1 

26 

12 

9 


54 

306 

1 

22 

1 

1 

24 

9 

28 

49 

1 

35 

15 

12 


60 

300 

1 

31 

1 

8 

26 

36 

31 

42 

1 

45 

18 

14 


66 

294 

1 

39 

1 

14 

28 

57 

34 

31 

1 

54 

21 

17 

20 

72 

288 

1 

46 

1 

19 

31 

14 

37 

14 

2 

3 

24 

20 


78 

282 

1 

53 

1 

24 

33 

25 

39 

50 

2 

11 

27 

23 


84 

276 

2 

0 

1 

29 

35 

31 

42 

19 

2 

19 

30 

26 


90 

270 

2 

7 

1 

34 

37 

31 

44 

40 

2 

26 

34 

29 


96 

264 

2 

13 

1 

39 

39 

24 

46 

54 

2 

33 

37 

32 

25 

102 

258 

2 

20 

1 

44 

41 

10 

49 

0 

2 

40 

39 

35 


108 

252 

2 

26 

1 

48 

42 

50 

50 

59 

2 

46 

42 

38 


114 

246 

2 

31 

1 

52 

44 

24 

52 

49 

2 

53 

45 

41 


120 

240 

2 

36 

1 

56 

45 

51 

54 

30 

3 

0 

47 

44 


126 

234 

2 

40 

2 

0 

47 

8 

56 

2 

3 

6 

49 

47 

30 

132 

228 

2 

44 

2 

2 

48 

15 

57 

23 

3 

11 

51 

49 


138 

222 

2 

, 49 

2 

3 

49 

15 

58 

36 

3 

14 

53 

52 


144 

216 

2 

52 

2 

4 

50 

10 

59 

39 

3 

17 

55 

54 


150 

210 

2 

54 

2 

4 

50 

55 

60 

31 

3 

20 

57 

56 


156 

204 

2 

56 

2 

5 

51 

29 

61 

12 

3 

22 

58 

57 

35 

162 

198 

2 

58 

2 

5 

51 

56 

61 

47 

3 

23 

59 

58 


168 

192 

2 

59 

2 

6 

52 

13 

62 

9 

3 

23 

59 

59 


174 

186 

3 

0 

2 

6 

52 

22 

62 

19 

3 

24 

60 

60 


180 

180 

3 

0 

2 

6 

52 

24 

62 

21 

3 

24 

60 

60 


213 









REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE RADII OF THE SUN, MOON, AND [EARTH’S] SHADOW 


Common 

Numbers 

Sun’s Radius 

Moon’s Radius 

Shadow’s Radius 

Shadow’s 

Variation 

o 

O 

/ 

// 

/ 

// 

/ 

tt 

Minutes 

6 

354 

15 

50 

15 

0 

40 

18 

0 

12 

348 

15 

50 

15 

1 

40 

21 

0 

18 

342 

15 

51 

15 

3 

40 

26 

1 

24 

336 

15 

52 

15 

6 

40 

34 

2 

30 

330 

15 

53 

15 

9 

40 

42 

3 

36 

324 

15 

55 

15 

14 

40 

56 

4 

42 

318 

15 

57 

15 

19 

41 

10 

6 

48 

312 

16 

0 

15 

25 

41 

26 

9 

54 

306 

16 

3 

15 

32 

41 

44 

11 

60 

300 

16 

6 

15 

39 

42 

2 

14 

66 

294 

16 

9 

15 

47 

42 

24 

16 

72 

288 

16 

12 

15 

56 

42 

40 

19 

78 

282 

16 

15 

16 

5 

43 

13 

22 

84 

276 

16 

19 

16 

13 

43 

34 

25 

90 

270 

16 

22 

16 

22 

43 

58 

27 

96 

264 

16 

26 

16 

30 

44 

20 

31 

102 

258 

16 

29 

16 

39 

44 

44 

33 

108 

252 

16 

32 

16 

47 

45 

6 

36 

114 

246 

16 

36 

16 

55 

45 

20 

39 

120 

240 

16 

39 

17 

4 

45 

52 

42 

126 

234 

16 

42 

17 

12 

46 

13 

45 

132 

228 

16 

45 

17 

19 

46 

32 

47 

138 

222 

16 

48 

17 

26 

46 

51 

49 

144 

216 

16 

50 

17 

32 

47 

7 

51 

150 

210 

16 

53 

17 

38 

47 

23 

53 

156 

204 

16 

54 

17 

41 

47 

31 

54 

162 

198 

16 

55 

17 

44 

47 

39 

55 

168 

192 

16 

56 

17 

46 

47 

44 

56 

174 

186 

16 

57 

17 

48 

47 

49 

56 

180 

180 

16 

57 

17 

49 

47 

52 

57 


214 










BOOK IV CH. 25 


COMPUTING THE SOLAR Chapter 25 

AND LUNAR PARALLAX 

I shall also briefly explain the method of computing the solar and lunar 
parallaxes by means of the Table. With the sun’s distance from the zenith or 
s twice the moon’s distance therefrom, we take the corresponding parallaxes in 
the Table: the single entry in the case of the sun, but in the case of the moon the 
parallaxes at its four limits. Also, with twice the moon’s motion or distance from 
the sun, we find the proportional minutes in the first [column of proportional 
minutes, that is, the 8th column]. With these proportional minutes we obtain, as 
io proportional parts of 60, the excess for both the first and the last limits. We always 
subtract [the first of these proportional parts of 60] from the next parallax in the 
sequence [that is, the parallax at the second limit]; and we always add the second 
[of these proportional parts of 60] to the parallax at the next to the last limit. 
This [procedure] gives us a pair of lunar parallaxes, reduced to the apogee and 
i5 perigee, and either increased or diminished by the smaller epicycle. Then with 
the lunar anomaly we take the proportional minutes in the last column. With 
these proportional minutes we next obtain the proportional part of the difference 
between the parallaxes just found. This proportional part [of 60] we always add 
to the first of the reduced parallaxes, that at the apogee. The result is the lunar 
20 parallax sought for a [given] place and time, as in the [following] example. 

Let the moon’s distance from the zenith = 54°; the moon’s mean motion = 
15°; and its normalized motion in anomaly = 100°. I wish to find the lunar par¬ 
allax by means of the Table. I double the degrees of the [zenith] distance, making 
them 108°. Corresponding to 108° in the Table as the excess at the second limit 
25 over the first limit is T 48"; the parallax at the second limit = 42' 50"; the parallax 
at the third limit = 50' 59"; the excess of the parallax at the fourth limit over 
the third = 2' 46". I note these values one by one. The moon’s motion, when 
doubled, = 30°. For this figure I find 5' in the first column of proportional min¬ 
utes. With these 5' I take the proportional part of 60 = 9" of the excess [at 
30 the second limit] over the first [1'48" X 5 / 60 = 9"]. I subtract these 9" from 
42' 50", the parallax [at the second limit]. The remainder is 42' 41". Similarly, 
of the second excess = 2' 46", the proportional part = 14" [2' 46" x V12 = 14"]. 
These 14" are added to 50' 59" = the parallax at the third limit, making the 
sum = 51' 13". The difference between these parallaxes = 8' 32" [= 51' 13"- 
35 42' 41"]. After this, with the [100] degrees of the normalized anomaly, in the last 
column I take the proportional minutes = 34. With these I find the proportional 
part of the 8'32" difference = 4'50" [= 8' 32" X 34 /«o]- When these 4'50" 
are added to the first corrected parallax [42' 41"], the sum is 47' 31". This is the 
required parallax of the moon in the vertical circle. 

4o However, any lunar parallaxes differ so slightly from those which occur at 
full and new moon that it would seem sufficient if everywhere we kept between the 
middle limits. These we especially need for the prediction of eclipses. The others 
do not merit so extensive an investigation, which will perhaps be thought to serve 
curiosity rather than usefulness. 


215 



REVOLUTIONS 


HOW THE PARALLAXES IN LONGITUDE Chapter 26 

AND LATITUDE ARE SEPARATED 
FROM EACH OTHER 

The parallax is readily separated into longitude and latitude; that is, [the 
distance] between the sun and moon [is measured] by arcs and angles of the ecliptic 5 
and of the vertical circle, which intersect each other. For when the vertical circle 
meets the ecliptic at right angles, obviously it produces no parallax in longitude. 
On the contrary, the entire parallax passes into the latitude, since the circles of 
latitude and altitude are the same. But, on the other hand, when the ecliptic 
happens to intersect the horizon at right angles and becomes identical with the i 0 
circle of altitude, if the moon at that time lacks latitude, it undergoes only a par¬ 
allax in longitude. But if it acquires any latitude, it does not escape having some 
parallax in longitude. Thus let ABC be the ecliptic, intersecting the horizon at 
right angles. Let A be the pole of the horizon. Then ABC will be identical with 
the vertical circle of the moon, which has no latitude. If its place is B, its entire 15 
parallax BC will be longitudinal. 


A 



But suppose that the moon also has a latitude. Through the poles of the ecliptic 
draw circle DBE, and take DB or BE = the moon’s latitude. Obviously, neither 
side AD nor side AE will be equal to AB. Nor will D or E be a right angle, since 
circles DA and AE do not pass through the poles of DBE. The parallax will panic- 20 
ipate somewhat in latitude, to a greater extent the nearer the moon is to the zenith. 
For while DE, the base of triangle ADE, remains constant, the shorter are sides 
AD and AE, the more acute are the angles made by them with the base. These 
angles become more like right angles, the farther removed the moon is from the 
zenith. 25 

Now let DBE, the moon’s vertical circle, intersect the ecliptic ABC obliquely. 
Let the moon have no latitude, as when it is at B, the intersection with the ecliptic. 
Let BE be the parallax in the vertical circle. Draw arc EF in the circle passing 
through the poles of ABC. Then in triangle BEF, angle EBF is given (as was 
shown above); i 7 is a right angle; and side BE also is given. In accordance with 30 
the theorems on Spherical Triangles, BF and FE, the remaining sides, are given, 
corresponding to the parallax BE, the latitude being FE, and the longitude being 


216 



BOOK IV CH. 26 


BF. However, on account of their small size BE, EF, and FB differ slightly and 
imperceptibly from straight lines. Therefore if we treat the right triangle as recti¬ 
linear, the computation will thereby become easy, and we shall commit no error. 

The calculation is more difficult when the moon has some latitude. Reproduce 
s the ecliptic ABC, intersected obliquely by DB, the circle passing through the 
poles of the horizon. Let B be the moon’s place in longitude. Let its latitude be 
BF to the north or BE to the south. From the zenith D let fall on the moon DEK 
and DFC as vertical circles, on which are the parallaxes EK and FG. For, the 
moon’s true places in longitude and latitude will be points E and F. But it will 
10 be seen at K and G, from which draw arcs KM and LG perpendicular to the ecliptic 
ABC. The moon’s longitude and latitude are known, as well as the latitude of 
the region. Therefore, in triangle DEB two sides are known, DB and BE, as well 
as ABD, the angle of intersection [of the ecliptic and the vertical circle]. Adding 
ABD to the right angle [ABE] gives the whole angle DBE. Consequently the 
is remaining side DE will be given, as well as angle DEB. 

Similarly in triangle DBF two sides, DB and BF, are given, as well as angle 
DBF, which is the remainder when angle ABD is subtracted from the right 
angle [ABF]. Then DF also will be given, together with angle DFB. Therefore 
the parallaxes EK and FG of both arcs DE and DF are given through the Table. 
20 So is the moon’s true distance DE or DF from the zenith, and likewise the ap¬ 
parent distance DEK or DFG. 

But DE intersects the ecliptic at point N. In triangle EBN, NBE is a right 
angle; angle NEB is given; and so is the base BE. The remaining angle BNE 
will be known, as well as the remaining sides BN and NE. Similarly in the whole 
25 triangle NKM, from the given angles M and N and the whole side KEN, the base 
KM will be known. This is the moon’s apparent southern latitude. Its excess over 
EB is the parallax in latitude. The remaining side NBM is given. When NB is 
subtracted from NBM, the remainder BM is the parallax in longitude. 

Similarly in the northern triangle BFC, B is a right angle, while side BF 
30 and angle BFC are given. Therefore the remaining sides BLC and FGC are given, 
as well as the remaining angle C. Subtracting FG from FGC leaves GC as a side 
given in triangle GLC, in which CLG is a right angle, and angle LCG is given. 
Consequently the remaining sides GL and LC are given. So is the remainder when ‘ 
[LC is subtracted] from BC; it is BL, the parallax in longitude. Also given is the 
35 apparent latitude GL, whose parallax is the excess of the true latitude BF 
[over GL]. 

However (as you see) this computation, which is expended on very small 
magnitudes, costs more labor than it bears fruit. For it will be enough to use angle 
ABD for DCB, and DBF for DEB, and simply (as before) the mean arc DB 
40 always for arcs DE and EF, ignoring the lunar latitude. Nor will any error be 
apparent on this account, especially in the regions of the [earth’s] northern side. 
On the other hand, in the extreme southern areas, when B touches the zenith 
at the maximum [lunar] latitude of 5° and the moon is nearest to the earth, the 
difference is about 6'. But during eclipses when the moon is in conjunction with 
45 the sun and its latitude cannot exceed 1 1 [ 2 °, the difference can be only 1 3 / 4 '. 
These considerations therefore make it clear that in the ecliptic’s eastern quadrant 
the parallax in longitude is always added to the moon’s true place, and in the other 
quadrant always subtracted from it, in order to obtain the moon’s apparent longi- 


217 



REVOLUTIONS 


tude. Its apparent latitude is acquired through the parallax in latitude. For if 
they are on the same side [of the ecliptic], they are added together. But if they 
are on opposite [sides of the ecliptic], the smaller is subtracted from the larger, 
and the remainder is the apparent latitude on the same side as the larger. 

CONFIRMATION OF THE ASSERTIONS Chapter 27 5 

ABOUT THE LUNAR PARALLAXES 

The lunar parallaxes, as set forth above [IV, 22, 24-26], are in agreement with 
the phenomena, as I can assert on the basis of many other observations, such as 
the one I made in Bologna on 9 March 1497 C.E. after sunset. I watched the 
moon about to occult [Aldebaran,] the bright star in the Hyades which the io 
Romans call Palilicium. After waiting, I saw the star touch the dark side of the 
lunar globe, with its light extinguished between the moon’s horns at the end of 
the 5th hour of the night [= 11 P. M.]. It was closer to the southern horn by 
about x l 3 of the moon’s width or diameter. It was computed to be at 2° 52' 
within the Twins and at 5 1 / e ° in southern latitude. Obviously, therefore, the center 15 
of the moon apparently was half of its diameter west of the star. Consequently, its 
apparent place was 2° 36' [within the Twins = 2° 52'-Va (32')] in longitude, and 

about 5° 6' in latitude. Accordingly, from the beginning of the Christian era there 
were 1497 Egyptian years, 76 days, plus 23 hours at Bologna. However, at 

Cracow, which lies nearly 9° farther east, the additional time would be 23 hours, 20 36 
minutes, plus 4 minutes added for uniform time, since the sun was at 28 V 2 0 within 
the Fishes. The moon’s uniform distance from the sun, then, was 74°; its 
normalized anomaly, 111 0 10'; the moon’s true place, 3° 24' within the Twins; the 
southern latitude, 4° 35'; and the true motion in latitude, 203° 41'. At that 
time, moreover, at Bologna 26° within the Scorpion was rising at an angle of 59 1 / 2 °; 26 
the moon was 84° from the zenith; the angle of intersection between the vertical 
circle and the ecliptic was about 29°; the lunar parallax in longitude, 5T, and in 
latitude, 30'. These values agree so thoroughly with the observation that nobody need 
doubt the correctness of my hypotheses and the statements based on them. 

THE MEAN CONJUNCTIONS AND OPPOSITIONS Chapter 28 30 
OF THE SUN AND MOON 

The statements made above about the motion of the moon and sun point to 
the method of investigating their conjunctions and oppositions. For any time close to 
when we think an opposition or conjunction will occur, we will look up the 
moon’s uniform motion. If we find that it has just completed a circle, we know 35 
that there is a conjunction; if a semicircle, the moon is full [at opposition]. But 
since this [precision] is seldom encountered, we must examine the distance between the 
two bodies. When we divide this distance by the moon’s daily motion, we will know 
the quantity of time since or until the occurrence of a syzygy, according as the 
motion was in excess or fell short. For this time, then, we will look up the 40 
motions and places, by which we will compute the true new and full moons, 
and distinguish the conjunctions at which eclipses occur from the others, in the 
maimer indicated below [IV, 30]. Once we have established these phases, we may 
extend them to any other months and continue them for several years by means 


218 



BOOK IV CH. 28 


of a 12-month Table. This contains the [partial] times, the uniform motions of 
the sun and moon in anomaly, and of the moon in latitude, each value of which 
is linked with the individual uniform values previously found. But with regard to 
the solar anomaly, in order that we may have it at once, I shall appropriately 
5 record it in its normalized form. For, its nonuniformity will not be perceived in 
a single year, nor in several years, on account of the slowness of its origin, that is, 
of its higher apse. 


219 



REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF THE CONJUNCTION AND OPPOSITION OF THE SUN AND MOON 

Months 

Partial Times 

Moon’s Motion in Anomaly 

Moon’s Motion in Latitude 

Days 

Day- 

Minutes 

Day- 

Seconds 

Sixtieths 
of Day- i 
Seconds 

60° 

- 

' 

- 

60° 

• 

' 

« 

1 

29 

31 

50 

9 

0 

25 

49 

0 

0 

30 

40 

14 

2 

59 

3 

40 

18 

0 

51 

38 

0 

1 

1 

20 

28 

3 

88 

35 

30 

27 

1 

17 

27 

1 

1 

32 

0 

42 

4 

118 

7 

20 

36 

1 

43 

16 

1 

2 

2 

40 

56 

5 

147 

39 

10 

45 

2 

9 

5 

2 

2 

33 

21 

10 

6 

177 

11 

0 

54 

2 

34 

54 

2 

3 

4 

1 

24 

7 

206 

42 

51 

3 

3 

0 

43 

2 

3 

34 

41 

38 

8 

236 

14 

41 

12 

3 

26 

32 

3 

4 

5 

21 

52 

9 

265 

46 

31 

21 

3 

52 

21 

3 

4 

36 

2 

6 

10 

295 

18 

21 

30 

4 

18 

10 

3 

5 

6 

42 

20 j 

11 

324 

50 

11 

39 

4 

43 

59 

4 

5 

37 

22 

34 

12 

354 

22 

1 

48 

5 

9 

48 

4 

0 

8 

2 

48 i 



FOR THE HALF-MONTH 

BETWEEN FULL AND 

NEW MOON 




D 

45 


4J 




30 

3 

15 


7 

SUN’S MOTION IN ANOMALY 

Months 

60° 

• 

- 

- 


Months 

60° 

« 

' 

- 

i 

0 

29 

6 

18 




7 

3 

23 

44 

7 

2 

0 

58 

12 

36 




8 

3 

52 


25 

3 

i 

27 

18 

54 




9 

4 

21 

56 

43 

4 

i 

56 

25 

12 




10 

4 

51 

3 

1 

5 

2 

25 

31 

31 




11 

5 


9 

El 

6 

2 

54 

37 

49 




12 

5 

49 

15 

38 

FOR THE HALF-MONTH 


i 


14 

33 

9 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


220 















BOOK IV CH. 29 


INVESTIGATING THE TRUE CONJUNCTIONS Chapter 29 
AND OPPOSITIONS OF THE SUN AND MOON 

After obtaining (by the aforesaid method) the time of the mean conjunction 
or opposition of these bodies as well as their motions, for the purpose of finding 
s their true [syzygies] we must have the true distance by which they are west or 
east of each other. For if the moon is west of the sun in a [mean] conjunction or 
opposition, obviously a true [syzygy] will occur. If the sun [is west of the moon], 
the true [syzygy] for which we are looking has already happened. These [sequen¬ 
ces] are made clear by the prosthaphaereses of both bodies. For if their prostha- 
io phaereses are zero or equal and in the same sense, that is, both additive or both 
subtractive, the true conjunctions or oppositions obviously coincide with the mean 
[syzygies] at the same instant. But if the prosthaphaereses are unequal [in the 
same sense], the difference [between the prosthaphaereses] indicates the distance 
between the bodies. The body having the greater additive or subtractive [prostha- 
15 phaeresis] is west or east [of the other body]. But when the prosthaphaereses are 
in opposite senses, the body whose prosthaphaeresis is subtractive will be that 
much farther west, since the sum of the prosthaphaereses gives the distance 
between the bodies. With regard to this distance, we will consider in how many 
whole hours it can be traversed by the moon (taking 2 hours for each degree of 
20 distance). 

Thus, if the distance between the bodies is about 6°, we will assume 12 hours 
for those degrees. Then for this time interval as thus determined, we will look 
for the moon’s true distance from the sun. We will find this easily when we know 
that the moon’s mean motion = 1 0 T in 2 hours, while its hourly true motion 
as in anomaly around full and new moon = 50'. In 6 hours the uniform motion 
amounts to 3° 3'[=3 xl° T], and the true motion in anomaly to 5° [=6 x 50']. With 
these figures, in the Table of the Lunar Prosthaphaereses [after IV, 11] we will look 
up the difference between the prosthaphaereses. This difference is added to 
the mean motion if the anomaly is in the lower part of the circle; if it is in the 
30 upper part [of the circle], the difference will be subtracted. The sum or remainder 
is the moon’s true motion in the assumed hours. This motion is sufficient if it 
is equal to the previously determined distance. Otherwise this distance, multiplied 
by the estimated number of hours, is divided by this motion; or we divide the 
distance, as it is, by what we have obtained as the true hourly motion. The quotient 
35 will be the true time difference in hours and minutes between the mean and true 
conjunction or opposition. We shall add this difference to the time of the mean 
conjunction or opposition, if the moon is west of the sun or of the place diametri¬ 
cally opposite the sun. If the moon is east [of these places], we will subtract this 
difference. Then we will have the time of the true conjunction or opposition. 
4® I admit, however, that the sun’s nonuniformity also adds or subtracts 
something. But this quantity may rightly be ignored, since it cannot amount to T 
over the entire time, even [with the two bodies during syzygy] at their greatest 
distance, which surpasses 7°. This method of determining the lunations is more 
reliable. For, those who rely exclusively on the moon’s hourly motion, which 
45 they call the “hourly surplus”, are sometimes mistaken and are often compelled 
to repeat their computation, since [the motion of] the moon changes even from 
hour to hour and does not remain constant. Therefore, for the time of a true 


221 



REVOLUTIONS 


conjunction or opposition we shall establish the true motion in latitude in order to 
obtain the moon’s latitude, and also the sun’s true distance from the vernal 
equinox, that is, in the [zodiacal] signs, from which the moon’s place is acquired, 
as being the same or the [diametrically] opposite. 

In this way the mean and uniform time is known for the meridian of Cracow, 5 
and we reduce it to apparent time by the method explained above. But if we wish 
to determine these phenomena for some place other than Cracow, we consider 
its longitude. For each degree of that longitude we take 4 minutes of an hour, 
and 4 seconds of an hour for each minute of longitude. We add these intervals 
to Cracow time, if the other place is farther east; if it is farther west, we subtract 10 
the intervals. The remainder or sum will be the time of the [true] conjunction 
or opposition of the sun and moon. 

HOW CONJUNCTIONS AND OPPOSITIONS Chapter 30 
OF THE SUN AND MOON 

AT WHICH ECLIPSES OCCUR 15 

MAY BE DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHERS 

Whether or not eclipses occur [in syzygies] is easily decided in the case of the 
moon. For if its latitude is less than half [the sum] of the diameters of the moon 
and shadow, the moon undergoes an eclipse; but if its latitude is greater [than 
half the sum of those diameters], it will not be eclipsed. 20 

The case of the sun, however, is more than enough troublesome, since it in¬ 
volves both [the solar and lunar] parallaxes, by which in general an apparent 
conjunction differs from the true conjunction. We therefore investigate the 
difference in longitude between the sun and the moon at the time of the true con¬ 
junction. Likewise, at 1 hour before the true conjunction in the eastern quadrant 25 
of the ecliptic, or in the western quadrant of the ecliptic at 1 hour after the true 
conjunction, we look for the moon’s apparent longitudinal distance from the sun, 
in order to find out apparently how far the moon moves away from the sun in 
an hour. Dividing that difference in longitude by this hourly motion, we obtain 
the difference in time between the true and apparent conjunction. This difference so 
in time is subtracted from the time of the true conjunction in the eastern part 
of the ecliptic, or it is added in the western part (since in the former case the appar¬ 
ent conjunction precedes, but in the latter case follows, the true conjunction). 
The result will be the desired time of the apparent conjunction. Then for this 
time we will compute the moon’s apparent [distance in] latitude from the sun, 35 
or the distance between the centers of the sun and moon [at the time] of the 
apparent conjunction, after the solar parallax has been subtracted. If this latitude 
is greater than half [the sum] of the diameters of the sun and moon, the sun will 
not undergo an eclipse; but it will, if this latitude is less [than half the sum of those 
diameters]. These conclusions make it clear that if the moon at the time of a true 40 
conjunction has no parallax in longitude, the true and apparent conjunctions will 
coincide. This happens at about 90° of the ecliptic, measured from the east or 
from the west. 


222 



BOOK IV CH. 31-32 


THE SIZE OF A SOLAR AND LUNAR ECLIPSE Chapter 31 

After we learn that the sun or moon will be eclipsed, we will also easily know 
how great the eclipse will be. In the case of the sun [we use] the apparent [difference 
in] latitude between the sun and the moon at the time of the apparent conjunction. 
5 For if we subtract this latitude from half [the sum], of the diameters of the sun 
and moon, the remainder is the eclipsed portion of the sun, as measured along its 
diameter. When we multiply this remainder by 12 , and divide the product by 
the sun’s diameter, we will have the number of eclipsed digits in the sun. But if 
no latitude intervenes between the sun and moon, the entire sun will be eclipsed, 
10 or as much of it as the moon can cover. 

In the case of a lunar eclipse [we proceed] in nearly the same way, except that 
instead of the apparent latitude we use the simple latitude. When this is subtracted 
from half [the sum] of the diameters of the moon and shadow, the remainder is 
the eclipsed portion of the moon, provided that the moon’s latitude is not less 
is than half [the sum] of [these] diameters by a lunar diameter. For then [if the moon’s 
latitude is a lunar diameter less than half this sum] the entire moon will be eclipsed. 
Moreover, the smaller latitude will also somewhat prolong the time [spent by the 
moon] in the shadows. This time will be at its maximum when there is no latitude, 
as is entirely obvious, I believe, to those who consider the matter. In a partial 
20 lunar eclipse, then, when we multiply the eclipsed portion by twelve, and divide 
the product by the moon’s diameter, we shall have the number of the eclipsed 
digits, exactly as was explained in the case of the sun. 


PREDICTING HOW LONG Chapter 32 

AN ECLIPSE WILL LAST 

25 It remains to see how long an eclipse will last. In this connection, it should 
be noted, we treat the arcs lying between the sun, moon, and shadow as straight 
lines on account of their small size, which makes them seem no different from 
straight lines. 

Thus, take the center of the sun or shadow in point A, and line BC as the 
30 passage of the moon’s globe. Let B be its center as it touches the sun or shadow 
at the beginning of the contact, and C [its center] at the end of its emergence. 
Join AB and AC. Drop AD perpendicular to BC. When the moon’s center is 
at D, obviously that will be the middle of the eclipse. For, AD is shorter than the 
other lines descending from A [to BC ']. BD = DC, since AB = AC, each of 
as which consists, in a solar eclipse, of half [the sum] of the diameters of the sun 
and moon, and of the moon and shadow in a lunar eclipse. AD is the true or 
apparent latitude of the moon at mid-eclipse. (AB) 2 -(AD ) 2 = (BD) 2 . Hence 
the length of BD will be given. When we divide this length by the true hourly 
motion of the moon in a lunar eclipse, or by the apparent [hourly motion of the 
40 moon] in a solar eclipse, we will have the time of half the duration [of the 
eclipse]. 

The moon, however, often tarries in the middle of the shadow. This happens 
when half the sum of the diameters of the moon and shadow exceeds the moon’s 
latitude by more than its diameter, as I said [IV, 31 ]. Thus, assume E as the moon’s 
45 center at the beginning of total immersion, when the moon contacts the shadow’s 


223 



REVOLUTIONS 


circumference from within, and F [as the moon’s center] at its second contact 
[with the shadow’s circumference from within] where the moon first emerges 
[from the shadow]. Join AE and AF. Then, in the same way as before, ED and 
DF will clearly be half the time spent in the shadow. For, AD is known to be the 
latitude of the moon, and AE or AF the excess of half the shadow’s diameter over 6 
half the moon’s diameter. Therefore ED or DF will be determined. When either 
is once more divided by the true hourly motion of the moon, we will have half 
the time spent [in the shadow], which we were looking for. 

Yet here it should be noticed that as the moon moves on its own circle, it does 
not tick off the degrees of longitude on the ecliptic exactly equal with the degrees 10 
on its own circle (as measured by the circles passing through the poles of the 
ecliptic). Nevertheless the difference is quite minute. At the full distance of 12 ° 
from the intersection with the ecliptic, close to the outermost limit of solar and 
lunar eclipses, the arcs of those circles do not differ from each other by 2' = 1 j li 
of an hour. For this reason I often use one of them instead of the other, as though is 
they were identical. I likewise also use the same lunar latitude at the limits of an 
eclipse as at mid-eclipse, although the moon’s latitude is always increasing or 
diminishing, and therefore the zones of immersion and emersion are not absolutely 
equal. On the other hand, the difference between them is so slight that it would 
seem to be a useless waste of time to investigate these details with greater pre- »> 
cision. In the foregoing way the times, durations, and sizes of eclipses are explained 
by reference to the diameters. 

But in the opinion of many astronomers, the portions in eclipse should be 
determined by reference to surfaces, not diameters, since surfaces are eclipsed, 
not lines. Accordingly let the circle of the sun or shadow be ABCD, with its center as 
at E. Let the moon’s circle be AFCG, with its center at I. Let these two circles 
intersect each other at points A and C. Through both centers draw the straight 
line BEIF. Join AE, EC,AI, and IC. Draw AKC perpendicular to BF. From these 


B 



224 



BOOK IV CH. 32 


circles we wish to determine the size of the eclipsed surface ADCG, or the number 
of twelfths of the whole plane of the circle of the sun or moon when partially 
eclipsed. 

Then, from what was said above, AE and AI, the radii of both circles are given, 
s So is El, the distance between their centers = the moon’s latitude. Hence in 
triangle AEI we have the sides given, and therefore the angles are given, by what 
was proved above. EIC is similar and equal to AEI. Consequently arcs ADC 
and AGC will be given in degrees of which the circumference of a circle = 
360°. According to the Measurement of the Circle by Archimedes of Syracuse, 
io the ratio of the circumference to the diameter is less than 3 V 7 [: 1] but more 
than 3 10 / 71 [: 1]. Between these values Ptolemy assumes a ratio of 3 p 8' 30" : Ip. 
On the basis of this ratio, arcs AGC and ADC will be known also in the same units 
as their diameters, or as AE and AI. The areas contained under EA and AD, 
and under IA and AG, are equal to sectors AEC and AIC, respectively, 
io But in the isosceles triangles AEC and AIC, the common base AKC is given, 
and so are the perpendiculars EK and KI. Then the product of AK x KE is given 
as the area of triangle AEC, just as the product of AK x KI = the area of triangle 
ACI. Subtracting both triangles from their sectors [sector EADC - AAEC ; sector 
AGCI-AACI ] leaves as remainders AGC and ACD as segments of the circles. 
80 These segments make known the whole of ADCG, which was sought. Also given 
is the entire circular area, which is defined by BE and BAD in a solar eclipse, or 
by FI and FAG in a lunar eclipse. Hence it will become clear how many twelfths 


B 



225 



REVOLUTIONS 


of the whole circle, either the sun’s or the moon’s, will be occupied by ADCG, 
the eclipsed area. 

With regard to the moon, let the foregoing discussion, which has been treated 
more fully by other astronomers, suffice for the present. For I am hurrying on to 
the revolutions of the other five bodies, which will be the subject of the following 6 
Books. 

End of the Fourth Book of the Revolutions 


226 



Book Five 


INTRODUCTION 

Thus far to the best of my ability I have discussed the earth’s revolution around 
s the sun [Book III], and the moon’s revolution around the earth [Book IV]. Now 
I tackle the motions of the five planets. The order and size of their spheres 
are connected with remarkable agreement and precise symmetry by the earth’s 
motion, as I indicated generally in Book I [ch. 9], when I showed that the cen¬ 
ters of these spheres are not near the earth, but rather near the sun. It therefore 
10 remains for me to prove all these statements one at a time and more clearly, and 
to fulfill my promises as well as I can. In particular I shall utilize observations of 
phenomena, which I have taken not only from antiquity but also from our own 
times, and by which the theory of those motions is made more certain. 

[Earlier version of the beginning of V, 1 : 

15 The planets move in various ways in longitude and latitude, their variations being nonuniform 

and observable on both sides [of their uniform motions]. Therefore it was worth-while to unravel 
their mean and uniform motions, from which the variation in their nonuniformity can be ascertained. 
In order to determine the uniform motion, however, it is important to know the periods of the 
revolutions, from which it is inferred that a nonuniformity has returned [to a state] similar to 
20 a previous [state], just as I did with respect to the sun and moon [III, 13 ; IV, 3 ]. 

[Printed version: 

In Plato’s Timaeus these five planets are each named according to its aspect. 
Saturn is called “Phaenon”, as though you were to say “bright” or “visible”, 
for it is invisible less than the others, and emerges sooner after being blotted 
as out by the sun. Jupiter is called “Phaeton” from its brilliance. Mars is called 
“Pyrois” from its fiery splendor. Venus is sometimes called “Phosphorus”, 
sometimes “Hesperus”, that is, “Morning Star” and “Evening Star”, according 
as it shines in the morning or evening. Finally, Mercury is called “Stilbon”, 
on account of its twinkling and shimmering light. 

30 These bodies move in longitude and latitude with greater irregularity than 
does the moon. 

THE REVOLUTIONS AND MEAN MOTIONS Chapter 1 
[OF THE PLANETS] 

Two entirely different motions in longitude appear in them. One is caused 
35 by the earth’s aforementioned motion, and the other is each one’s own proper 
motion. I have decided without any impropriety to call the first one a par¬ 
allactic motion, since it is this which makes the stations, [resumptions of] di¬ 
rect motion, and retrogradations appear in all of them. These phenomena ap¬ 
pear, not because the planet, which always moves forward with its own motion, 
40 is erratic in this way, but because a sort of parallax is produced by the earth’s 
motion according as it differs in size from those spheres. 


227 



REVOLUTIONS 


Clearly, then, the true places of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars become visible 
to us only when they rise at sunset. This happens about the middle of their retro- 
gradations. For at that time they coincide with the straight line through the mean 
place of the sun [and earth], and are unaffected by that parallax. For Venus and 
Mercury, however, a different relation prevails. For when they are in conjunction 6 
with the sun, they are completely blotted out, and are visible only while executing 
their elongations to either side of the sun, so that they are never found without 
this parallax. Consequently each planet has its own individual parallactic revolu¬ 
tion, I mean, terrestrial motion in relation to the planet, which these two bodies 
perform mutually. 10 

[Deleted in the autograph: 

Combined in this way, the motions of both bodies display themselves interconnected, and they 
incorporate the simple motion of the earth (or you may say, of the sun), since throughout this entire 
work, and now above all, it must be remembered that whatever is said in the ordinary way about 
t he sun’s motion is always to be understood as referring to the earth.] 15 

I say that the motion in parallax is nothing but the difference by which the 
earth’s uniform motion exceeds their motion, as in the cases of Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars, or is exceeded by it, as in the cases of Venus and Mercury. But these 
parallactic periods are found to be nonuniform with an obvious irregularity. The 
ancients accordingly recognized that the motions of these planets were likewise ao 
nonuniform, and their circles had apsides to which their nonuniformity returned. 
They believed that the apsides possessed permanent places in the sphere of the 
fixed stars. This consideration opened the way to mastering the planets’ mean 
motions and uniform periods. For when they had a record of the place of a planet 
at a precise distance from the sun and a fixed star, and learned that after an 25 
interval of time the planet had arrived at the same place at a similar distance from 
the sun, the planet was seen to have passed through its entire irregularity and to 
have returned through all its aspects to its former relation with the earth. Thus 
by means of the intervening time they computed the number of whole uniform 
revolutions, and thereby the detailed motions of the planet. 30 

These revolutions were reported by Ptolemy [Syntaxis, IX, 3] in terms of 
solar years, as he states that he received them from Hipparchus. But he wants 
solar years to be understood as measured from an equinox or solstice. Such years, 
however, it has now become quite clear, are not entirely uniform. Therefore 
I shall use those which are measured by the fixed stars. By means of these years 36 
I have also redetermined the motions of these five planets with greater accuracy, 
in accordance with my findings that in our time they lacked something or were 
in excess, as follows. 

In what I have called the parallactic motion, the earth returns to Saturn 57 times 
in 59 of our solar years, plus 1 day, 6 day-minutes, and about 48 day-seconds; 40 
in that time the planet completes 2 revolutions plus 1 0 6' 6" in its own motion. 
Jupiter is passed by the earth 65 times in 71 solar years, minus 5 days, 45 day- 
minutes, 27 day-seconds; in that time the planet revolves 6 times minus 
5° 41'2 V*" in its own motion. For Mars the parallactic revolutions are 37 in 79 
solar years, 2 days, 27 day-minutes, 3 day-seconds; in that time the planet com- 45 
pletes 42 periods plus 2° 24' 56" in its own motion. Venus passes the moving earth 
5 times in 8 solar years minus 2 days, 26 day-minutes, 46 day-seconds; in this 
period it revolves around the sun 13 times minus 2° 24' 40". Finally in 46 solar 


228 



BOOK V CH. 1 


years, plus 34 day-minutes, 23 day-seconds. Mercury completes 145 parallactic 
revolutions, in which it overtakes the moving earth, with which it revolves around 
the sun, 191 times plus 31' and about 23". For each planet, therefore, one 
parallactic revolution takes, for: 


Saturn 

378 days 

5 day-minutes 

32 day-seconds 

11 

Jupiter 

398 

23 

2 

56 

Mars 

779 

56 

19 

7 

Venus 

583 

55 

17 

24 

Mercury 

115 

52 

42 

12 


10 When we convert the foregoing figures to the [360] degrees of a circle multiplied 

by 365, and then divide this product by the [given] number of days and fractions 
of days, we will have the annual motion for 


Saturn 347° 32' 2" 54'" 12"" 

Jupiter 329 25 8 15 6 

is Mat's 168 28 29 13 12 

Venus 225 1 48 54 30 

Mercury 53 56 46 54 40, after 3 revolutions. 

Of the above values, Vase is the daily motion for 


Saturn 

57' 

7" 

44'" 

O' 

Jupiter 

54 

9 

3 

49 

Mars 

27 

41 

40 

8 

Venus 

36 

59 

28 

35 

Mercury 3° 

6 

24 

7 

43 : 


as set forth in the following Tables, on the model of the Tables of the Mean 
26 Motions of the Sun and Moon [following III, 14 and IV, 4]. However, I 
thought it unnecessary to tabulate in this manner the planets’ proper motions. 
For these are obtained hy subtracting the tabulated motions from the sun’s 
mean motion, into which they enter as a component, as I said [earlier in V, 1], 
Nevertheless, if anybody is dissatisfied with these arrangements, he may make the 
so other table if he so wishes. For, the annual proper motion with respect to the 
sphere of the fixed stars is for 

Saturn 12° 12' 46" 12"' 52"" 

Jupiter 30 19 40 51 58 
Mars 191 16 19 53 52 


as But for Venus and Mercury, since [their annual proper motion] is not apparent 
to us, the sun’s motion is used and furnishes a method of determining and 
demonstrating their appearances, as indicated below. 


229 



REVOLUTIONS 


SATURN’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF 60 YEARS 









Christian Era 205° 49' 

Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 



B 

B 

B 



60° 

O 

B 

B 

B 

1 

5 

47 

32 

3 

9 


31 

5 

33 

33 

37 

59 

2 

5 

35 

4 

6 

19 


32 

5 

21 

5 

41 

9 

3 

5 

22 

36 

9 

29 


33 

5 

8 

37 

44 

19 

4 

5 


8 

12 

38 


34 

4 

56 

9 

47 

28 

5 

4 

57 


15 

48 


35 

4 

43 

41 

50 

38 

6 

4 

45 

12 

18 

58 


36 

4 

31 

13 

53 

48 

7 

4 

32 

44 

22 

7 


37 

4 

18 

45 

56 

57 

8 

4 


16 

25 

17 


38 

4 

6 

18 

0 

7 

9 

4 

7 

48 

28 

27 


39 

3 

53 

50 

3 

17 

10 

3 

55 


31 

36 


40 

3 

41 

22 

6 

26 

11 

3 

42 

52 

34 

46 


41 

3 

28 

54 

9 

36 

12 

3 


24 

37 

56 


42 

3 

16 

26 

12 

46 

13 

3 

17 

56 

41 

5 


43 

3 

3 

58 

15 

55 

14 

3 

5 

28 

44 

15 


44 

2 

51 

30 

19 

5 

15 

2 

53 


47 

25 


45 

2 

39 

2 

22 

15 

16 

2 


32 


34 


46 

2 

26 

34 

25 

24 

17 

2 

28 

4 

53 

44 


47 

2 

14 

6 

28 

34 

18 

2 

15 

36 

56 

54 


48 

2 

1 

38 

31 

44 

19 

2 

3 

9 


3 


49 

1 

49 


34 

53 

20 

1 


41 

3 

13 


50 

1 

36 


38 

3 

21 

1 

38 

13 

6 

23 


51 

1 

24 


41 

13 

22 

1 

25 

45 

9 

32 


52 

1 

11 


44 

22 

23 

1 

13 

17 

12 

42 


53 

0 

59 


47 

32 

24 

1 


49 

15 

52 


54 

0 

46 

50 

50 

42 

25 


48 

21 

19 

1 


55 

0 

34 

22 

53 

51 

26 


35 

53 

22 

11 


56 

0 

21 

54 

57 

1 

27 


23 

25 

25 

21 


57 

0 

9 

27 

0 

11 

28 



57 

28 



58 

5 

56 

59 

3 


29 

5 

58 

29 

31 

H 


59 

5 

44 

31 

6 


30 

5 

46 

1 

34 

□ 


60 

5 

32 

3 

9 

H 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


230 















BOOK V CH. 1 


SATURN’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF 60 DAYS, AND 
FRACTIONS OF DAYS 



Motion 


Days 

Motion j 


n 

■ 

ft 

m 

o 

O 

VO 

o 

/ 

ft 

m 

1 

0 

0 

57 

7 

44 


31 

0 

29 

30 

59 

46 

2 

0 

1 

54 

15 

28 


32 

0 

30 

28 

7 

30 

3 

0 

2 

51 

23 

12 


33 

0 

31 

25 

15 

14 

4 

0 

3 

48 

30 

56 


34 

0 

32 

22 

22 

58 

5 

0 

4 

45 

38 

40 


35 

0 

33 

19 

30 

42 

6 

0 

5 

42 

46 

24 


36 

0 

34 

16 

38 

26 

7 

0 

6 

39 

54 

8 


37 

0 

35 

13 

46 

1 

8 

0 

7 

37 

1 

52 


38 

0 

36 

10 

53 

55 

9 

0 

8 

34 

9 

36 


39 

0 

37 

8 

1 

39 

10 

0 

9 

31 

17 

20 


40 

0 

38 

5 

9 

23 

11 

0 

10 

28 

25 

4 


41 

0 

39 

2 

17 

7 

12 

0 

11 

25 

32 

49 


42 

0 

39 

59 

24 

51 

13 

0 

12 

22 

40 

33 


43 

0 

40 

56 

32 

35 

14 

0 

13 

19 

48 

17 


44 

0 

41 

53 

40 

19 

15 

0 

14 

16 

56 

1 


45 

0 

42 

50 

48 

3 

16 

0 

15 

14 

3 

45 


46 

0 

43 

47 

55 

47 

17 

0 

16 

11 

11 

29 


47 

0 

44 

45 

3 

31 

18 

0 

17 

8 

19 

13 


48 

0 

45 

42 

11 

16 

19 

0 

18 

5 

26 

57 


49 

0 

46 

39 

19 

0 

20 

0 

19 

2 

34 

41 


50 

0 

47 

36 

26 

44 

21 

0 

19 

59 

42 

25 


51 

0 

48 

33 

34 

28 

22 

0 

20 

56 

50 

9 


52 

0 

49 

30 

42 

12 

23 

0 

21 

53 

57 

53 


53 

0 

50 

27 

49 

56 

24 

0 

22 

51 

5 

38 


54 

0 

51 

24 

57 

40 

25 

0 

23 

48 

13 

22 


55 

0 

52 

22 

5 

24 

26 

0 

24 

45 

21 

6 


56 

0 

53 

19 

13 

8 

27 

0 

25 

42 

28 

50 


57 

0 

54 

16 

20 

52 

28 

0 

26 

39 

36 

34 


58 

0 

55 

13 

28 

36 

29 

0 

27 

36 

44 

18 


59 

0 

56 

10 

36 

20 

30 

0 

28 

33 

52 

2 


60 

0 

57 

7 

44 

5 


231 












REVOLUTIONS 


JUPITER’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF 60 YEARS 


Christian Era 98° 16' 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 

1 

Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion | 

60° 

O 

t 

tt 

- 

O 

O 

vO 

O 

/ 

It 

m 

1 

5 

29 

25 

8 

15 


31 

2 

11 

59 

15 

48 

2 

4 

58 

50 

16 

30 


32 

1 

41 

24 

24 

3 

3 

4 

28 

15 

24 

45 


33 

1 

10 

49 

32 

18 

4 

3 

57 

40 

33 

0 


34 

0 

40 

14 

40 

33 

5 

3 

27 

5 

41 

15 


35 

0 

9 

39 

48 

48 

6 

2 

56 

30 

49 

30 


36 

5 

39 

4 

57 

3 

7 

2 

25 

55 

57 

45 


37 

5 

8 

30 

5 

18 

8 

1 

55 

21 

6 

0 


38 

4 

37 

55 

13 

33 

9 

1 

24 

46 

14 

15 


39 

4 

7 

20 

21 

48 

10 

0 

54 

11 

22 

31 


40 

3 

36 

45 

30 

4 

11 

0 

23 

36 

30 

46 


41 

3 

6 

10 

38 

19 

12 

5 

53 

1 

39 

1 


42 

2 

35 

35 

46 

34 

13 

5 

22 

26 

47 

16 


43 

2 

5 

0 

54 

49 

14 

4 

51 

51 

55 

31 


44 

1 

34 

26 

3 

4 

15 

4 

21 

17 

3 

46 


45 

1 

3 

51 

11 

19 

16 

3 

50 

42 

12 

1 


46 

0 

33 

16 

19 

34 

17 

3 

20 

7 

20 

16 


47 

0 

2 

41 

27 

49 

18 

2 

49 

32 

28 

31 


48 

5 

32 

5 

36 

4 

19 

2 

18 

57 

36 

46 


49 

5 

1 

31 

44 

19 

20 

1 

48 

22 

45 

2 


50 

4 

30 

56 

52 

34 

21 

1 

17 

47 

53 

17 


51 

4 

0 

22 

0 

50 

22 

0 

47 

13 

1 

32 


52 

3 

29 

47 

9 

5 

23 

0 

16 

38 

9 

47 


53 

2 

59 

12 

17 

20 

24 

5 

46 

3 

18 

2 


54 

2 

28 

37 

25 

35 

25 

5 

15 

28 

26 

17 


55 

1 

58 

2 

33 

50 

26 

4 

44 

53 

34 

32 


56 

1 

27 

27 

42 

5 

27 

4 

14 

18 

42 

47 


57 

0 

56 

52 

50 

20 

28 

3 

43 

43 

51 

2 


58 

0 

26 

17 

58 

35 

29 

3 

13 

8 

59 

17 


59 

5 

55 

43 

6 

50 

30 

2 

42 

34 

7 

33 


60 

5 

25 

8 

15 

6 


232 








BOOK V CH. 1 


JUPITER’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF 60 DAYS, AND 
FRACTIONS OF DAYS 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

o 

/ 

0 

» 

60° 

0 

/ 

n 

m 

1 

■ 

0 

54 

9 

3 


31 

0 

27 

58 

40 

58 

1 

1 

1 

48 

18 

7 


32 

0 

28 

52 

50 

2 

H 

0 

n 

42 

27 

11 


33 

0 

29 

46 

59 

5 

KP 

n 

n 

36 

36 

15 


34 

0 

30 

41 

8 

9 

5 

0 


30 

45 

19 


35 

0 

31 

35 

17 

13 

6 

0 

5 

24 

54 

22 


36 

0 

32 

29 

26 

17 

7 

0 

6 

19 

3 

26 


37 

0 

33 

23 

35 

21 

8 

0 

7 

13 

12 

30 


38 

0 

34 

17 

44 

25 

9 

0 

8 

7 

21 

34 


39 

0 

35 

11 

53 

29 


0 

9 

1 

30 

38 


40 

0 

36 

6 

2 

32 

11 

0 

9 

55 

39 

41 


41 

0 

37 

0 

11 

36 

12 

0 


49 

48 

45 


42 

0 

37 

54 

20 

40 

13 

0 

11 

43 

57 

49 


43 

0 

38 

48 

29 

44 

14 

0 

12 

38 

6 

53 


44 

0 

39 

42 

38 

47 

15 

0 

13 

32 

15 

57 


45 

0 

40 

36 

47 

51 

16 

0 

14 

26 

25 

1 


46 

0 

41 

30 

56 

55 

17 

0 

15 

20 

34 

4 


47 

0 

42 

25 

5 

59 

18 

0 

16 

14 

43 

8 


48 

0 

43 

19 

15 


19 

0 

17 

8 

52 

12 


49 

0 

44 

13 

24 


20 

0 

18 

3 

1 

16 


50 

0 

45 

7 

33 

10 

21 

0 

18 

57 

10 

20 


51 

0 

46 

1 

42 

14 

22 

0 

19 

51 

19 

23 


52 

0 

46 

55 

51 

18 

23 

0 

20 

45 

28 

27 


53 

0 

47 

50 

0 

22 

24 

0 

21 

39 

37 

31 


54 

0 

48 

44 

9 

26 

25 

0 

22 

33 

46 

35 


55 

0 

49 

38 

18 

29 

26 

0 

23 

27 

55 

39 


56 

0 

50 

32 

27 

33 

27 

0 

24 

22 

4 

43 


57 

0 

51 

26 

36 

37 

28 

0 

25 

16 

13 

46 


58 

0 

52 

20 

45 

41 

29 

0 

26 

10 

22 

50 


59 

0 

53 

14 

54 

45 

30 

0 

27 

4 

31 

54 


60 

0 

54 

9 

3 

49 











































REVOLUTIONS 
























BOOK V CH. 1 


MARS’ PARALLACTIC MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF 60 DAYS, AND 
FRACTIONS OF DAYS 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

o 

/ 

// 

m 

60° 

o 

, 1 

n 

m 

1 

0 

0 

27 

41 

40 


31 

0 

14 

18 

31 

51 

2 

0 

0 

55 

23 

20 


32 

0 

14 

46 

13 

31 

3 

0 

1 

23 

5 

1 


33 

0 

15 

14 

55 

12 

4 

0 

1 

50 

46 

41 


34 

0 

15 

41 

36 

52 

5 

0 

2 

18 

28 

21 


35 

0 

16 

9 

18 

32 

6 

0 

2 

46 

10 

2 


36 

0 

16 

37 

0 

13 

7 

0 

3 

13 

51 

42 


37 

0 

17 

4 

41 

53 

8 

0 

3 

41 

33 

22 


38 

0 

17 

32 

23 

33 

9 

0 

4 

9 

15 

3 


39 

0 

18 

0 

5 

14 

10 

0 

4 

36 

56 

43 


40 

0 

18 

27 

46 

54 

11 

0 

5 

4 

38 

24 


41 

0 

18 

55 

28 

35 

12 

0 

5 

32 

20 

4 


42 

0 

19 

23 

10 

15 

13 

0 

6 

0 

1 

44 


43 

0 

19 

50 

51 

55 

14 

0 

6 

27 

43 

25 


44 

0 

20 

18 

33 

36 

15 

0 

6 

55 

25 

5 


45 

0 

20 

46 

15 

16 

16 

0 

7 

23 

6 

45 


46 

0 

21 

13 

56 

56 

17 

0 

7 

50 

48 

26 


47 

0 

21 

41 

38 

37 

18 

0 

8 

18 

30 

6 


48 

0 

22 

9 

20 

17 

19 

0 

8 

46 

11 

47 


49 

0 

22 

37 

1 

57 

20 

0 

9 

13 

53 

27 


50 

0 

23 

4 

43 

38 

21 

0 

9 

41 

35 

7 


51 

0 

23 

32 

25 

18 

22 

0 

10 

9 

16 

48 


52 

0 

24 

0 

6 

59 

23 

0 

10 

36 

58 

28 


53 

0 

24 

27 

48 

39 

24 

0 

11 

4 

40 

8 


54 

0 

24 

55 

30 

19 

25 

0 

11 

32 

21 

49 


55 

0 

25 

23 

12 

0 

26 

0 

12 

0 

3 

29 


56 

0 

25 

50 

53 

40 

27 

0 

12 

27 

45 

9 


57 

0 

26 

18 

35 

20 

28 

0 

12 

55 

26 

49 


58 

0 

26 

46 

17 

1 

29 

0 

13 

23 

8 

30 


59 

0 

27 

13 

58 

41 

30 

0 

13 

50 

50 

11 


60 

0 

27 

41 

40 

22 


235 




REVOLUTIONS 


VENUS’ PARALLACTIC MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF 60 YEARS 










Christian Era 126° 

45' 

Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 

60° 

O 

/ 

* 

m 


60° 

O 

t 

0 

m 

1 

3 

45 

1 

45 

3 


31 

2 

15 

54 

16 

53 

2 

1 

30 

3 

30 

7 


32 

0 

0 

56 

1 

57 

3 

5 

15 

5 

15 

11 


33 

3 

45 

57 

47 

1 

4 

3 

0 

7 

0 

14 


34 

1 

30 

59 

32 

4 

5 

0 

45 

8 

45 

18 


35 

5 

16 

1 

17 

8 

6 

4 

30 

10 

30 

22 


36 

3 

1 

3 

2 

12 

7 

2 

15 

12 

15 

25 


37 

0 

46 

4 

47 

15 

8 

0 

0 

14 

0 

29 


38 

4 

31 

6 

32 

19 

9 

3 

45 

15 

45 

33 


39 

2 

16 

8 

17 

23 

10 

1 

30 

17 

30 

36 


40 

0 

1 

10 

2 

26 

11 

5 

15 

19 

15 

40 


41 

3 

46 

11 

47 

30 

12 

3 

0 

21 

0 

44 


42 

1 

31 

13 

32 

34 

13 

0 

45 

22 

45 

47 


43 

5 

16 

15 

17 

37 

14 

4 

30 

24 

30 

51 


44 

3 

1 

17 

2 

41 

15 

2 

15 

26 

15 

55 


45 

0 

46 

18 

47 

45 

16 

0 

0 

28 

0 

58 


46 

4 

31 

20 

32 

48 

17 

3 

45 

29 

46 

2 


47 

2 

16 

22 

17 

52 

18 

1 

30 

31 

31 

6 


48 

0 

1 

24 

2 

56 

19 

5 

15 

33 

16 

9 


49 

3 

46 

25 

47 

59 

20 

3 

0 

35 

1 

13 


50 

1 

31 

27 

33 

3 

21 

0 

45 

36 

46 

17 


51 

5 

16 

29 

18 

7 

22 

4 

30 

38 

31 

20 


52 

3 

1 

31 

3 

10 

23 

2 

15 

40 

16 

24 


53 

0 

46 

32 

48 

14 

24 

0 

0 

42 

1 

28 


54 

4 

31 

34 

33 

18 

25 

3 

45 

43 

46 

31 


55 

2 

16 

36 

18 

21 

26 

1 

30 

45 

31 

35 


56 

0 

1 

38 

3 

25 

27 

5 

15 

47 

16 

39 


57 

3 

46 

39 

48 

29 

28 

3 

0 

49 

1 

42 


58 

1 

31 

41 

33 

32 

29 

0 

45 

50 

46 

46 


59 

5 

16 

43 

18 

36 

30 

4 

30 

1 .'"H 

52 

31 

50 


60 

3 

1 

45 

3 

40 


6 


10 


IS 


20 


25 


30 


35 


236 




















BOOK V CH. 1 


VENUS’ PARALLACTIC MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF 60 DAYS, AND 
FRACTIONS OF DAYS 


Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

n 

■ 

B 

B 

60° 

0 

/ 

m 

m 


0 

0 

36 

59 

28 


31 

0 

19 


43 

46 

mm 

0 

1 

13 

58 

57 


32 

0 

19 

43 

43 

14 

H 

0 

1 


58 

25 


33 

0 

20 

20 

42 

43 


0 

2 

27 

57 

54 


34 

0 

20 

57 

42 

11 

5 

0 

3 

4 

57 

22 


35 

0 

21 

34 

41 

40 

6 

0 

3 

41 

56 

51 


36 

0 

22 

11 

41 

9 

7 

0 

4 

18 

56 

20 


37 

0 

22 

48 

40 

37 

8 

0 

4 

55 

55 

48 


38 

0 

23 

25 

40 

6 

9 

0 

5 

32 

55 

17 


39 

0 

24 

2 

39 

34 

10 

0 

6 

9 

54 

45 


40 

0 

24 

39 

39 

3 

11 

0 

6 

46 

54 

14 


41 

0 

25 

16 

38 

31 

12 

0 

7 

23 

53 

43 


42 

0 

25 

53 

38 

0 

13 

0 

8 

0 

53 

11 


43 

0 

26 

30 

37 

29 

14 

0 

8 

37 

52 

40 


44 

0 

27 

7 

36 

57 

15 

0 


14 

52 

8 


45 

0 

27 

44 

36 

26 

16 

0 


51 

51 

37 


46 

0 

28 

21 

35 

54 

17 

0 

10 

28 

51 

5 


47 

0 

28 

58 

35 

23 

18 

0 

11 

5 

D 

34 


48 

0 

29 

35 

34 

52 

19 

0 

11 

42 

50 

2 


49 

0 

30 

12 

34 

20 

20 

0 

12 

19 

49 

31 


50 

0 

30 

49 

33 

49 

21 

0 

12 

56 

48 

59 


51 

0 

31 

26 

33 

17 

22 

0 

13 

33 

48 

28 


52 

0 

32 

3 

32 

46 

23 

0 

14 

10 

47 

57 


53 

0 

32 

40 

32 

14 

24 

0 

14 

47 

47 

26 


54 

m 

33 

17 

31 

43 

25 

0 

15 

24 

46 

54 


55 

m 

33 

54 

31 

12 

26 

0 

16 

1 

46 

23 


56 

0 

34 

31 

30 

40 

27 

0 

16 

38 

45 

51 


57 

0 

35 

8 

30 

9 

28 

0 

17 

15 

45 

20 


58 

D 

35 

45 

29 

37 

29 

0 

17 

52 

44 

48 


59 

0 

36 

22 

29 

6 

30 

0 

18 

29 

44 

17 


60 

0 

36 

59 

28 

35 
































































REVOLUTIONS 


MERCURY’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN YEARS AND PERIODS OF 60 YEARS 


Christian Era 46° 24' 


Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 



Egyp¬ 

tian 

Years 

Motion 


o 

/ 

// 

m 

o 

O 

VO 

o 

/ 

V 

m 

1 


53 

57 

23 

6 


31 

3 

52 

38 

56 

21 

2 

1 

47 

54 

46 

13 


32 

4 

46 

36 

19 

28 

3 

2 

41 

52 

9 

19 


33 

5 

40 

33 

42 

34 

4 

3 

35 

49 

32 

26 


34 

0 

34 

31 

5 

41 

5 

4 

29 

46 

55 

32 


35 

1 

28 

28 

28 

47 

6 

5 

23 

44 

18 

39 


36 

2 

22 

25 

51 

54 

7 

0 

17 

41 

41 

45 


37 

3 

16 

23 

15 

0 

8 

1 

11 

39 

4 

52 


38 

4 

10 

20 

38 

7 

9 

2 

5 

36 

27 

58 


39 

5 

4 

18 

1 

13 

10 

2 

59 

33 

51 

5 


40 

5 

58 

15 

24 

20 

11 

3 

53 

31 

14 

11 


41 

0 

52 

12 

47 

26 

12 

4 

47 

28 

37 

18 


42 

1 

46 

10 

10 

33 

13 

5 

41 

26 

0 

24 


43 

2 

40 

7 

33 

39 

14 

0 

35 

23 

23 

31 


44 

3 

34 

4 

56 

46 

15 

1 

29 

20 

46 

37 


45 

4 

28 

2 

19 

52 

16 

2 

23 

18 

9 

44 


46 

5 

21 

59 

42 

59 

17 

3 

17 

15 

32 

50 


47 

0 

15 

57 

6 

5 

18 

4 

11 

12 

55 

57 


48 

1 

9 

54 

29 

12 

19 

5 

5 

10 

19 

3 


49 

2 

3 

51 

52 

18 

20 

5 

59 

7 

42 

10 


50 

2 

57 

49 

15 

25 

21 

0 

53 

5 

5 

16 


51 

3 

51 

46 

38 

31 

22 

1 

47 

2 

28 

23 


52 

4 

45 

44 

1 

38 

23 

2 

40 

59 

51 

29 


53 

5 

39 

41 

24 

44 

24 

3 

34 

57 

14 

36 


54 

0 

33 

38 

47 

51 

25 

4 

28 

54 

37 

42 


55 

1 

27 

36 

10 

57 

26 

5 

22 

52 

0 

49 


56 

2 

21 

33 

34 

4 

27 

0 

16 

49 

23 

55 


57 

3 

15 

30 

57 

10 

25} 

1 

10 

46 

47 

2 


58 

4 

9 

28 

20 

17 

2 <J 

2 

4 

44 

10 

8 


59 

5 

3 

25 

43 

23 

30 

2 

58 

41 

33 

15 


60 

5 

57 

23 

6 

30 


238 









BOOK V CH. 1 


MERCURY’S PARALLACTIC MOTION IN DAYS, PERIODS OF 60 DAYS, AND 
FRACTIONS OF DAYS 


I 

Days 

Motion 


Days 

Motion 

60° 

n 

■ 

B 


60° 

O 

/ 


m 

1 

0 

3 

6 

24 

13 


31 

1 

36 

18 

31 

3 

2 

0 

6 

12 

48 

27 


32 

1 

39 

24 

55 

17 

3 

0 

9 

19 

12 

41 


33 

1 

42 

31 

19 

31 

4 

0 

12 

25 

36 

54 


34 

1 

45 

37 

43 

44 

5 

0 

15 

32 

1 

8 


35 

1 

48 

44 

7 

58 

6 

0 

18 

38 

25 

22 


36 

1 

51 

50 

32 

12 

7 

0 

21 

44 

49 

35 


37 

1 

54 

56 

56 

25 

8 

0 

24 

51 

13 

49 


38 

1 

58 

3 

20 

39 

9 

0 

27 

57 

38 

3 


39 

2 

1 

9 

44 

53 

10 

0 

31 

4 

2 

16 


40 

2 

4 

16 

9 

6 

11 

0 

34 

10 

26 

30 


41 

2 

7 

22 

33 

20 

12 

0 

37 

16 

50 

44 


42 

2 

10 

28 

57 

34 

13 

0 

40 

23 

14 

57 


43 

2 

13 

35- 

21 

47 

14 

0 

43 

29 

39 

11 


44 

2 

16 

41 

46 

1 

15 

0 

46 

36 

3 

25 


45 

2 

19 

48 

10 

15 

16 

0 

49 

42 

27 

38 


46 

2 

22 

54 

34 

28 

17 

0 

52 

48 

51 

52 


47 

2 

26 

0 

58 

42 

18 

0 

55 

55 

16 

6 


48 

2 

29 

7 

22 

56 

19 

0 

59 

1 

40 

19 


49 

2 

32 

13 

47 

9 

20 

1 

2 

8 

4 

33 


50 

2 

35 

20 

11 

23 

21 

1 

5 

14 

28 

47 


51 

2 

38 

26 

35 

37 

22 

1 

8 

20 

53 

0 


52 

2 

41 

32 

59 

50 

23 

1 

11 

27 

17 



53 

2 

44 

39 

24 

4 

24 

1 

14 

33 

41 



54 

2 

47 

45 

48 

18 

25 

1 

17 

40 

5 



55 

2 

50 

52 

12 

31 

26 

1 

20 

46 

29 

55 


56 

2 

53 

58 

36 

45 

27 

1 

23 

52 

54 

9 


57 

2 

57 

5 

0 

59 

28 

1 

26 

59 

18 

22 


58 

3 

0 

11 

25 

12 

29 

1 

30 

5 

42 

36 


59 

3 

3 

17 

49 

26 

30 

1 

33 

12 

6 

50 


60 

3 

6 

24 

13 

40 








































fcj t*1 


REVOLUTIONS 


THE PLANETS’ UNIFORM AND APPARENT Chapter 2 
MOTION, AS EXPLAINED BY THE THEORY 
OF THE ANCIENTS 



Their mean motions occur as set forth above. Now let me turn to their nonuni¬ 
form apparent motion. The ancient astronomers [for example, Ptolemy, Syntaxis, s 
IX, 5], who regarded the earth as stationary, imagined an eccentrepicycle for 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, as well as another eccentric, in relation to 
which the epicycle moved uniformly, and so did the planet on the epicycle. 

Thus, let AB be an eccentric circle, with its center at C. Let the diameter 
be ACB, on which the center of the earth is D, so that the apogee is in A, 10 
and the perigee in B. Bisect DC at E. With E as center, describe a second eccentric 
FG, equal to the first eccentric [AB]. Anywhere on FG take H as center, and 
describe epicycle IK. Through its center draw straight line IHKC, and likewise 
LHME. Let the eccentrics be understood to be inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, 
and the epicycle to the plane of the eccentric, on account of the latitudes displayed is 
by the planet. Here, however, to simplify the explanation, [let all these circles] 
lie in one plane. This whole plane, according to the ancient astronomers, to¬ 
gether with points E and C, moves around D, the center of the ecliptic, with 
the motion of the fixed stars. Through this [arrangement] they wish it to be 
understood that these points have unalterable places in the sphere of the fixed 20 
stars, while the epicycle also moves eastward on circle FHG but is regulated by 
line IHC, with reference to which the planet also revolves uniformly on epi¬ 
cycle IK. 

The motion on the epicycle, however, clearly should be uniform with respect 
to E, the center of its deferent, and the planet’s revolution should be uniform with 25 
respect to line LME. Here too, then, as they admit, a circular motion can be uni¬ 
form with respect to an extraneous center not its own, a concept of which Scipio 
in Cicero would hardly have dreamed. And now in the case of Mercury the same 
thing is permitted, and even more. But (in my opinion) I have already adequately 
refuted this idea in connection with the moon [IV, 2]. These and similar situations 30 
gave me the occasion to consider the motion of the earth and other ways of preserv¬ 
ing uniform motion and the principles of the science, as well as of making the 
computation of the apparent nonuniform motion more enduring. 


GENERAL EXPLANATION Chapter 3 

OF THE APPARENT NONUNIFORMITY 35 

CAUSED BY THE EARTH’S MOTION 

There are two reasons why a planet’s uniform motion appears nonuniform: 
the earth’s motion, and the planet’s own motion. I shall explain each of the nonuni¬ 
formities in general and separately with a visual demonstration, in order that they 
may be better distinguished from each other. I shall begin with the nonuniformity 10 
which is intermingled with them all on account of the earth’s motion, and I shall 
start with Venus and Mercury, which are enclosed within the earth’s circle. 

Let circle AB, eccentric to the sun, be described by the earth’s center in the 
annual revolution as set forth above [III, 15]. Let AB’s center be C. Now let us 


240 



BOOK V CH. 3 


assume that the planet has no irregularity other than that which it would have 
if we made it concentric with AB. Let the concentric be DE, either Venus’ or 
Mercury’s. On account of their latitude DE must be inclined to AB. But for the 
sake of an easier explanation, let them be conceived in the same plane. Put the 
5 earth in point A, from which draw lines of sight AFL and AGM, tangent to the 
planet’s circle at points F and G. Let ACB be a diameter common to both circles. 

Let both bodies, I mean, the earth and the planet, move in the same direction, 
that is, eastward, but let the planet be faster than the earth. Hence C and line ACB 
will appear to an observer traveling with A to move with the sun’s mean motion. 
10 On the other hand, on circle DFG, as though it were an epicycle, the planet will 
traverse arc FDG eastward in more time than the remaining arc GEF westward. 
In arc FDG it will add the entire angle FAG to the sun’s mean motion, while in 
arc GEF it will subtract the same angle. Therefore, where the planet’s sub¬ 
tractive motion, especially near perigee E, exceeds CP s additive motion, to the 
is extent of that excess it seems to [the observer in] A to retrograde, as happens in 
these planets. In their cases, line CE : line AE > A’s motion : planet’s motion, 
according to the theorems of Apollonius of Perga, as will be mentioned hereafter 
[V, 35]. But where the additive motion equals the subtractive (counteracting each 
other), the planet will seem stationary, all these aspects being in agreement with 
ao the phenomena. 

Therefore, if there were no other irregularity in the planet’s motion, as Apollo¬ 
nius thought, these constructions could be sufficient. But these planets’ greatest 
elongations from the sun’s mean place in the mornings and evenings, as indicated 
by angles FAE and GAE, are not found everywhere equal. Nor is either one 
as of these greatest elongations equal to the other, nor are their sums equal to each 
other. The inference is obvious that they do not move on circles concentric with 
the earth’s, but on certain other circles by which they produce a second inequality. 

The same conclusion is proved also for the three outer planets, Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars, which completely encircle the earth. Reproduce the earth’s circle from 
so the preceding diagram. Assume DE outside it and concentric with it in the same 
plane. On DE put the planet at any point D, from which draw straight lines DF 
and DG tangent to the earth’s circle at points F and G, and [from D also draw] 
DACBE, the diameter common [to both circles]. On DE, the line of the sun’s 
motion, the true place of the planet, when it rises at sunset and is closest to the 
35 earth, will obviously be visible (only to an observer at A). For when the earth is at 
the opposite point B, although the planet is on the same line, it will not be visible, 
having become blotted out on account of the sun’s closeness to C. But the earth’s 
travel exceeds the planet’s motion. Hence throughout the apogeal arc GBF it will 
appear to add the whole angle GDF to the planet’s motion, and to subtract it in 
40 the remaining arc FAG, but for a shorter time, FAG being a smaller arc. Where 
the earth’s subtractive motion exceeds the planet’s additive motion (especially 
around A), the planet will seem to be left behind by the earth and to move west¬ 
ward, and to stand still where the observer sees the least difference between 
the opposing motions. 

45 Thus all these phenomena, which the ancient astronomers sought [to explain] 
by means of an epicycle for each planet, happen on account of the single motion 
of the earth, as is again clear. Contrary to the view of Apollonius and the ancients, 
however, the planet’s motion is not found uniform, as is proclaimed by the earth’s 


241 



REVOLUTIONS 


irregular revolution with respect to the planet. Consequently the planets do not 
move on a concentric, but in another way, which I shall also explain next. 

IN WHAT WAYS DO THE PLANETS’ OWN Chapter 4 

MOTIONS APPEAR NONUNIFORM? 

Their own motions in longitude have almost the same pattern, with the 5 
exception of Mercury, which seems to differ from them. Hence those four will 
be discussed together, and a separate place reserved for Mercury. Whereas the 
ancients put a single motion on two eccentrics, as has been recalled [V, 2], I think 
that there are two uniform motions of which the apparent nonuniformity is com¬ 
posed: either an eccentreccentric or an epicyclepicycle or also a mixed eccentr- 10 
epicycle, which can produce the same nonuniformity, as I proved above in con¬ 
nection with the sun and moon [III, 20; IV, 3]. 

Thus, let AB be an eccentric circle, with center C. Let the diameter ACB, 
drawn through the planet’s higher and lower apse, be the line of the sun’s mean 
place. On ACB let D be the center of the earth’s circle. With the higher apse A 15 
as center, and radius = Vs of distance CD, describe epicyclet EF. In F, its perigee, 
place the planet. Let the epicyclet move eastward along the eccentric AB. Let the 
planet likewise move eastward on the epicyclet’s upper circumference, and west¬ 
ward on the rest of the circumference. Let the revolutions of both, I mean, the 
epicyclet and the planet, be equal to each other. It will therefore happen that 20 
with the epicyclet in the eccentric’s higher apse, and the planet on the contrary 
in the epicyclet’s perigee, when each of them has completed its semicircle, they 
change their relation to each other to the opposite. But at both quadratures midway 
between [the higher and lower apsides], each will be at its middle apse. Only 
in the former cases [higher and lower apsides], will the epicyclet’s diameter lie 25 
on the line AB. Moreover, at the midpoints [between the higher and lower ap¬ 
sides, the epicyclet’s diameter] will be perpendicular to AB. Elsewhere it always 
swings towards and away [from AB], All these phenomena are easily understood 
from the sequence of the motions. 

Hence it will also be demonstrated that by this composite motion the planet 30 
does not describe a perfect circle. [This departure from perfect circularity] is in 
conformity with the thinking of the ancient astronomers, yet the difference is 
imperceptible. Reproducing the same epicyclet, let it be KL, with center B. 
Taking AG as a quadrant of the [eccentric] circle, with G as center draw epicyclet 
HI. Trisecting CD, let V 3 CD = CM = GI. Join GC and IM, which intersect 35 
each other in Q. Hence, arc AG is similar to arc HI by construction. ACG being 
a right angle, HGI is therefore also a right angle. Furthermore, the vertical angles 
at Q are likewise equal. Consequently triangles GIQ and QCM are equiangular. 

But their corresponding sides are also equal, since by hypothesis base GI = base 
CM. Side QI > GQ, just as also QM > QC. Therefore, the whole of IQM > 40 
the whole of GQC. But FM — ML — AC — CG. Then, the circle drawn around 
M as center through points F and L — circle AB, and will intersect line IM. 
The demonstration will proceed in the same way in the other quadrant opposite 
[AG]. Therefore, the uniform motions of the epicyclet on the eccentric, and of 
the planet on the epicycle, cause the planet to describe not a perfect, but an almost 45 
perfect, circle. Q. E. D. 


242 



BOOK V CH. 4 



Now around D as center describe NO as the earth’s annual circle. Draw IDR, 
and also PDS parallel to CG. Then IDR will be the straight line of the planet’s 
true motion, and GC of its mean and uniform motion. In R the earth will be at 
its true greatest distance from the planet, and in S at its mean [greatest distance], 
s Therefore, angle RDS or IDP is the difference between these two, the uniform 
and apparent motions, that is, between angles ACG and CDI. But suppose that 
instead of eccentric AB, we took as its equal a concentric with D as center. This 
concentric would serve as deferent for an epicyclet, whose radius = CD. On this 
[first epicyclet] there would also be a second epicyclet, whose diameter = % CD. 
10 Let the first epicycle move eastward, and the second in the opposite direction with 
equal speed. Finally, on the second epicycle let the planet travel at twice this 
speed. The same results will follow as those described above, and they will not 
differ much from the lunar phenomena, or even [from those obtained] by any of 
the aforementioned arrangements. 

is But here I have chosen an eccentrepicycle. For though [the distance] between 
the sun and C always remains the same, D is meanwhile found to have shifted, 
as was shown in the solar phenomena [III, 20]. This shift is not accompanied 
equally by the others. Hence these must undergo an irregularity which, although 
slight, is nevertheless perceptible in Mars and Venus, as will be seen in the proper 
20 places [V, 16, 22]. 

Therefore, these hypotheses suffice for the phenomena, as I shall presently 
prove from observations. I shall do so first for Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, for 


243 



REVOLUTIONS 


which the principal and hardest task is to find the place of the apogee and the 
distance CD, since from these data the rest is easily demonstrated. For these 
[three planets] I shall use practically the same procedure as I employed for the 
moon [IV, 5], namely, a comparison of three ancient oppositions to the sun with 
the same number of modem oppositions. These are called “acronycal risings” by 5 
the Greeks, and by us [risings and settings] “at the ends of the night”. At those 
times the planet is in opposition to the sun and meets the straight line of the sun’s 
mean motion, where it sloughs off the entire inequality imposed on it by the 
earth’s motion. These positions are obtained instrumentally by observing with 
the astrolabe, as was explained above [II, 14], and also by applying the compu- 10 
tations for the sun, until the planet has clearly arrived opposite it. 

DERIVATIONS OF SATURN’S MOTION Chapter 5 

Let us begin with Saturn by taking three oppositions observed long ago by 
Ptolemy [Synraxts, XI, 5]. The first of these occurred at the 1st hour of night on 
the 7th day of the month Pachon in Hadrian’s 11th year. This was 26 March 15 
127 C.E., 17 uniform hours after midnight, when the computation is reduced to the 
meridian of Cracow, which we have found to be 1 hour away from Alexan-dria. 
In the sphere of the fixed stars, to which we refer all these data for the origin 
of uniform motion, the planet’s place was located at about 174° 40'. For at that 
time the sun in its simple motion was opposite [Saturn] at 354° 40' so [-180° 
= 174° 40'], the horn of the Ram being taken as the zero point. 

The second opposition happened on the 18th day of the Egyptian month 
Epiphi in Hadrian’s 17th year. This was 15 uniform hours after midnight on the 3rd 
day before the Nones of June in the Roman calendar [=3 June] 133 C.E. Ptolemy 
finds the planet at 243° 3', while the sun in its mean motion was at 63° 3' 25 [+180° 
= 243° 3'] at 15 hours after midnight. 

Then he reported the third opposition as taking place on the 24th day of the 
Egyptian month Mesori in Hadrian’s 20th year. This was 8 July 136 C.E., 11 
hours after midnight, similarly reduced to the Cracow meridian. [The planet was] 
at 277° 37', while the sun in its mean motion was at 97° 37' [+180° = 30 277° 
37']. 

In the first interval, therefore, there are 6 years, 70 days, 55 day-minutes, 

during which the planet apparently moved 68° 23' [= 243° 3-174° 40'], while 
the earth’s mean motion away from the planet - this is the motion in parallax - 

was 352° 44'. Hence the 7° 16' missing from the circle [= 360°- 352° 44'] are 35 
added to make the planet’s mean motion 75° 39' [=7° 16'+ 68° 23']. In the 
second interval there are 3 Egyptian years, 35 days, 50 day-minutes; the planet’s 
apparent motion is 34° 34' [= 277° 37'-243° 3'], and the motion in parallax is 
356° 43'. The remaining 3° 17' of a circle [= 360°-356° 43'] are added to the plan-et’s 
apparent motion, so that there are 37° 51' in its mean motion [ = 3° 40 
17'+34° 34']. 

Having reviewed these data, draw the planet’s eccentric circle ABC, with 
center D, and diameter FDG, on which E is the center of the earth’s grand circle. 
Let A be the epicyclet’s center at the first opposition, B at the second, and C at 
the third. Around these [points as centers], describe this epicyclet, with radius = 45 

V 3 DE. Join centers A, B, and C with D and E by straight lines intersecting the 


244 



BOOK V CH. 5 



epicyclet’s circumference in points K, L, and M. Take arc KN similar to AF, 
LO to BF, and MP to FBC. Join EN, EO, and EP. Then by [the preceding] 
computation arc AB = 75° 39', BC = 37° 5T, NEO =the angle of apparent 
motion = 68° 23', and angle OEP = 34° 34'. 

6 The first task is to investigate the places of the higher and lower apsides, that 
is, of F and G, as well as DE, the distance between the centers [of the planet’s 
eccentric and the earth’s grand circle]. Without this information there is no way 
of distinguishing between the uniform and apparent motions. But here too we 
encounter a difficulty no less than Ptolemy’s in this discussion. For if the given 
10 angle NEO enclosed the given arc AB , and OEP included BC, the path would 
now be open to derive what we are seeking. However, the known arc AB 
subtends the unknown angle AEB, and similarly angle BEC lies unknown beneath 
the known arc BC. Yet both [AEB and BEC] must be known. But angles AEN, 
BEO, and CEP, which indicate the differences [between the apparent and mean 
is motions], cannot be ascertained before the determination of arcs AF, FB, and 
FBC, which are similar to the arcs of the epicyclet. These values are so inter¬ 
connected that they are unknown or known at the same time. Hence, lacking 
the means of deriving them, astronomers relied on a posteriori arguments and 
detours to what could not be reached directly and a priori, as happens in the 
ao squaring of the circle and many other problems. Thus in this investigation 
Ptolemy elaborated a verbose treatment and an enormous mass of calculations. 
To review these words and numbers is, in my judgement, burdensome and un¬ 
necessary, since in my discussion, which follows, I shall adopt practically the 
same procedure. 


245 


REVOLUTIONS 


Reviewing his calculations, in the end [Syntaxis, XI, 5] he found arc AF = 
57° 1', FB = 18° 37', FBC = 56 V 2 °, and DE — the distance between the 
centers = 6 p 50', whereof DF = 60 p . But with DF = 10,000 on our numeri¬ 
cal scale, DE = 1139. Of this total, I have accepted 3 / 4 for DE = 854, and I have 
assigned the remaining 1 / i = 285 to the epicyclet. Assuming these values and 5 
borrowing them for my hypothesis, I shall show that they agree with the observed 
phenomena. 

In the first opposition there are given in triangle ADE side AD — 10,000 p , 
DE = 854 p , and angle ADE as the supplement of ADF [= 57° 1']. From these 
values, in accordance with the theorems on Plane Triangles, AE = 10,489 p 10 
of the same units, while the remaining angles DEA = 53° 6', and DAE = 3° 55', 
when 4 right angles = 360°. But angle KAN = ADF = 57° T. Therefore the 
whole angle NAE = 60° 56' [= 57° l'+3° 55']. Consequently in triangle NAE 
two sides are given: AE = 10,489 p , and NA = 285 p , whereof AD = 10,000 p , 
as well as angle NAE. Angle AEN will also be given = 1 0 22', and the remaining 15 
angle NED [=AED—AEN] = 51° 44' [= 53° 6'- 1°22'], whereof 4 right an¬ 
gles = 360°. 

The situation is similar in the second opposition. For in triangle BDE, side 
DE is given = 854 p , whereof BD = 10,000 p ; and angle BDE = supplement 
of BDF = 161° 22' [= 180°- 18° 38']. The angles and sides of this triangle too 20 
will be given: side BE — 10,812 p , whereof BD = 10,000 p ; angle DBE = 1° 27'; 
and the remaining angle BED = 17° IT [= 180°-(161° 22'+1° 27')]. But angle 
OBL = BDF = 18° 38'. Therefore the whole angle EBO [= DBE+OBL] = 20° 

5' [= 18°38'+1° 27']. In triangle EBO, accordingly, besides angle EBO two 
sides are given: BE = 10,812 p and BO = 285 p . In accordance with the the- 25 
orems on Plane Triangles, the remaining angle BEO is given = 32'. Hence OED = 
the remainder [when BEO is subtracted from BED] = 16° 39' [= 17° 11'—32']. 

Likewise in the third opposition, in triangle CDE, as before, two sides, CD 
and DE, are given, as well as angle CDE [the supplement of] 56° 29' [= 123° 31']. 

In accordance with Theorem IV on Plane Triangles, base CE is given = 10,512 p , 30 
whereof CE = 10,000 p ; angle DCE = 3° 53'; and the remaining angle CED = 

52° 36' [= 180°- (3° 53'+123° 31')]. Therefore the whole angle ECP = 60° 22' 

[= 3° 53'+56°29'], with 4 right angles =360°. Then also in triangle ECP 
two sides are given, besides angle ECP. Angle CEP is also given = 1 0 22'. Hence 
the remaining angle PED [= CED-CEP] = 51° 14' [= 52° 36'- 1 ° 22']. Ac- 35 
cordingly the whole angle OEN [= NED-\-BED—BEO] of the apparent motion 
amounts to 68° 23' [= 51°44'+17° 11'- 32'], and OEP to 34° 35' [= PED- 
OED = 51° 14'-16° 39'], in agreement with the observations. F, the place of 
the eccentric’s higher apse, is 226° 20' from the head of the Ram. To this 
figure add 6° 40' for the precession of the vernal equinox as it was then, 40 
and the apse reaches 23° within the Scorpion, in conformity with Ptolemy’s 
conclusion [Syntaxis, XI, 5]. For the planet’s apparent place in this third opposition 
(as was mentioned) =277° 37'. From this figure subtract 51° 14' = PEF, the 
angle of the apparent motion, as has been shown, and the remainder is the place 
of the eccentric’s higher apse in 226° 23'. 45 

Now also describe the earth’s annual circle RST, which will intersect line PE 
in point R. Draw diameter SET parallel to CD, the line of the planet’s mean 
motion. Therefore angle SED = CDF. Hence angle SER, the difference andpros- 


246 



BOOK V CH. 5-6 



thaphaeresis between the apparent and mean motions, that is, between angles 
CDF and PED, = 5°16'[=56 o 30'-51°14']. Between the mean and true motions 
in parallax the difference is the same. When this is subtracted from a semicircle, 
it leaves arc RT = 174° 44' [= 180°-5° 16'] as the uniform motion in parallax 
6 from point T, the assumed origin, that is, from the mean conjunction of the sun 
and planet until this third "end of the night” or true opposition of the earth and 
planet. 

Therefore we now have at the hour of this [third] observation, namely, in 
Hadrian’s regnal year 20 = 136 C.E., 8 July, 11 hours after midnight, Saturn’s io 
anomalous motion from its eccentric’s higher apse = 56 7s °> and the mean 
motion in parallax = 174° 44'. The establishment of these values will be use¬ 
ful for what follows. 

THREE OTHER MORE RECENTLY OBSERVED Chapter 6 
OPPOSITIONS OF SATURN 

is The computation of Saturn’s motion as reported by Ptolemy differs, however, 
not a little from our times, nor could it be understood at once where the error lay 
hidden. Hence I was compelled to perform new observations, from which once 
more I took three oppositions of Saturn. The first occurred 1 75 hours before 
midnight on 5 May 1514 C.E., when Saturn was found at 205° 24'. The second so 
happened at noon on 13 July 1520 C.E., [with Saturn] at 273° 25'. The third took 
place at 6 2 /b hours after midnight on 10 October 1527 C.E., when Saturn appeared 
at 7' east of the Ram’s horn. Then between the first and second oppositions 


247 


there are 6 Egyptian years, 70 days, 33 day-minutes, during which Saturn’s 

apparent motion is 68° 1' [= 273° 25 - 205° 24']. From the second opposition to 
the third there are 7 Egyptian years, 89 days, 46 day-minutes, and the planet’s 

apparent motion is 86° 42' [= 360° 7' -273° 25']. In the first interval its mean 
motion is 75° 39'; and in the second interval, 88° 29'. Therefore, in seeking the 5 
higher apse and eccentricity we must operate at first according to Ptolemy’s 
procedure [Syntaxis, X, 7], as if the planet moved on a simple eccentric. Although 
this arrangement is not adequate, nevertheless by conforming to it we shall 
more easily reach the truth. 

Hence take ABC as if it were the circle on which the planet moves uniformly. 10 
Let the first opposition be at point A, the second at B, and the third at C. Within 
ABC let the center of the earth’s circle be D. Joining AD, BD, and CD, extend 
any one of them in a straight line to the opposite side of the circumference, for 
instance, CDE. Join AE and BE. Then angle BDC is given = 86° 42'. Hence 
with 2 central right angles = 180°, supplementary angle BDE = 93° 18' [= 180°- is 
86° 42'], but 186° 36' with 2 right angles = 360°. Angle BED, intercepting arc 
BC, = 88 ° 29'. Hence [in triangle BDE] the remaining angle DBE = 84 ° 55' [ =360 ° 
-(186 ° 36' +88 ° 29')]. Then in triangle BDE, the angles being given, the sides are 
obtained from the Table [of the Straight Lines Subtended in a Circle]: BE = 19,953 p , 
and DE = 13,50 l p , whereof the diameter of the circle circumscribing the triangle = 20 
20,000 p . Similarly in triangle ADE, since ADC is given = 154° 43' [= 68° 1' + 
86° 42'] with 2 right angles = 180°, supplementary angle ADE = 25° 17' [ = 
180°-154° 43']. But with 2 right angles = 360°, ADE = 50° 34'. In those units 
angle AED, intercepting arc ABC, = 164° 8' [ = 75° 39' + 88° 29'], and the 
remaining angle DAE = 145° 18' [= 360°-(50° 34'+164° 8')]. Therefore 25 the 
sides too are known: DE = 19,090 p , and AE = 8542 p , whereof the diameter of the 
circle circumscribed around triangle ADE = 20,000 p . But in units whereof DE was 
given = 13,501 p and BE = 19,953 p , AE will be 6041 p . Then in triangle ABE also, 
these two sides, BE and EA, are given, as well as angle AEB, inter-cepting arc 

AB, = 75° 39'. Hence, in accordance with the theorems on Plane so Triangles, 
AB = 15,647 p , whereof BE = 19,968 p . But as AB, subtending a given arc, = 
12,266 p whereof the eccentric’s diameter = 20,000 p , EB = 15,664 p , and 
DE = 10,599 p . Through chord BE, then, arc BAE is given = 103° 7'. 
Therefore the whole of EABC = 191° 36' [= 103° 7'+88° 29']. CE, the rest of 
the circle, = 168° 24'; hence its chord CDE = 19,898 p ; and CD, the remainder 35 
[when DE = 10,599 is subtracted from CDE], = 9299 p . 

Now if CDE were the eccentric’s diameter, obviously the places of the higher 
and lower apse would lie on it, and the distance between the centers [of the 
eccentric and the earth’s grand circle] would be known. But because segment 
EABC is larger [than a semicircle], the center [of the eccentric] will fall with- 40 
in it. Let it be F. Through it and D draw diameter GFDH, and FKL per¬ 
pendicular to CDE. 

Gearly, rectangle CD x DE = rectangle GD x DH. But rectangle GD x DH + 
(FD) 2 = (V 2 GZ)//) 2 = (FDH) 1 . Therefore (% diameter) 2 - rectangle GD x DH or 
rectangle CD xDE = (FD) 2 . Then FD will be given as a length = 1200 p , whereof «s 
radius GF = 10,000 p . But in units whereof FG = 60 p , FD = 7 p 12', slightly 
different from Ptolemy [Syntaxis, XI, 6: 6 p 50']. But CDK = 9949 p = x / a of 
the whole of CDE [= 19,898 p ]. CD has been shown = 9299 p . Therefore the 


BOOK V CH. 6 


remainder DK = 650 p [= 9949 p - 9299 p ], whereof GF is assumed = 10,000 p , 
and FD = 1200 p . But in units whereof FD = 10 3 000 p 3 DK = 541 l p = half 
the chord subtending twice the angle DFK. The angle [DFK] = 32° 45', with 
4 right angles = 360°. As an angle at the center of the circle, it subtends a similar 
s quantity on arc HL. But the whole of CHL = 1 / 2 CLE [168° 24'] s 84° 13'. 
Therefore CH, the remainder [when HL = 32° 45' is subtracted from CHL = 
84° 13'], extending from the third opposition to the perigee = 51 0 28'. Subtract 
this figure from the semicircle, and the remaining arc CBG = 128° 32', ex¬ 
tending from the higher apse to the third opposition. Since arc CB = 88° 29', 
io the remainder BG [when CB is subtracted from CBG = 128° 32'] = 40° 3', 
extending from the higher apse to the second opposition. Then the following 
arc BGA = 75° 39' furnishes AG, which extends from the first opposition to 
apogee G, = 35° 36' [= 75° 39' -40° 3']. 

Now let ABC be a circle, with diameter FDEG, center D, apogee F, perigee 
ib G, arc AF = 35° 36', FB = 40° 3', and FBC = 128° 32'. Of the previously 
demonstrated distance [1200 p ] between the centers [of Saturn’s eccentric and the 
earth’s grand circle], take 3 / 4 for DE = 900 p . With the remaining V 4 = 300 p , 
whereof radius FD [of Saturn’s eccentric] = 10,000 p , as radius, describe an epi- 
cyclet around A, B, and C as centers. Complete the diagram in accordance with 
20 the assumed conditions. 

If we wish to derive Saturn’s observed places from the foregoing arrangements 
by the method explained above and soon to be repeated, we shall find some discrep¬ 
ancies. To speak briefly, lest I overburden the reader and appear to have worked 


F 



249 


REVOLUTIONS 


harder in showing bypaths than in indicating the right road forthwith, the foregoing 
data must lead through the solution of the triangles to angle NEO = 67° 35' 
and the other angle OEM = 87° 12 '. The latter is Va° bigger than the apparent 
[angle = 86 ° 42'], and the former is 26' smaller [than 68 ° 1']. We find mutual 
agreement only by advancing the apogee a little [3° 14'] and setting AF = 38° 50' 5 
[instead of 35° 36'], and then arc FB = 36° 49' [= 40° 3'-3° 14']; FBC = 
125° 18' [= 128° 32'-3° 14']; DE, the distance between the centers = 854 p 
[instead of 900 p ]; and the epicyclet’s radius = 285 p [instead of 300 p ], whereof 
ED = 10,000 p . These figures nearly agree with Ptolemy, whose values were 
set forth above [V, 5]. 10 

The consistency of the above data with the phenomena and the three observed 
oppositions will become clear. For in the first opposition, in triangle ADE side 
DE is given = 854 p , whereof AD = 10,000 p . Angle ADE = 141 °10', and to¬ 
gether with ADF = [38° 50'] makes 2 right angles at the center. From the fore¬ 
going information the remaining side AE is shown = 10,679 p , whereof radius ib 
FD = 10,000 p . The remaining angles DAE =2° 52', and DEA =35° 58'. 
Similarly in triangle AEN, since KAN = ADF [= 38° 50'], the whole of 
EAN = 41° 42' [= DAE+KAN = 2 ° 52'+38° 50'], and side AW = 285 p , where¬ 
of AE = 10,679 p . Angle AEN will be shown = 1°3'. But the whole of DEA 
consists of 35° 58'. Hence DEN, the remainder [when AEN is subtracted from 20 
DEA], will be 34° 55' [= 35° 58'- 1° 3']. 

Likewise in the second opposition, triangle BED has two sides given (for 
DE = 854 p , whereof BD = 10,000 p ) as well as angle BDE [= 180°-(BD.F = 
36°49') = 143°11']. Therefore BE = 10,697 p , angle DBE = 2° 45', and the 
remaining angle BED = 34° 4'. But LBO = BDF [= 36° 49']. Therefore the as 
whole of EBO = 39° 34' at the center [= DBO+DBE = 36° 49'+2° 45']. Its 
enclosing sides are given: BO = 285 p , and BE = 10,697 p . From this information 
BEO is shown = 59'. When this value is subtracted from angle BED [= 34° 4'], 
the remainder OED = 33° 5'. But it has already been shown in the first op¬ 
position that angle DEN = 34° 55'. Therefore the whole angle OEN [= DEN+ 30 
OED] = 68° [= 34°55'+33°5']. It revealed the distance of the first opposition 
from the second, in agreement with the observations [= 68T]. 

A similar demonstration will apply to the third opposition. In triangle CDE 
angle CDE is given = 54°42' [= 180°- (FDC = 125° 18')], as well as sides CD and 
DE previously established [= 10,000; 854]. From this information the third side 35 
EC is shown = 9532 p , and the remaining angles CED = 121° 5' and DCF = 4° 13'. 
Therefore the whole of PCE = 129° 31' [= 4° 13' + 125° 18']. Furthermore, in 
triangle EPC two sides, PC and CE, are given [= 285; 9532] as well as angle 
PCE [= 129°31']. From this information anglePBC is shown = 1° 18'. When this 
figure is subtracted from CED [= 121° 5'], it will leave as a remainder angle « 
PED = 119° 47', the distance from the eccentric’s higher apse to the planet’s 
place in the third opposition. It has been shown, however, that in the second 
opposition there were 33° 5' [from the eccentric’s higher apse to the planet’s 
place]. Therefore, between Saturn’s second and third oppositions there remain 
86°42' [= 119°47-33°5']. This figure too is recognized to be in agreement « 
with the observations. Saturn’s place, however, was found by observation to be 
at that time 8 ' east of the Ram’s first star, accepted as the zero point. The distance 
from Saturn’s place to the eccentric’s lower apse has been shown to be 60° 13' 


250 



BOOK V CH. 6-7 



[= 180°-119° 47']. Therefore the lower apse was at about 60 V 3 ° [= 60° 13'+8'], 
and the place of the higher apse diametrically opposite at 240 V 3 °. 

Now describe the earth’s grand circle RST, with center E. Draw its diameter 
SET parallel to CD, the line of the [planet’s] mean motion (by making angle 
6 FDC — DES ). Then the earth and our place of observation will be on line PE, 
say, at point R. Angle PES [= EMD] or arc RS = the difference between 
angle FDC and DEP = the difference between the [planet’s] uniform and appar¬ 
ent motions, has been shown = 5° 31' [(CES = DCE)-\-PEC = 4°13'+1°18']. 
When this figure is subtracted from the semicircle, the remainder, arc RT, = 
10 174° 29' = the planet’s distance from the grand circle’s apogee T = the sun’s 
mean place. Thus we have the demonstration that at 6 2 / 5 hours after midnight 
on 10 October 1527 C.E., Saturn’s motion in anomaly from the eccentric’s 
higher apse = 125° 18'; the motion in parallax = 174° 29'; and the place of the 
higher apse = 240° 21' from the first star of the Ram in the sphere of the fixed 
15 stars. 

ANALYSIS OF SATURN’S MOTION Chapter 7 

At the time of the last of Ptolemy’s three observations, it has been shown [V, 5], 
Saturn’s motion in parallax was at 174° 44', and the place of its eccentric’s higher 
apse was 226° 23' from the beginning of the constellation Ram. Therefore, during 
20 the time intervening between the two observations [Ptolemy’s last and Copernicus’ 
last], it is clear, Saturn completed 1344 revolutions of its uniform motion in parallax 
minus y 4 °. From 1 hour before noon on the 24th day of the Egyptian month 


251 



Mesori in Hadrian’s year 20, until the later observation at 6 o’clock on 10 October 
1527 C.E., there are 1392 Egyptian years, 75 days, 48 day-minutes. For this 
time, furthermore, if we wish to obtain the motion from the Table [of Saturn’s 

Parallactic Motion], we shall similarly find 5x60° plus 59° 48' beyond 1343 
revolutions of the parallax. Therefore, what was asserted [in V, 1] about Saturn’s 5 
mean motions is correct. 

In that [same] interval, moreover, the sun’s simple motion is 82° 30'. From 
this figure subtract 359 ° 45', and for Saturn’s mean motion the remainder is 
82° 45'. This value has now accumulated in Saturn’s 47th [sidereal] revolution, 
in agreement with the computation. Meanwhile the place of the eccentric’s higher i0 

apse has also advanced 13° 58' [= 240° 21' — 226 ° 23'] in the sphere of the fixed 
stars. Ptolemy believed that the apse was fixed in the same way [as the stars], 

but now it is evident that the apse moves about 1 ° in 100 years. 


DETERMINING SATURN’S PLACES Chapter 8 

From the beginning of the Christian era to Ptolemy’s observation at 1 hour i 5 
before noon on the 24th day of the month Mesori in Hadrian’s year 20, there are 
135 Egyptian years, 222 days, 27 day-minutes. During that time Saturn’s motion in 

parallax is 328 ° 55'. When this figure is subtracted from 174° 44', the remainder 205° 
49' gives the extent of the distance of the sun’s mean place from Saturn’s 
mean place, and this is the latter’s motion in parallax at midnight preceding 1 Janu- ao 
ary [1 C.E.] The motion in 775 Egyptian years, 12 1 / 2 days, from the 1st Olympiad to 
this place [at the beginning of the Christian era] includes, in addition to complete 
revolutions, 70° 55'. When this figure is subtracted from 205° 49', the remainder 
134° 54' marks the beginning of the Olympiads at noon on the first day of the 
month Hecatombaeon. From that place, after 451 years, 247 days, there are, in as 

addition to complete revolutions, 13° 7'. When this figure is added to the previous 
value [134° 54'], the sum gives 148° 1' for the place of Alexander the Great at 
noon on the first day of the Egyptian month Thoth. For Caesar, in 278 years, 

118 Vg days, the motion is 247 ° 20', making the place 35 ° 21' at midnight preceding 
1 January [45 B. C.] so 

SATURN’S PARALLAXES ARISING FROM THE Chapter 9 
EARTH’S ANNUAL REVOLUTION, AND 
SATURN’S DISTANCE [FROM THE EARTH] 

Saturn’s uniform and apparent motions in longitude are set forth in the forego¬ 
ing manner. For, the other phenomena to which it is subject are parallaxes, as I 35 
have called them [V, 1], arising from the earth’s annual orbit. For just as the earth’s 
size as compared with its distance from the moon creates parallaxes, so also the 
orbit in which it revolves annually has to produce parallaxes in the five planets. 
But because of the orbit’s size the planetary parallaxes are far more conspicuous. 
These parallaxes cannot be ascertained, however, unless the planet’s altitude is 40 
known previously. It is possible, nevertheless, to obtain the altitude from any 
observation of the parallax. 

I made such an observation of Saturn at 5 uniform hours after midnight on 


252 



BOOK V CH. 9 


24 February 1514 C.E. Saturn was seen in a straight line with stars in the Scor¬ 
pion’s forehead, that is, the second and third [stars in that constellation], which 

have the same longitude, 209° in the sphere of the fixed stars. Through them, 
accordingly, Saturn’s place was known. From the beginning of the Christian era 
5 until this hour there are 1514 Egyptian years, 67 days, 13 day-minutes. Hence 
the sun’s mean place was computed to be 315° 41'; Saturn’s parallactic anomaly, 
116° 31'; and therefore Saturn’s mean place was 199° 10', and the place of the 
eccentric’s higher apse was about 240 1 I Z °. 

Now, in accordance with the previous model, let ABC be the eccentric, with 
io its center at D. On its diameter BDC let B be the apogee, C the perigee, and E 
the center of the earth’s orbit. Join AD and AE. With A as center, and radius = 
1 / 3 DE, describe the epicyclet. On it let F be the planet’s place, making angle 
DAF = ADB. Draw HI, as though it were in the same plane as circle ABC, 
through E, the center of the earth’s orbit. As the orbit’s diameter, let HI be par- 
i5 allel to AD, so that H is understood to be the point on the earth’s orbit farthest 
from the planet, and I is the nearest point. On the orbit take arc HL = 116° 31' 
in agreement with the computation of the parallactic anomaly. Join FL and EL. 
Extend FKEM to intersect both sides of the orbit’s circumference. Angle ADB = 
41° 10' = DAF, by hypothesis. Supplementary angle ADE = 138° 50'. DE = 
20 854 p , whereof AD = 10,000 p . These data show that in triangle ADE, the third 
side AE = 10,667 p , angle DEA = 38° 9', and the remaining angle EAD = 3° 1'. 
Therefore the whole of EAF [= EAD-\-DAF] = 44° ll'[=3°l'-j-41° 10']. Thus 
again in triangle FAE, side FA is given = 285 p , whereof AE also is given 
[= 10,667 p ]. The remaining side FKE will be shown = 10,465 p , and angle 



253 



REVOLUTIONS 


AEF = 1°5'. Therefore the entire difference or prosthaphaeresis between the 
planet’s mean and true places evidently = 4° 6' = angle DAE + angle AEF 
[= 3°1'+1° 5']. For this reason, had the earth’s place been K or M, Saturn’s 
place would have appeared to be 203° 16' from the constellation of the Ram, as 
though it had been observed from center E. But with the earth at L, Saturn was 6 
seen at 209°. The difference of 5° 44' [= 209°- 203° 16'] is the parallax, indi¬ 
cated by angle KFL. But arc HL in the [earth’s] uniform motion = 116° 3T 
[= Saturn’s parallactic anomaly]. From this figure subtract the prosthaphaeresis 
HM. The remainder ML = 112°25' [= 116° 31'-4° 6'], and LIK, the rest [of the 
semicircle] = 67° 35' [= 180°-112° 25'].From this information angle KELis also 10 
obtained [=67° 35']. Therefore in triangle FEL, the angles being given [EFL = 
5°44'; FEL = 67°35'; ELF = 106°41'], the ratio of the sides is also given, in 
units whereof EF = 10,465 p . In these units EL = 1090 p , whereof AD or BD = 
10,000 p . But if BD = 60 p in accordance with the procedure of the ancients, 
EL = 6 p 32', which also differs very slightly from Ptolemy’s conclusion. There- is 
fore the whole of BDE = 10,854 p , and CE = the rest of the diameter = 9146 p 
[=20,000-10,854]. However, the epicyclet at B always subtracts 285 p from 
the planet’s height, but at C adds the same quantity, that is, % of its diameter. 
Therefore Saturn’s greatest distance from center E = 10,569 p [= 10,854 - 285], 
and its least distance [from E] = 9431 p [9146+285], whereof BD = 10,000 p . 20 
According to this ratio, the height of Saturn’s apogee = 9 p 42', whereof the 
radius of the earth’s orbit = l p , and the height of Saturn’s perigee = 8 p 39'. 
From this information Saturn’s larger parallaxes can be clearly obtained by 
the procedure explained in connection with the moon’s small parallaxes [IV, 

22, 24]. Saturn’s greatest parallaxes = 5 p 55' with the planet at apogee, and 26 
with the planet at perigee = 6 p 39'. The difference between these two values = 
44', which occurs when the lines coming from the planet are tangent to the [earth’s] 
orbit. Through this example every individual variation in Saturn’s motion is 
found. I shall set these variations forth hereafter at the same time for these five 
planets jointly [V, 33]. 30 

EXPOSITIONS OF JUPITER’S MOTION Chapter 10 

Having finished Saturn, I shall use the same procedure and order also for 
expounding Jupiter’s motion. First, I shall repeat three places reported and ana¬ 
lyzed by Ptolemy [Sjwraxii, XI, 1]. I shall so reconstitute them by means of the 
previously exhibited transformation of the circles that they are the same as, or ss 
not much different from, his places. 

The first of his oppositions occurred 1 hour before the midnight following 
the 1st day of the Egyptian month Epiphi in Hadrian’s year 17 at 23° IT within 
the Scorpion [= 223°11'], according to Ptolemy, but at 226 0 33' after the precession 
of the equinoxes [=6° 38'] is subtracted. He recorded the second opposition 2 « 
hours before the midnight following the 13th day of the Egyptian month Phaophi 
in Hadrian’s year 21 at 7° 54' within the Fishes; in the sphere of the fixed stars, 
however, this was 331° 16' [= 337° 54'-6° 38']. The third opposition happened 
5 hours after the midnight following the 20th day of the month Athyr in Antoninus 
[Pius’] 1st year at 7°45' in the sphere of the fixed stars [= 14° 23'-6° 38']. « 

Accordingly, from the first opposition to the second there are 3 Egyptian 


254 



BOOK V CH. 10 


years 106 days 23 hours, and the planet’s apparent motion = 104 ° 43' [ = 331 ° 16'- 
226° 33']. From the second opposition to the third the interval is 1 year 37 days 
7 hours, and the planet’s apparent motion = 36° 29' [= 360°+7° 45'-331° 16']. 
In the first period of time the [planet’s] mean motion = 99° 55'; and in the 
6 second, 33° 26'. Ptolemy found the eccentric’s arc from the higher apse to the 
first opposition = 77° 15'; the following arc, from the second opposition to the 
lower apse = 2° 50'; and from there to the third opposition =30° 36'; the 
entire eccentricity = 5 1 / 2 V , whereof the radius = 60 p ; but if the radius = 
10,000 p , the eccentricity = 917 p . All these values agreed almost exactly with the 
io observations. 

Now let ABC be a circle, whose arc AB from the first opposition to the second 
contains the aforementioned 99° 55', and BC = 33° 26'. Through center D draw 
diameter FDG so that, starting from the higher apse F, FA = 11° 15', FAB = 
177° 10' [= 180°-2° 50'], and GC = 30° 36'. Take E as the center of the earth’s 
is circle, and let distance DE = 687 p = % of [Ptolemy’s eccentricity =] 917 p . 
With 1 U [of 917 p ] = 229 p [as radius], describe an epicyclet around points A, 
B, and C. Join AD, BD, CD, AE, BE, and CE. In the epicyclets join AK, BL, 
and CM, so that angles DAK, DBL, DCM = ADF, FDB, FDC. Lastly, join 
K, L, and M by straight lines to E also. 

20 In triangle ADE, angle ADE is given = 102° 45' because ADF is given [as 
its supplement = 77° 15']; side DE = 687 p , whereof AD = 10,000 p ; the third 
side AE will be shown = 10,174 p ; angle EAD = 3° 48'; the remaining angle 
DEA = 73° 27'; and the whole of EAK = 81° 3' [= EAD+{DAK = ADF) = 



255 


REVOLUTIONS 


3° 48' +77° 15']. Therefore in triangle AEK likewise, two sides are given: EA = 
10,1740, whereof AK = 229 p , and since [the included] angle EAK is also given, 
angle AEK will be known = 1° 17'. Accordingly, the remaining angle KED = 
72° 10' [= DEA-AEK = 73° 27'-1° 17']. 

A similar demonstration will be made in triangle BED. For, sides BD and DE 6 
still remain equal to the previous [corresponding members], but angle BDE 
is given = 2° 50' [=180°- {FDB = 177°10')]. Therefore base BE will emerge = 
9314 p whereof DB — 10,000 p , and angle DBE = 12'. Thus again in tri¬ 
angle ELB two sides are given [BE, BL ] and the whole angle EBL [= (DBL = 
FDB ) +DBE] = 177° 22' [= 177° 10'+12']. Angle LEB will also be given = 4'. » 
When the sum of 16' [= 12'+ 4'] is subtracted from angle FDB [= 177° 10'], 
the remainder 176° 54' = angle FEE. From it subtract KED = 72° 10', 
and the remainder = 104° 44' = KEL, in almost exact agreement with the 
angle of the apparent motion between the first and second of the observed 
terminal points [= 104° 43']. 15 

In like manner at the third position, in triangle CDE two sides, CD and DE, 
are given [= 10,000; 687] as well as angle CDE = 30° 36'. Base EC will be shown 
in the same way = 9410 p , and angle DCE = 2° 8'. Hence the whole of ECM = 
147° 44' in triangle ECM. Thereby angle CEM is shown = 39'. Exterior angle 
DXE = interior angle ECX + opposite interior angle CEX = 2° 47'[=2° 8'+ 20 
39'] = FDC-DEM[FDC = 180°-30° 36' = 149°24';DFAf = 149° 24'-2° 47' 

= 146° 37']. Hence GEM = 180°- DEM = 33° 23'. The whole angle LEM, 
intervening between the second opposition and the third =36° 29', likewise in 
agreement with the observations. But this third opposition, 33° 23' east of the 
lower apse (as was demonstrated), was found at 7° 45'. Hence the place of the 28 
higher apse is shown by the remainder of the semicircle to be 154° 22' [= 180°- 
(33° 23'-7° 45')] in the sphere of the fixed stars. 

Now around E describe the earth’s annual orbit RST, with diameter SET 
parallel to line DC. Angle GDC was shown = 30° 36' = GES. Angle DXE = 
RES = arc RS = 2° 47' = the planet’s distance from the orbit’s mean perigee. 30 
Thereby the whole of TSR = [the planet’s distance] from the orbit’s higher apse 
emerges = 182° 47'. 

Thus it is confirmed that at this hour of Jupiter’s third opposition, reported 
at 5 hours after the midnight following the 20th day of the Egyptian month Athyr 
in Antoninus [Pius’] year 1, the planet Jupiter in its anomaly of parallax was at 38 
182° 47'; its uniform place in longitude = 4° 58' [=7°45 - 2°47']; and the place 
of the eccentric’s higher apse = 154° 22'. All these results are in absolutely 
complete agreement also with my hypothesis of a moving earth and uniform 
motion. 


THREE OTHER MORE RECENTLY OBSERVED Chapter 11 40 
OPPOSITIONS OF JUPITER 

To the three positions of the planet Jupiter as reported long ago and analyzed in 
the foregoing manner, I shall append three others, which I too observed with the 
greatest care in oppositions of Jupiter. The first occurred 11 hours after the 
midnight preceding 30 April 1520 C.E., at 200° 28' in the sphere of the fixed 45 


256 



BOOK V CH. 11 


stars. The second happened 3 hours after midnight on 28 November 1526 C.E., 
at 48° 34'. The third took place 19 hours after midnight on 1 February 1529 
C.E., at 113° 44'. From the first opposition to the second, there are 6 years 212 
days 40 day-minutes, during which Jupiter’s motion appeared to be 208° 6' 

6 [= 360°+ 48° 34'- 200° 28']. From the second opposition to the third, there are 
2 Egyptian years 66 days 39 day-minutes, and the planet’s apparent motion = 

65° 10' [=113° 44'-48° 34']. In the first period of time, however, the uniform 
motion = 199° 40', and in the second period, 66° 10'. 

To illustrate this situation, describe an eccentric circle ABC, on which the 
10 planet is regarded as moving simply and uniformly. Designate the three observed 
places as A, B, and C in the order of the letters so that arc AB = 199° 40', BC = 

66° 10', and therefore AC = the rest of the circle = 94° 10'. Also take D as the E 
center of the earth’s annual orbit. To D join AD, BD, and CD. Prolong any one 
of these, say DB, in a straight line BDE to both sides of the circle. Join AC, 

15 AE, and CE. 

Angle BDC of the apparent motion = 65° 10', with 4 right angles at the cen¬ 
ter = 360°. Supplementary angle CDE = 114° 50' [= 180°-65° 10'] in such 
degrees; but with 2 right angles (as at the circumference) = 360°, CDE = 

229° 40' [= 2 Xll4° 50']. Angle CED, intercepting arc BC, = 66° 10'. Therefore 
20 [in triangle CDE] the remaining angle DCE = 64° 10' [= 360°- (229° 40'+66° 
10')]. Accordingly, in triangle CDE, the angles being given, the sides are 
given: CE = 18,150 p , and ED = 10,918 p , whereof the diameter of the circle 
circumscribed around the triangle = 20,000 p . 

A similar demonstration holds for triangle ADE. Angle ADB is given = 

26 151 0 54' = the remainder of the circle, from which is subtracted the given distance 
from the first opposition to the second [=208° 6']. Therefore, supplementary 
angle ADE = 28° 6' [= 180°-151° 54'] as a central angle, but at the circum¬ 
ference = 56° 12' [= 2 X 28° 6']. Angle AED, intercepting arc BCA [= BC+CA] 

= 160° 20' [= 66° 10'+94° 10']. The remaining [inscribed] angle EAD [in trian- 
30 gl eADE] = 143° 28' [= 360°-(56° 12'+160° 20')]. From this information, side 
AE emerges = 9420 p , and ED = 18,992 p , whereof the diameter of the circle 
circumscribed around triangle ADE = 20,000**. But when ED = 10,918 p , AE = 
5415 p in units whereof CE = 18,150 p also was known. 

Hence we again have in triangle EAC two sides, EA and EC, given [5415; 

35 18,150] as well as [the included] angle A EC, intercepting arc AC = 94° 10'. 
From this information, angle ACE, intercepting arc AE, will be shown = 30° 40'. 
When this figure is added to AC, the sum = 124° 50' [= 94° 10'+30°40'], 
subtended by CE = 17,727 p , whereof the eccentric’s diameter = 20,000 p . In 
those same units, according to the previously established proportion, DE = 

40 10,665 p . But the whole arc BCAE = 191 0 [= BC+CA+AE = 66° 10'+ 

94° 10'+30° 40']. Consequently EB = the remainder of the circle [= 360°- 
{BCAE = 191°)] = 169°, subtended by the whole of BDE = 19,908 p , whereof 
BD, the remainder [when DE = 10,665 p is subtracted from BDE = 19,908 p ], = 
9243 p . Therefore the larger segment is BCAE, within which will lie the [eccen- 
46 trie] circle’s center. Let this be F. 

Now draw diameter GFDH. Obviously rectangle EDxDB = rectangle 
GDxDH, which therefore is also given. But rectangle GDxDH-\-[FD ) 2 = 

(. FDH ) 2 , and when rectangle GD xDH is subtracted from ( FDH ) 2 , the remain- 


257 



REVOLUTIONS 


der = (FD) 2 . Therefore as a length FD is given = 1193 d whereof FG = 10,000 p . 
But when FG = 60 p , FD = 7 p 9'. Now bisect BE at K, and draw FKL, which 
will therefore be perpendicular to BE. Since BDK = x ] 2 [BDE = 19,908 p ] = 
9954 p , and DB = 9243d, the remainder DK [when DB = 9243 p is subtracted 
from BDK = 9954 p ] = 71 l p . Hence, in [right] triangle DFK, the sides being 5 
given, [FD = 1193; DK = 1\\-, (KF ) 2 = (FD) 2 - (DK) 2 ], angle DFK also is 
given = 36° 35', and arc LH likewise = 36° 35'. But the whole oiLHB = 84 72° 

[= 72 (EB = 169°)]. The remainder BH [when LH = 36° 35' is subtracted 
from LHB = 84 72°] =47° 55' = the distance of the place of the second [oppo¬ 
sition] from the perigee. The remainder BCG [when BH = 47° 55' is subtracted 10 
from the semicircle] = the distance from the second opposition to the apogee = 
132° 5'. From BCG [= 132° 5'] subtract BC = 66° 10', and the remainder = 
65° 55' [= CG, the distance] from the place of the third [opposition] to the 
apogee. When this figure [65° 55'] is subtracted from 94° 10' [= CA ], the re¬ 
mainder [ GA ] = 28° 15' = the distance from the apogee to the epicycle’s first is 
place. 

The foregoing results unquestionably agree only slightly with the phenomena, 
since the planet does not run along the aforementioned eccentric. Consequently 
this method of exposition, based on an erroneous foundation, cannot produce 
any sound result. Among the many proofs of its fallibility is the fact that in 20 
Ptolemy it yielded an eccentricity greater than was proper for Saturn, and 
for Jupiter smaller, whereas in my case the eccentricity for Jupiter was quite 
excessive. Thus it appears obvious that when different arcs of a circle are assumed 
for a planet, the desired result does not come out in the same way. A comparison 
of Jupiter’s uniform and apparent motion at the three aforementioned terminal 25 
points, and thereafter at all places, would have been impossible had I not accepted 
the entire eccentricity declared by Ptolemy = 5 p 30' whereof the eccentric’s 
radius = 60 p , but with the radius = 10,000 p , the eccentricity = 917 p [V, 10], 
and put the arc from the higher apse to the first opposition = 45° 2' [instead of 
28°15']; from the lower apse to the second opposition = 64° 42' [instead of 30 
47°55']; and from the third opposition to the higher apse = 49° 8' [instead of 
65°55']. 

Reproduce the previous diagram of an eccentrepicycle, insofar as it fits this 
situation. In accordance with my hypothesis, 3 l i oithe entire distance [916 instead 
of 1193] between the centers = 687 p = DE, while the epicyclet receives the re- ss 
maining 74 = 229 p whereof FD = 10,000 p . Angle ADF = 45° 2'. Hence, in trian¬ 
gle ADE, two sides, AD and DE, are given [10,000 p , 687 p ], as well as [the included] 
angle ADE [= 134° 58' = 180°- (ADF = 45° 2')]. Thereby the third side AE will 
be shown = 10,496 p whereof AD = 10,000 p , and angle DAE = 2° 39'. Angle 
DAK being assumed = ADF[= 45° 2'], the whole oiEAK = 47° 4T [=DAK+ 40 
DAE = 45° 2' +2° 39']. Moreover, in triangle AEK two sides, AK and AE, 
are also given [229 p , 10,496 p ]. This makes angle AEK = 57'. When this angle + 
DAE [=2° 39'] are subtracted from ADF [=45° 2'], the remainder KED = 
41° 26' at the first opposition. 

A similar result will be shown in triangle BDE. Two sides, BD and DE, 46 
are given [10,000 p , 687 p ], and [the included] angle BDE = 64° 42'. Hence here 
too the third side BE will be known = 9725 p whereof BD = 10,000 p , as well as 
angle DBE = 3° 40'. Consequently, also in triangle BEL two sides, BE and BL, 


258 



BOOK V CH. 11 


F 



are given [9725 p , 229 p ], together with the [included] whole angle EBL — 118° 58' 
[= DBE = 3° 40 '+DBL = FDB = 180°- (BDG = 64° 42') = 115° 18']. BEL 
will also be given = 1° 10', and thereby DEL = 110° 28'. But KED was pre¬ 
viously known = 41° 26'. Therefore the whole of KEL [= KED+DEL] = 151° 
a 54' [= 110° 28'+41° 26']. Then, as the remainder from 4 right angles = 360° 
[- 151 °54'], 208° 6' = the apparent motion between the first and second op¬ 
positions, in agreement with the [revised] observations [(180°-45° 2' = 
134°58')+64°42' = 199° 40']. 

Lastly, at the third place, sides DC and DE of triangle CDE are given in the 
10 same way [10,000 p , 687 p ]. Moreover, [the included] angle CDE = 130° 52' 
because FDC is given [= 49° 8' = the distance from the third opposition to the 
higher apse]. The third side CE will emerge = 10,463 p whereof CD = 10,000 p , 
and angle DCE = 2° 51'. Therefore the whole of ECM = 51° 59' [= 2 0 51'+ 
49° 8' = DCE-\-(DCM = FDC)]. Consequently in triangle CEM likewise two 
is sides, CM and CE, are given [229 p , 10,463 p ], as well as [the included] angle MCE 
[=51° 59']. Angle Af.EC will also be known = 1°. MEC+DCE, previously 
found [= 2° 51'], = the difference between FDC and DEM , the angles of the 
uniform and apparent motions. Therefore DEM at the third opposition = 
45° 17'. But DEL has already been shown = 110° 28'. Therefore LEM = the 
a0 difference [between DEL and DEM = 110° 28'-45° 17'] = 65° 10' = the angle 
from the second observed opposition to the third, likewise in agreement with 
the observations [= 180°-(64°42'+49° 8' = 113° 50') = 66° 10']. But since 
Jupiter’s third place was seen at 113° 44' in the sphere of the fixed stars, the 
place of Jupiter’s higher apse is shown s 159° [113°44'+45° 17' = 159° T]. 


259 


Com 


REVOLUTIONS 



Now around E describe the earth’s orbit RST, with diameter RES parallel 

to DC. Evidently, at Jupiter’s third opposition, angle FDC = 49° 8' = DES, 
and R = the apogee of the uniform motion in parallax. But after the earth has 
traversed a semicircle plus arc ST, it enters into conjunction with Jupiter in opposi¬ 
tion [to the sun]. Arc ST = 3° 51' = angle SET, as was shown numerically 5 
[in the previous diagram: DCE = 2° 51'+ MEC = 1°]. These figures therefore 
show that 19 hours after midnight on 1 February 1529 C.E. Jupiter’s 
uni-form anomaly in parallax = 183° 51' [= RS+ ST = 180°+ 3° 51']; its 
true motion = 109° 52'; and the eccentric’s apogee now = 159° from the 
horn of the constellation Ram. This is the information we were seeking. 10 


CONFIRMATION OF JUPITER’S Chapter 12 

UNIFORM MOTION 


As we saw above [V, 10], in the last of the three oppositions observed by Ptole-my 
the planet Jupiter in its mean motion was at 4 ° 58', while the parallactic anom-aly 

was 182° 47'. Hence, in the period intervening between both observations « 
[Ptolemy’s last and Copernicus’ last], Jupiter’s motion in parallax evidently trav¬ 
ersed 1 0 5' [s 183° 51'- 182° 47'] in addition to complete revolutions; and its 
own motion, about 104° 54' [ = 109° 52'- 4° 58']. The time elapsed between 5hours 
after the midnight following the 20th day of the Egyptian month Athyr in Antoninus 
[Pius’] year 1, and 19 hours after the midnight preceding 1 February 1529 C.E., 20 
amounts to 1392 Egyptian years 99 days 37 day-minutes. To this time, according to 
the computation set forth above, the corresponding [motion in parallax] sim-ilarly 
= 1 0 5' after complete revolutions, in which the earth in its uniform motion 
overtook Jupiter 1274 times. Thus the calculation is considered to be certain 
and confirmed because it agrees with the results obtained visually. In 25 this 
time also, the eccentric’s higher and lower apsides clearly shifted eastward 4 Va 0 

[= 159°-154° 22']. An average distribution assigns approximately 1 0 to 300 
years. 


DETERMINING THE PLACES Chapter 13 

OF JUPITER’S MOTION 30 

The last of [Ptolemy’s] three observations occurred at 5 hours after the mid¬ 
night following the 20th day of the month Athyr in Antoninus [Pius’] year 1. The 
time reckoned backwards from then to the beginning of the Christian era = 
136 Egyptian years 314 days 10 day-minutes. In that period the mean motion 
in parallax = 84° 31'. When this figure is subtracted from 182° 47' [at Ptolemy’s 86 
third observation], the remainder = 98° 16' for the midnight preceding 1 January 
at the beginning of the Christian era. From that time to the 1st Olympiad in 775 
Egyptian years 12 Va days, the motion is computed = 70° 58' in addition to 
complete circles. When this figure is subtracted from 98° 16' [for the Christian 
era], the remainder = 21° 18' for the place of the Olympiads. Thereafter in 451 40 
years 247 days the motion amounts to 110° 52'. When this figure is added to 
the place of the Olympiads, the sum = 138° 10' for the place of Alexander at 
noon on the 1st day of the Egyptian month Thoth. This method will serve for 
any other epochs. 


260 



BOOK V CH. 14 


DETERMINING JUPITER’S PARALLAXES, Chapter 14 

AND ITS HEIGHT IN RELATION 
TO THE EARTH’S ORBITAL REVOLUTION 

For the purpose of determining the other phenomena connected with Jupiter, 
s namely, its parallax, I very carefully observed its position at 6 hours before noon 

on 19 February 1520 C.E. Through the instrument I saw Jupiter 4°31' west 
of the first, brighter star in the forehead of the Scorpion. Since the fixed star’s 

place = 209° 40', Jupiter’s position obviously = 205° 9' in the sphere of the 
fixed stars. From the beginning of the Christian era to the hour of this observation 
io there are 1520 uniform years 62 days 15 day-minutes. Thereby the sun’s mean 
motion is derived = 309° 16', and the [mean] parallactic anomaly = 111° 15'. 
Hence the planet Jupiter’s mean place is determined = 198° T [=309°16'- 
111° 15']. In our time the place of the eccentric’s higher apse has been found = 
159° [V, 11]. Therefore, the anomaly of Jupiter’s eccentric =39° T [= 198° 
is T- 159°]. 

To illustrate this situation, describe the eccentric circle ABC, with center D 
and diameter ADC. Let the apogee be at A, the perigee at C, and therefore let E, 
the center of the earth’s annual orbit, be on DC. Take arc AB = 39° T. With 
B as center, describe the epicyclet, with [radius] BF = Vs F>E = the distance 
20 [between the centers]. Let angle DBF = ADB. Draw straight lines BD, BE, 
and FE. 

In triangle BDE two sides are given: DE = 687p whereof BD = 10,000p. 
They enclose the given angle BDE = 140° 59' [= 180°-(/IDS = 39° T)]. 


A 



261 


REVOLUTIONS 


From this information base BE will therefore be shown = 10,543 p , and angle 
DBE = 2° 21' = ADB-BED. Consequently the whole of angle EBF = 41° 22' 

[= (DBE = 2° 21 ')+(DBF = ADB — 39° 1')]. Hence in triangle EBF, angle 
EBF is given, together with the two sides enclosing it: EB = 10,543 p whereof 
BD = 10,000 p , and BF = 229 p = x / 8 (DE = the distance) [between the centers]. 5 
From this information the remaining side FE is deduced = 10,373 p , and angle 
BEF = 50'. Lines BD and FE intersect each other in point X. Hence angle DXE 
at the intersection = BDA-FED = the mean motion minus the true. DXE = 
DBE+BEF [= 2° 21'+50'] = 3° 11'. When this figure is subtracted from 39° 1' 

[= ADB], the remainder = angle FED = 35° 50' = the angle between the 10 
eccentric’s higher apse and the planet. But the place of the higher apse = 159° 
[V, 11]. Together they amount to 194° 50'. This was Jupiter’s true place with 
respect to center E, but the planet was seen at 205° 9' [V, 14, above]. There¬ 
fore, the difference = 10° 19' belongs to the parallax. 

Now around E as center, describe the earth’s orbit RST, with diameter RET is 
parallel to BD, so that R is the parallactic apogee. Also take arc RS = 111° 15' 
in accordance with the determination [at the beginning of V, 14] of the mean 
parallactic anomaly. Prolong FEV in a straight line through both sides of the 
earth’s orbit. V will be the planet’s true apogee. REV = the angular difference 
[between the mean and true apogees], = DXE, makes the whole arc VRS = 20 
114° 26' [= RS+RF = 111° 15'+3°11'], and FES, the remainder [when 
SEV = 114° 26' is subtracted from 180°] = 65° 34'. But [just above, the parallax] 
EFS was found = 10° 19', and FSE, the remaining angle [in triangle EFS] = 
104° 7'. Therefore in triangle EFS, the angles being given, the ratio of the sides 
is given: FE : ES = 9698 : 1791. Then, with FE = 10,373 p , ES = 1916, with 25 
BD = 10,000. Ptolemy, however, found ES = ll p 30', with the eccentric’s 
radius = 60 p [Syntaxis, XI, 2]. This is nearly the same ratio as 1916 : 10,000. 

In this respect, therefore, I seem not to differ from him at all. 

Then diameter ADC : diameter RET — 5 p 13' : l p . Similarly, AD : ES or 
RE = 5 p 13' 9" : l p . In like manner DE = 21' 29", and BF = 7' 10". There- 30 
fore, with the radius of the earth’s orbit = l p , the whole of ADE - BF = 5 p 27' 
29" [=5 p 13'9"+21'29"—7'9"], with Jupiter at apogee; [with the planet] at 
perigee, the remainder EC+BF [= 5 p 13' 9"-21'29"+7' 9"] = 4 p 58' 49"; and 
with the planet at places between [apogee and perigee], there is a correspond¬ 
ing value. These figures lead to the conclusion that at apogee Jupiter makes 33 
its greatest parallax = 10° 35'; at perigee, 11° 35'; and between these [ex¬ 
tremes] the difference = 1°. Accordingly, Jupiter’s uniform motions as well as 
its apparent motions have been determined. 

THE PLANET MARS Chapter 15 

Now I must analyze Mars’ revolutions by taking three of its ancient opposi- 40 
tions, with which I shall once again combine the earth’s motion in antiquity. 

Of the oppositions reported by Ptolemy [Syntaxis, X, 7], the first occurred 1 uni¬ 
form hour after the midnight following the 26th day of Tybi, the 5th Egyptian 
month, in Hadrian’s year 15; according to Ptolemy, the planet was at 21° within 
the Twins, but at 74° 20' in relation to the sphere of the fixed stars [21 0 Twins = 45 
81° O'-6° 40' = 74° 20']. He recorded the second opposition at 3 hours before 


262 



BOOK V CH. 15 


midnight following the 6th day of Pharmuthi, the 8th Egyptian month, in Hadrian’s 
year 19, with the planet at 28° 50' within the Lion, but at 142° 10' in the sphere 
of the fixed stars [28° 50' Lion =148° 50'(-6° 40') = 142° 10']. The third opposition 
happened at 2 uniform hours before the midnight following the 12th day of 
5 Epiphi, the 11th Egyptian month, in Antoninus [Pius’] year 2, with the planet 
at 2° 34' within the Archer, but at 235 ° 54' in the sphere of the fixed stars 
[2° 34' Archer = 242° 34'(-6° 40') = 235° 54']. 

Between the first opposition and the second, then, there are 4 Egyptian years 
69 days, plus 20 hours = 50 day-minutes, with the planet’s apparent motion, 
io after complete revolutions, = 67° 50' [= 142° 10' -74° 20']. From the second 
opposition to the third, there are 4 years 96 days 1 hour, with the planet’s apparent 
motion = 93° 44' [= 235° 54' -142° 10']. But in the first interval the mean mo¬ 
tion = 81° 44' in addition to complete revolutions; and in the second interval, 
95° 28'. Then Ptolemy found [Syntaxis, X, 7] the entire distance between the 
is centers = 12p whereof the eccentric’s radius = 60p; but with the radius = 
10,000p, the proportionate distance = 2,000 p . From the first opposition to the 
higher apse, the mean motion = 41° 33'; then, next in order, from the higher 
apse to the second opposition, = 40° IT; and from the third opposition to the 
lower apse =44° 21'. 

20 In accordance with my hypothesis of uniform motion, however, the distance 
between the centers of the eccentric and of the earth’s orbit = 1500p = 3 / 4 [of 
Ptolemy’s eccentricity = 2000 p ], while the remaining x /* = 500p makes up the 
epicyclet’s radius. In this way now describe the eccentric circle ABC, with center 
D. Through both apsides draw diameter FDG, on which let E be the center of 
25 the circle of the annual revolution. Let A, B, C in that order be the places of the 


F 



263 


REVOLUTIONS 


observed oppositions, with arcs AF = 41 ° 33', FB = 40° 11', and CG = 44° 21'. 

At each of the points A, B, and C describe the epicyclet, with radius = Vs of the 
distance DE. Join AD, BD, CD, AE, BE, and CE. In the epicyclets draw AL, 
BM, and CN so that angles DAL, DBM, and DCN = ADF, BDF, and CDF. 

In triangle ADE, angle ADE is given = 138° [27'], because angle FDA is 5 
given [=41° 33']. Furthermore, two sides are given: DE = 1500 p whereof 
AD — 10,000 p . From this information it follows that the remaining side AE = 
ll,172 p in the same units, and angle DAE = 5° 7'. Hence, the whole of EAL 
[= DAE+DAL = 5°7'+41°33'] = 46° 40'. So also in triangle EAL, angle 
EAL is given [= 46° 40'] as well as two sides : AE = ll,172 p , and AL = 500 p 10 
whereof AD = 10,000 p . Angle AEL will also be given = 1 0 56'. When added 
to angle DAE, AEL makes the entire difference between ADF and LED = 7° 3', 
and DEL = 34 1 / 2 °. 

Similarly, at the second opposition, in triangle BDE angle BDE is given = 
139°49' [= 180°-(FDB = 40°11')], and side DE = 1500 p whereof BD = 15 
10,000 p . This makes side BE = 1 l,188 p , angle BED = 35° 13', and the remaining 
angle DBE [= 180°-(139° 49'+35° 13')] = 4° 58'. Therefore the whole of EBM 
[= DBE+(DBM = BDF) = 4° 58'+40°ll'] = 45° 9', enclosed by the given 
sides BE and BM [= 11,188, 500]. Hence it follows that angle BEM = 1° 53', 
and the remaining angle DEM [= BED - BEM = 35° 13'- 1 0 53'] =33° 20'. ao 
Therefore the whole of MEL [= DEM+DEL = 33° 20'+34 Va°] = 67° 50' = 
the angle through which the planet was seen to move from the first opposition 
to the second, a numerical result in agreement with experience [=67° 50']. 

Again, at the third opposition, triangle CDE has two sides, CD and DE, 
given [= 10,000 p , 1500 p ]. They enclose angle CDE [= arc CG] = 44° 21'. as 
Hence, base CE comes out = 8988 p whereof CD = 10,000 p or DE — 1500 p , 
angle CED = 128° 57', and the remaining angle DCE = 6° 42' [= 180°- (44°21' 
+128°57')]. Thus once more in triangle CEN, the whole angle ECN [= ( DCN = 
CDF = 180°-44° 21' = 135° 39 ')+{DCE = 6° 42')] = 142° 21', and is enclosed 
toy known sides EC and CN [8988 p , 500 p ]. Hence angle CEN will also be given so 
_ 1 ° 52 ' Therefore the remaining angle NED [= CED-CEN = 128° 57'- 
1°52'] = 127° 5' at the third opposition. But DEM has already been shown 
= 33° 20'. The remainder MEN [NED - DEM = 127° 5'- 33° 20'] = 93° 45' = 
the angle of the apparent motion between the second and third oppositions. 
Here also the numerical result agrees quite well with the observations [93° 45' ss 
as compared with 93° 44']. In this last observed opposition of Mars, the 
planet was seen at 235° 54', at a distance of 127° 5' from the eccentric’s 
apogee [= -$lNEF], as was shown. Hence, the place of the apogee of Mars’ 
eccentric was 108° 49' [= 235° 54'- 127° 5'] in the sphere of the fixed stars. 

Now around E as center, describe the earth’s annual orbit RST, with diam- 40 
eter RET parallel to DC, in order that R may be the parallactic apogee, and T 
the perigee. The planet was sighted along EX at 235° 54' in longitude. Angle 
DXE has been shown = 8° 34' = the difference between the uniform and appar¬ 
ent motions [= DCE+CEN = 6° 42'+l° 52', in the preceding diagram]. There¬ 
fore, the mean motion = 244 V 2 0 [= 235° 54' + 8 ° 34' =244° 28']. But angle 46 
DXE = central angle SET, which similarly = 8° 34'. Hence, if arc ST = 8° 34' 
is subtracted from a semicircle, we shall have the planet’s mean motion in par¬ 
allax = arc RS = 171° 26'. Consequently, in addition to other results, I have 


264 



BOOK V CH. 15-16 


also shown by means of this hypothesis of the moving earth that at 10 uniform 
hours after noon on the 12th day of the Egyptian month Epiphi in Antoninus 
[Pius’] year 2, the planet Mars’ mean motion in longitude = 244 1 / 2 °, and its 
parallactic anomaly = 171° 26'. 

e THREE OTHER RECENTLY OBSERVED Chapter 16 

OPPOSITIONS OF THE PLANET MARS 

Once more, with these observations of Mars by Ptolemy, I compared three 
others, which I performed not without some care. The first occurred at 1 hour 
after midnight on 5 June 1512 C.E., when Mars’ place was found to be 235° 33', 
10 just as the sun was directly opposite at 55° 33' from the first star in the Ram, 
taken as the beginning of the sphere of the fixed stars. The second observation 
happened 8 hours after noon on 12 December 1518 C.E., when the 
planet appeared at 63° 2'. The third observation took place at 7 hours before 
noon on 22 February 1523 C.E., with the planet at 133° 20'. From the first 
16 observation to the second, there are 6 Egyptian years 191 days 45 day-minutes; 
and from the second observation to the third, 4 years 72 days 23 day-minutes. 
In the first period of time, the apparent motion = 187° 29' [= 63° 2'+360°- 

235° 33'], but the uniform motion = 168° 7'; and in the second interval, the 
apparent motion = 70° 18' [= 133° 20'-63° 2'], but the uniform motion = 83°. 
2° Now reproduce Mars’ eccentric circle, except that this time AB = 168° 7', 
and BC = 83°. Then by a method like that which I used for Saturn and Jupiter 
(to pass silently over the multitude, complexity, and boredom of those computa- 



265 


REVOLUTIONS 


tions), I finally found Mars’ apogee on arc BC. Obviously it could not be on AB, 
because [there] the apparent motion exceeded the mean motion, namely, by 
19° 22' [= 187° 29'-168° 7']. Nor [could the apogee be] on CA. For even though 
[there the apparent motion 102° 13' = 360°-(187°29'+70°18')] is smaller [than 
the mean motion, 360°- (168° 7'+83° = 251 ° 7') = 108° 53'], nevertheless on BC, 5 
preceding CA, [the mean motion = 83°] exceeds the apparent motion [= 70° 18'] 
by a wider margin [12° 42'] than on CA [where 108° 53' mean - 102° 13' appar¬ 
ent = 6° 40']. But, as was shown above [V, 4], on the eccentric the smaller and 
diminished [apparent] motion occurs near the apogee. Therefore, the apogee 
will rightly be regarded as located on BC. to 

Let it be F, and let the circle’s diameter be FDG, on which [E], the center 
of the earth’s orbit, is located as well as [D, the center of the eccentric]. I then 
found FCA = 125° 29' and, in order, BF = 66° 25', FC = 16° 36', DE = the 
distance between the centers = 1460 p whereof the radius = 10,000 p , and the 
epicyclet’s radius = 500 p in the same units. These figures show that the apparent is 
and uniform motions are mutually consistent and entirely in agreement with the 
observations. 

Accordingly, complete the diagram, as before. In triangle ADE two sides, 
AD and DE, are known [10,000 p , 1460 p ], as well as angle ADE, from Mars’ 
first opposition to the perigee, = 54°31' [= arc AG = 180°- (FCA = 125° 29')]. 20 
Therefore, angle DAE will be shown to emerge = 7° 24', the remaining angle 
AED = 118° 5' [= 180°- (ADE+DAE = 54° 31'+7° 24')], and the third side 
AE = 9229 p . But angle DAL = FDA by hypothesis. Therefore the whole of 
EAL [= DAE+DAL = 7° 24'+125° 29'] = 132° 53'. Thus also in triangle 
EAL two sides, EA and AL, are given [9229 p , 500 p ], enclosing the given angle A 25 
[= 132° 53']. Therefore the remaining angle AEL = 2° 12', and the residual 
angle LED = 115°53' [ =AED-AEL = 118°5'-2° 12']. 

Similarly, at the second opposition, in triangle BDE two sides, DB and DE, 
are given [10,000 p , 1460 p ]. They enclose angle BDE [= arc BG = 180°-(BF = 
66° 25')] = 113° 35'. Therefore, in accordance with the theorems on Plane 30 
Triangles, angle DBF will be shown = 7° 1T, the remaining angle DEB = 59° 14' 

[= 180°-(113°35'+7°11')], base BE = 10,668 p whereof DB = 10,000 p and 
BM = 500 p , and the whole of EBM [= DBE+(DBM = BF) = 7° 11'+ 
66° 25'] = 73° 36'. 

Thus, also in triangle EBM, whose given sides [BE = 10,668; BM = 500] 35 
enclose the given angle [EBM = 73° 36'], angle BEM will be shown =2° 36'. 
DEM, the remainder when BEM is subtracted [from DEB =59° 14'] =56° 38'. 
Then exterior angle MEG, from the perigee [to the second opposition], = the 
supplement [of DEM = 56° 38'] = 123° 22'. But angle LED has already been 
shown = 115° 53'. Its supplement LEG = 64° 7'. When this is added to GEM, 40 
which has already been found [= 123° 22'], the sum = 187° 29', with 4 right 
angles = 360°. This figure [187° 29'] agrees with the apparent distance [= 187° 
29'] from the first opposition to the second. 

The third opposition may likewise be analyzed by the same method. For, 
angle DCE is shown = 2° 6', and side EC = ll,407 p whereof CD = 10,000 p . 48 
Therefore the whole of angle ECN [=DCE+(DCN = FDC) = 2° 6'+16° 36'] = 

18° 42'. In triangle ECN, sides CE and CN are already given [ll,407 p , 500 p ]. 
Hence, angle CEN will come out = 50'. When this figure is added to DCE 


266 



BOOK V CH. 16-17 


[=2° 6'], the sum = 2° 56' = the amount by which DEN = the angle of the 
apparent motion, is smaller than FDC = the angle of the uniform motion [= arc 
FC = 16° 36']. Therefore DEN is given = 13° 40'. These figures [DEN+DEM = 
13° 40'-|-56 o 38' = 70° 18'] are once more in close agreement with the apparent 
s motion [= 70° 18'] observed between the second and third oppositions. 

On this later occasion, as I said [near the beginning of V, 16], the planet Mars 
appeared at 133° 20' from the head of the constellation Ram. Angle FEN has 
been shown = 13° 40'. Therefore, computed backwards, the place of the ec¬ 
centric’s apogee in this last observation obviously = 119° 40' [= 133° 20'-13° 40'] 
t° in the sphere of the fixed stars. In Antoninus [Pius’] time Ptolemy found the 
apogee at 108° 50' [Syntaxis, X, 7 : 25° 30' within the Crab = 115° 30'-6° 40']. 
It has therefore shifted eastward 10° 50' [= 119° 40'- 108° 50' from that time] 
to ours. I have also found the distance between the centers smaller by 40 p [1460 p 
as compared with 1500 p ] whereof the eccentric’s radius = 10,000 p . The reason is 
16 not that Ptolemy or I made an error, but that, as is clearly proved, the center of 
the earth’s grand circle has approached the center of Mars’ orbit, with the sun 
meanwhile remaining stationary. For, these conclusions are mutually consistent 
to a high degree, as will become plainer than daylight hereafter [V, 19]. 

Now around E as center describe the earth’s annual orbit [RST], with its diam- 
20 eter SER parallel to CD, on account of the equality of their revolutions. Let R = 
the uniform apogee with respect to the planet, and 5 = the perigee. Put the earth 
at T. When ET, along which the planet is sighted, is extended, it will intersect 
CD at point X. But in this last position the planet was seen along ETX at 133° 20' 
of longitude, as was mentioned [near the beginning of V, 16]. Moreover, angle 
25 DXE [= CEN+DCE in the preceding diagram = 50'+2° 6'] has been shown = 
2° 56'. Now DXE is the difference by which XDF = the angle of the uniform 
motion, exceeds XED = the angle of the apparent motion. But SET = alternate 
interior angle DXE = the parallactic prosthaphaeresis. When this is subtracted 
from the semicircle [S77?], it leaves as the remainder 177° 4' [= 180°-2° 56'] = 
80 the uniform parallactic anomaly, computed from R = the apogee of the uniform 
motion. Consequently we have established here again that at 7 uniform hours 
before noon on 22 February 1523 C.E., the planet Mars’ mean motion in longi¬ 
tude = 136° 16' [= 2° 56'+(133 0 20' = apparent place)]; its uniform parallactic 
anomaly = 177° 4' [= 180°-2° 56']; and the eccentric’s higher apse = 119° 40'. 
85 Q. E. D. 

CONFIRMATION OF MARS’ MOTION Chapter 17 

In the last of Ptolemy’s three observations, as was made clear above [V, 15], 
Mars’ mean motion [in longitude] = 244 1 I 2 °, and its parallactic anomaly = 

171 0 26'. Therefore, in the time intervening [between Ptolemy’s last observation 
40 and Copernicus’ last observation] there was an accumulation, in addition to 

complete revolutions, of5°38' [+171°26' = 177° 4']. From 9 hours after noon = 
3 uniform hours, with respect to the meridian of Cracow, before the midnight 
following the 12th day of Epiphi = the 11th Egyptian month in Antoninus 
[Pius’] year 2, until 7 hours before noon on 22 February 1523 C£., there are 45 
1384 Egyptian years 251 days 19 day-minutes. During this interval, according to 
the computation set forth above, there is an accumulation of 5° 38' in the par- 


267 



REVOLUTIONS 


allactic anomaly after 648 complete revolutions. The anticipated uniform motion 
of the sun = 257 x / 2 °. From this figure subtract 5° 38' of the parallactic motion, 
and the remainder = 251° 52' = Mars’ mean motion in longitude. All these 
results agree fairly well with what was just set forth. 

DETERMINING MARS’ PLACES Chapter 18 « 

From the begi nnin g of the Christian era to 3 hours before midnight on the 
12th day of the Egyptian month Epiphi in Antoninus [Pius’] year 2, there are 
counted 138 Egyptian years 180 days 52 day-minutes. During that time the 
parallactic motion = 293 ° 4'. When this figure is subtracted from the 171° 26' 
of Ptolemy’s last observation [V, 15, end], an entire revolution being borrowed, 10 
[171° 26'+360° = 531° 26'], the remainder = 238° 22' [= 531° 26-293° 4'] 
for midnight, 1 January 1 C.E. To this place, from the 1st Olympiad there are 
775 Egyptian years 12 x / 2 days. During that time the parallactic motion = 254° 1'. 
When this figure is similarly subtracted from238 ° 22', a revolution being borrow¬ 
ed [238° 22'+360° = 598° 22'], the remainder for the place of the 1st Olympiad 16 
= 344° 2T. By similarly separating out the motions for the periods of other 
eras, we shall have the place of Alexander’s era = 120° 39', and Caesar’s = 
111° 25'. 

THE SIZE OF MARS’ ORBIT IN UNITS Chapter 19 

WHEREOF THE EARTH’S ANNUAL ORBIT 20 

IS ONE UNIT 

In addition, I also observed Mars occulting the star called the “southern 
claw”, the first bright star in the Claws. I made this observation on 1 January 
1512 C.E. Early in the morning, 6 uniform hours before noon on that day, I 
saw Mars x / 4 ° away from the fixed star, but in the direction of the sun’s solstitial 86 
rising [in the winter, that is, northeast]. This indicated that Mars was x / 8 ° east 
of the star in longitude, but in latitude x / 6 ° to the north. The star’s place 
being known = 191° 20' from the first star in the Ram, with a northern latitude 
= 40', Mars’place was clearly = 191 ° 28' [sl91° 20'+ x / 8 °], with a northern 
latitude = 51' [^ 40'+ x / 6 °]. At that time the parallactic anomaly by com- 30 
putation =98°28'; the sun’s mete place =262°; Mars’ mean place = 163° 
32'; and the eccentric’s anomaly = 43° 52'. 

With this information available, describe the eccentric ABC, with center D, 
diameter ADC, apogee A, perigee C, and eccentricity DE = 1460p whereof 
AD = 10,000p. Arc AB is given = 43° 52'. With B as center, and radius BF = 35 
500p whereof AD = 10,OOOp, describe the epicyclet so that angle DBF = ADB. 
Join BD, BE, and FE. Furthermore, around E as center, construct the earth’s 
grand circle RST. On its diameter RET, parallel to BD, let R = the [uniform] 
apogee of the planet’s parallax, and T = the perigee of its uniform motion. Put 
the earth at S, with arc RS = the uniform parallactic anomaly, computed = 40 
98° 28'. Extend FE as straight line FEV, intersecting BD at point X, and the 
convex circumference of the earth’s orbit at V = the true apogee of the parallax. 

In triangle BDE two sides are given: DE = 1460p whereof BD = 10,000p. 
They enclose angle BDE, given = 136° 8' = the supplement of ADB, given = 


268 



BOOK V CH. 19 


A 



43° 52'. From this information the third side BE will be shown = 11,0970, 
and angle DBE = 5° 13'. But angle DBF = ADB by hypothesis. The whole 
angle EBF = 49° 5' [= DBE+DBF = 5° 13'+43° 52'], enclosed by the given 
sides EB and BF [11,0970, 5000]. [In triangle BEF] we shall therefore have angle 
s BEF = 2°, and the remaining side FE = 10,776 p whereof DB = 10,000 p . Hence 
DXE = 7° 13' = XBE+XEB = the opposite interior angles [= 5° 13'+2°]. DXE 
is the subtractive prosthaphaeresis, by which angle ADB exceeded XED 
[= 36° 39' = 43° 52'-7° 13'], and Mars’ mean place exceeded its true place. 
But its mean place was computed = 163° 32'. Therefore its true place was to 
10 the west, at 156° 19' [+7° 13' = 163° 32']. But to those who were observing 
it from a place near 5 it appeared at 191 0 28'. Therefore its parallax or commuta¬ 
tion became 35° 9' eastward [= 191° 28'-156° 19']. Clearly, then, angle EFS = 
35° 9'. Since RT is parallel to BD, angle DXE = REV, and arc RV likewise = 
7° 13'. Thus the whole of VRS [= flF+flS = 7° 13'+98°28'] = 105°4T = 
is the normalized parallactic anomaly. Thus is obtained angle VES, exterior to 
triangle FES, [= 105° 41']. Hence, the opposite interior angle FSE is also 
given = 70° 32' [= VES-EFS = 105° 41'-35° 9']. All these angles are given in 
degrees whereof 180° = 2 right angles. 

But in a triangle whose angles are given, the ratio of the sides is given. Therefore 
20 as a length FE = 9428 p , and ES = 5757 p , whereof the diameter of the circle cir¬ 
cumscribed around the triangle = 10,000 p . Then, with EF = 10,776 p , ES = 
6580 p whereof BD = 10,000 p . This too differs only slightly from what Ptolemy 
found [Syntaxis, X, 8;39 1 / 2 :60], and is almost identical therewith [39 X J 2 :60 = 
10,0000]. But in the same units all of ADE = ll,460 p [= AD-\-DE = 


269 



REVOLUTIONS 


10,000+1460], and the remainder EC = 8540 p [ADEC = 20,000 p ]. At A = the 
eccentric’s higher apse, the epicyclet subtracts 500 p , and adds the same quantity 
at the lower apse, so that at the higher apse 10,960 p remain [= 11,460-500], 
and at the lower apse 9040 p [= 8540+500]. Therefore, with the radius of 
the earth’s orbit = l p , Mars’ apogee and greatest distance = l p 39'57"; its 6 
least distance = l p 22'26"; and its mean distance = l p 3T 11" [l p 39' 57"- l p 
22' 26" = 17' 31"; 17' 31" 2 s 8'45"; 8'45" + l p 22' 26" s l p 39' 57"- 8' 45"]. 

Thus also in the case cf Mars the sizes and distances of its motion have been 
explained through sound computation by means of the earth’s motion. 

THE PLANET VENUS Chapter 20 10 

After the explanation of the motions of the three outer planets, Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars, which encircle the earth, it is now time to discuss those which are en¬ 
closed by the earth. I shall deal first with Venus, which permits an easier and clearer 
demonstration of its motion than the outer planets do, provided that the necessary 
observations of certain places are not lacking. For if its greatest elongations, 15 
morning and evening, to either side of the sun’s mean place are found equal to 
each other, then we know for certain that halfway between those two places of 
the sun is the higher or lower apse of Venus’ eccentric. These apsides are dis¬ 
tinguished from each other by the fact that when the matched [greatest] elonga¬ 
tions are smaller, they occur around the apogee, with the bigger pairs around 20 
the opposite apse. In all the other places [between the apsides], finally, the relative 
size of the elongations reveals without any uncertainty the distance of Venus’ 
globe from the higher or lower apse, and also its eccentricity, as these topics are 
treated very perspicuously by Ptolemy [Syntaxis, X, 1-4]. Hence there is no need 
to repeat these matters one after the other, except insofar as they are adapted 28 
to my hypothesis of a moving earth from Ptolemy’s observations. 

He took the first of these from the astronomer Theon (of Smyrna?). It was 
performed at the first hour of the night following the 21st day of the month Phar- 
muthi in Hadrian’s year 16, as Ptolemy says [Syntaxis, X, 1] = twilight, 8 March 
132 C.E. Venus was seen at its greatest evening elongation = 47 1 / i ° from the 30 
mean place of the sun, when that mean place of the sun was computed = 337° 4T in 
the sphere of the fixed stars. To this observation Ptolemy compared another, 
which he says he made at dawn on the 12th day of the month Thoth in Antoninus 
[Pius’] year 4 = daybreak, 30 July 140 C.E. Here again he states that Venus’ 
greatest morning elongation = 47° 15' = the previous distance from the sun’s 35 
mean place, which was = 119° in the sphere of the fixed stars, and previously had 
been = 337° 4T. Halfway between these places, clearly, are the apsides opposite 

each other at 48 V°a and 228 7,° [337° 41'-119° = 218° 41'; 218° 41' -H2 2 
109° 20'; 109° 20'+119° = 228° 20'; 228° 20'- 180° = 48° 20']. To both thejjf: 
figures add 6 2 / 3 0 for the precession of the equinoxes, and the apsides come 
out, as Ptolemy says [Syntaxis, X, 1], at 25° within the Bull [= 55° = 48V 3 

+6 2 / 3 °] and Scorpion [= 235° = 228 1 l 3 °+6 2 / 3 °], where Venus’ higher and 
lower apsides had to be diametrically opposite each other. 

Moreover, for stronger support of this result, he takes another observation 
by Theon at dawn on the 20th day of the month Athyr in Hadrian’s year 12=the 45 
morning of 12 October 127 C .E. At that time Venus was again found at its greatest 


270 



BOOK V CH. 20-21 


elongation = 47° 32' from the sun’s mean place = 191° 13'. To this observation 
Ptolemy adds his own in Hadrian’s year 21 = 136 C.E., on the 9th day of the 
Egyptian month Mechir = 25 December in the Roman calendar, at the first 
hour of the following night, when the evening elongation was again found = 

5 47° 32' from the mean sun = 265°. But in the previous observation by Theon the 
sun’s mean place = 191 ° 13'. The midpoints between these places [265°-191 ° 13' 
= 73° 47'; 73° 47' -r- 2 s 36° 53'; 36° 53'+191° 13' =228° 6 '; 228 ° 6'-180° = 
48° 6 '] again come out s 48° 20', 228° 20', where the apogee and perigee must 
lie. As measured from the equinoxes, these points =25° within the Bull and 
10 Scorpion, which Ptolemy then distinguished by two other observations, as follows 
[Syntaxis, X, 2], 

One of them was Theon’s on the 3rd day of the month Epiphi in Hadrian’s 
year 13 = 21 May 129 C.E., at dawn, when he found Venus’ morning greatest 
elongation =44° 48', with the sun’s mean motion = 48 5 /e°> and Venus appearing 
is at 4° [s48° 50'-44° 48'] in the sphere of the fixed stars. Ptolemy himself made 
the other observation on the 2nd day of the Egyptian month Tybi in Hadrian’s 
year 21, which I equate with 18 November 136 C.E. in the Roman calendar. At 
the 1st hour of the following night the sun’s mean motion = 228° 54', from which 
Venus’ evening greatest elongation =47 ° 16', with the planet itself appearing 
20 at 276 V 6 ° [= 228° 54'+47° 16']. By means of these observations the apsides 
are distinguished from each other; namely, the higher apse = 48 V 3 °> where 
Venus’ [greatest] elongations are narrower, and the lower apse = 228 x j z °, where 
they are wider. Q. E. D. 

THE RATIO OF THE EARTH’S Chapter 21 

25 AND VENUS’ ORBITAL DIAMETERS 

This information will accordingly also make clear the ratio of the earth’s and 
Venus’orbital diameters. Describe the earth’s orbit AB around Cas center .Through 
both apsides draw diameter ACB, on which take D as the center of Venus’ orbit, 
eccenlric to circle AB. Let A = the place of the apogee. When the earth is in the 
30 apogee, the center of Venus’ orbit is at its greatest distance [from the earth]. 
AB, the line of the sun’s mean motion, is at 48 1 / 3 ° [at A], with B = Venus’ 
perigee, at 228 V 3 0 . Also draw straight lines AE and BF, tangent to Venus’ orbit 
at points E and F. Join DE and DF. 

DAE, as an angle at the center of a circle, subtends an arc = 44 4 / B ° 
35 [= greatest elongation in Theon’s 3 rd observation, V, 20], and AED is a right 
angle. Therefore, triangle DAE will have its angles given, and consequent¬ 
ly its sides, namely, DE = half the chord subtending twice DAE = 7046 p 
whereof AD = 10,000 p . In the same way, in right triangle BDF, angle 
DBF is given =47° 16', and chord DF = 7346 p whereof BD = 10,000 p . Then, 
40 with DF = DE = 7046 p , in those units BD = 9582 p . Hence, the whole of ACB = 
19,582 p [=BD+AD = 9582 p +10,000 p ]; AC = V 2 [ACB] = 9791 p , and CD, 
the remainder [when BD is subtracted from BC (= AC) = 9791- 9582] = 
209 p . Then, with AC = l p , DE = 43 V,', and CD s 1 V 4 '. With AC = 10,000 p , 
DE = DF = 7193 p , and CD s208 p . Q. E. D. 


271 



REVOLUTIONS 


VENUS’ TWOFOLD MOTION Chapter 22 

Nevertheless, there is no simple uniform motion of Venus around D, as is 
proved particularly by two of Ptolemy’s observations [Syntaxis, X, 3]. He made 
one of them on the 2nd day of the Egyptian month Pharmuthi in Hadrian’s year 18 
= dawn, 18 February 134 C.E. in the Roman calendar. At that time, with sthe 
sun’s mean motion = 318 b / 6 °, Venus, appearing in the morning at 275 ^“in the 
ecliptic, had reached the outermost limit of its elongation = 43 ° 35' 
[+275° 15' = 318° 50']. Ptolemy performed the second observation on the 4th 
day of the same Egyptian month Pharmuthi in Antoninus [Pius’] year 3 = 
twilight, 19 February 140 C.E. in the Roman calendar. At that time too the sun’s io 

mean place =318 5 /«°; Venus, at its evening greatest elongation therefrom = 

48 1 I 3 °, was seen at 7 1 / 6 ° in longitude [= 48° 20'+318° 50'-360°]. 

With this information available, on the same terrestrial orbit take point G, 
where the earth is located, such that AG = the quadrant of a circle, the distance 
at which in both observations the sun in its mean motion was seen on the opposite is 
side [of the circle] west of the apogee of Venus’ eccentric [48 1 / 3 °+360° -90° = 
318° 20's 318 ®/ 6 °]. Join GC, and construct DK parallel to it. Draw GE and GF 
tangent to Venus’ orbit. Join DE, DF, and DG. 

In the first observation angle EGC = the morning elongation = 43° 35'. 

In the second observation, CGF = the evening elongation = 48 1 / 3 °. The sum 20 
of both = the whole of EGF = 91 n / 12 °. Therefore DGF = V 2 [EGF] = 

45° 57 1 / 2 '- CGD, the remainder [when DGF is subtracted from CGF — 48 1 / 3 °- 
45° 57 V,' = 2°22 1 / a '] s 2° 23'. But DCG is a right angle. Therefore in [right] 
triangle CGD, the angles being given, the ratio of the sides is given, and as 
a length CD = 416 p whereof CG = 10,000 p . However, the distance between the 25 
centers was shown above = 208 p in the same units [V, 21]. Now it has become 
just twice as large. Hence, when CD is bisected at point M, DM will similarly 
= 208 p = the entire variation of this approach and withdrawal. If this variation 
is bisected again at N, this will appear to be the midpoint and normalizer of 
this motion. Consequently, as in the three outer planets, Venus’ motion too 30 
happens to be compounded out of two uniform motions, whether that occurs 
through an eccentrepicycle, as in those cases [V, 4], or in any other of the afore¬ 
mentioned ways. 

Nevertheless, this planet differs somewhat from the others in the pattern and 
measurement of its motions, as will be demonstrated more easily and more con- as 
veniently by an eccentreccentric (in my opinion). Thus, suppose that around N 
as center and with DN as radius, we describe a circlet on which [the center of] 
Venus’ circle revolves and shifts in accordance with the following rule. Whenever 
the earth touches diameter ACB, which contains the eccentric’s higher and lower 
apsides, the center of the planet’s circle is always at its least distance [from the 40 
center of the earth’s orbit in C], that is, at point M. But when the earth is at 
a middle apse (such as G),the center of the [planet’s] circle reaches point D, with 
CD the greatest distance [from the center of the earth’s orbit in C]. Hence, as may 
be inferred, while the earth traverses its own orbit once, the center of the planet’s 
circle revolves twice around center N, and in the same direction as the earth, that 45 
is, eastward. Through this hypothesis for Venus, its uniform and apparent motions 
agree with every kind of situation, as will soon be clear. Everything proved thus 


272 



BOOK V CH. 22-23 


A 



far with regard to Venus is found to fit our times too, except that the eccentricity 
has decreased by about 1 / 6 . Formerly it was all of 416p [Ptolemy, Syntaxis, X, 3; 
2 1 l'f : 60p =416 2 / s ], but now it is 350p, as many observations show us [416 X 
76 =347], 

5 ANALYZING VENUS’ MOTION Chapter 23 

From these observations I took two places, observed with the greatest accuracy 
[Syntaxis, X, 4], 

[Earlier version: 

One was the work of Ptolemy in Antoninus [Pius’] year 2 on the 29th day of the month Tybi 
10 before dawn. On a straight line between the moon and the first bright star, the farthest north of the 
[three], in the forehead of the Scorpion, Ptolemy saw Venus 1 1 / a times farther away from the moon 
than from the fixed star. The position of the fixed star being hnown, namely, 209° 40' [longitude] 
and 1 1 / 3 ° north latitude, it was worth-while ascertaining the observed place of the moon for the 
purpose of determining the position of Venus. 

15 From the birth of Christ to the time of this observation there were 138 Egyptian years, 18 days, 

4 3 / 4 hours after midnight at Alexandria, but at Cracow 3 3 / 4 h local time, uniform time 3 h 41 m = 
gdm 23 ds . In its mean uniform motion the sun was at 255 1 j 2 °; in its apparent motion, at 23° within 
the Archer [= 263°]. Hence, the moon’s uniform distance from the sun = 319° 18'; its mean 
anomaly = 87° 37'; and its mean latitudinal anomaly from its northern limit = 12° 19'. From this 
30 information the moon’s true place was computed = 209° 4', north latitude 4° 58'. But the addition 
of the precession of the equinoxes, then = 6° 41', put the moon at 5° 45' within the Scorpion 
[= 215° 45' = 209° 4'+6° 41']. By instrumental means 2° within the Virgin were seen to culminate 
at Alexandria, and 25° within the Scorpion were rising. Consequently according to my calculation 
the moon’s parallax was 51' in longitude, 16' in latitude. Hence the place of the moon, as observed 
25 at Alexandria and corrected, emerged as 209° 55' [= 209° 4' + 51'], north latitude 4° 42' [= 
4° 58'-16']. Accordingly, Venus’ position was determined = 209° 46', north latitude 2° 40'. 

Now let the earth’s orbit be AB, with its center at C and diameter AOB passing through both 


273 


REVOLUTIONS 



apsides. Let A be the point from which the body of Venus is seen at its apogee = 48 1 / 3 ° ) and B 
the opposite point = 228 1 / 3 °. On the diameter take distance CD = 312 p , whereof AC = 10,000. 
With D as center, and radius DF = 1/3 CD, that is, 104, describe a circlet. 

Now since the mean place of the sun = 255 1 / 2 °, therefore the earth’s distance from [Venus’] 
lower apse = 27° 10' [+228 1 / 3 ° = 255 1 / 2 °]. Hence let arc BE = 27° 10'. Join EC, ED, and DF, 5 
so that angle CDF = 2 X BCE. Then with F as center, describe Venus’ orbit. Let its concave 
circumference be intersected at L by the prolongation of straight line EF, intersecting diameter 
AB at O. To the same circumference also draw FK parallel to CE. Put the planet at point G. Join 
GE and GF. 

Now that these preparations have been made, our tasks are to find arc KG = the planet’s 10 
distance from its orbit’s mean apogee = K, and angle CEO. In triangle CDE, angle DCE = 27° 10' 
and side CD = 312 p , whereof CE = 10,000. Hence the remaining side DE = 9724, and angle 
CED = 50'. Similarly in triangle DEF, two sides are given, DE = 9724 p , whereof DF = 104, 
and CE = 10,000. The angle [EDF] enclosed by sides ED and DF is given. For, CDF is given = 

54° 20' [= 2 X ( BCE = 21° 10')] and FDB = the remainder of the semicircle [from which CDF = 15 
54° 20' is subtracted] = 125° 40'. Therefore, the whole of FDE = 153° 40'. Hence, the remain¬ 
ing side EF is obtained = 9817 in those units, and angle DEF = 16'. 

The whole of CEF [ = DEF + CED = 16'+ 50'] = 1° 6'. This is the difference between 
the mean motion and the apparent motion around center F, that is, between angles BCE and EOB. 
Therefore BOE is obtained = 28° 16' [= 27° 10' + 1° 6'], which was our first task. 20 

Secondly, angle CEG = 45° 44' = the planet’s distance from the mean place of the sun 
[= 255 V 2 °-209 o 46']. Hence, the whole of FEG [= CEG + FEC = 45° 44' + l° 6'] = 46° 50'. 
ButFF is given = 9817 p , whereof AC = 10,000, and FG is ascertained = 7193 also in those afore¬ 
mentioned units. Hence in triangle EFG, the ratio of the sides EF and FG is given [9817 : 7193], 
together with angle FEG [= 46° 50']. Angle EFG will also be given = 84° 19'. Thereby exterior 25 
angle LFG is given = 131° 6' = arc LKG = the planet’s distance from the apparent apogee 
of its orbit. But angle KFL = CEF = the difference between the mean and true apsides = 1° 6', 
as has been shown. When this is subtracted from 131° 6', the remainder = 130° = arc KG, 
from the planet to the mean apse. The remainder of the circle = 230° = the uniform anomaly, 
measured from point K. Hence we have for Antoninus [Pius’] year 2 = 138 C.E., at Cracow, on 30 
16 December, 3 hours, 45 minutes after midnight, Venus’ uniform anomaly = 230°, the quantity for 
which we were looking]. 


274 


BOOK V CH. 23 


One was the work of Timocharis at dawn on the 18th day of the Egyptian 
month Mesori in Ptolemy Philadelphus’ year 13 = year 52 after Alexander’s 
death. In this observation Venus was reported as having been seen occulting the 
westernmost of the four fixed stars in the Virgin’s left wing. In the description 
s of this constellation, this is the sixth star, with longitude = 151 1 / 2 °, latitude = 
1 Ve 0 north, and magnitude = 3. Thus Venus’ place was evident [= 151 %“]. 
The sun’s mean place was computed = 194° 23'. 

This being the situation, in the illustrative diagram, with point A remaining 
at 48° 20', arc AE = 146° 3' [= 194° 23'-48° 20']. BE = the remainder [when 
10 AE is subtracted from the semicircle = 180°-146° 3'] = 33° 57'. Furthermore, 
angle CEG = the planet’s distance from the sun’s mean place = 42° 53' 
[= 194° 23'-151 x / a °]. Line CD = 312p [= 208p+104p] whereof CE = 10,000p. 
Angle BCE [= arc BE] =33° 57'. Hence in triangle CDE, the remaining angles 
CED = 1° 1' [and CDE = 145° 2'], while the third side DE = 9743p. But 
is angle CDF = 2 xBCE [=33° 57'] =67° 54'. When CDF is subtracted from 
the semicircle, the remainder = BDF = 112° 6'. BDE, being an angle exterior 
to triangle CDE, [= CED+(DCE = BCE) = 1° l'+33° 57'] = 34° 58'. Hence, 
all of EDF [= BDE+BDF = 34° 58'+112° 6'] = 147° 4'. DF is given = 104p 
whereof DE = 9743 p . Moreover, in triangle DEF, angle DEF = 20'. The whole 
so of CEF [= CED+DEF = 1° l'+20'] = 1° 21', and side EF = 983R But 
the whole of CEG is already known = 42° 53'. Therefore FEG, the remainder 
[when CEF (= 1° 21') is subtracted from CEG (= 42° 53')] = 41° 32'. FG = 
the radius of [Venus’] orbit = 7193 p whereof EF = 9831 p . In triangle EFG, 
therefore, through the given ratio of the sides and through angle FEG, the re- 
25 maining angles are given, and EFG = 72° 5'. When this is added to a semicircle 
the sum = 252° 5' = arc KLG, from the higher apse of [Venus’] orbit. Thus 
again we have established that at dawn on the 18th day of the month Mesori in 
Ptolemy Philadelphus’ year 13, Venus’ parallactic anomaly = 252° 5'. 


A 



275 


REVOLUTIONS 


A 



I myself observed Venus’ other place at 1 hour after sunset = the start of the 
8th hour after noon on 12 March 1529 C.E. I saw Venus beginning to be occulted by 
the moon’s dark side midway between both horns. This occultation lasted until 
the end of that hour or a little longer, when the planet was observed emerging 
westward on the [moon’s] other side in the middle of the curvature between the 5 
horns. Therefore, at or about the middle of this hour, clearly there was a central 
conjunction of the moon and Venus, a spectacle which I witnessed at Frombork. 
Venus was still increasing its evening elongation, and had not yet reached the 
tangent to its orbit. From the beginning of the Christian era there are 1529 Egyp¬ 
tian years 87 days plus 7 7» hours by apparent time, but 7 hours 34 minutes by 10 
uniform time. The sun’s mean place in its simple motion = 332° IT; the preces¬ 
sion of the equinoxes =27° 24'; the moon’s uniform motion away from the 
sun = 33° 57'; its uniform anomaly = 205° T; and its [motion in] latitude = 

71° 59'. From this information the moon’s true place was computed = 10°, 
but with respect to the equinox = 7° 24' within the Bull [= 37° 24' = 10°+ is 
27° 24'], with latitude = 1° 13' north. Since 15° within the Balance were rising, 
the moon’s parallax in longitude = 48', and in latitude = 32'. Hence, its apparent 

place =6° 36' within the Bull [= 7° 24'-48']. But its longitude in the sphere 
of the fixed stars = 9° 12' [= 10°-48'], with north latitude = 4T [= 1° 13'- 
32']. The same was Venus’ apparent place in the evening when it was 37° T 20 
away from the sun’s mean place [332° IT+37° T = 369° 12' =9° 12'], with the 
earth’s distance to Venus’higher apse = 76° 9'to the west [+332° IT =408°20'- 
360° = 48° 20']. 

Now reproduce the diagram, following the model of the preceding construction, 

except that arc EA or angle ECA =76° 9'. CDF = 2 XECA = 152° 18'. The 25 
eccentricity CD, as it is found nowadays, = 246 p , and DF = 104 p whereof CE — 
10,000p. Therefore, in triangle CDE, we have angle DCE = the remainder 


276 



BOOK V CH. 23-24 


[when ECA = 76° 9' is subtracted from 180°] given = 103° 51', and enclosed 
by given sides [CD = 246 p , CE = 10,000 p ]. From this information angle CED 
will be shown = 1 0 15', the third side DE = 10,056 p , and the remaining angle 
CDE = 74° 54' [= 180°-(DCE+CED = 103° 51'+1° 15')]. But CDF = 2x 
5 ACE [= 76° 9'] = 152° 18'. From CDF, subtract angle CDE [= 74° 54'], and 
the remainder EDF = 77° 24' [= 152° 18'- 74° 54']. Thus again in triangle DEF, 
two sides, DF = 104 p whereof DE = 10,056 p , enclose the given angle EDF 
[= 77° 24']. Angle DEF is also given = 35', as well as the remaining side EF = 
10,034 p . Hence, the whole angle CEF [= CED+DEF = 1° 15'+35'] = 1° 50'. 
10 Furthermore, the whole angle CEG =37°1' = the planet’s apparent distance 
from the sun’s mean place. When CEF is subtracted from CEG, the remainder 
FEG [= 37° T-1° 50'] = 35° IT. Accordingly, in triangle EFG also, with 
angle E given [= 35° IT], two sides are likewise given: EF = 10,034 p whereof 
FG =7193 p . Hence, the remaining angles will also be determined: EGF = 
is 53 72°, and EFG = 91° 19' = the planet’s distance from its orbit’s true 
perigee. 

But diameter KFL was drawn parallel to CE, so that K = the apogee of [the 
planet’s] uniform motion, and L = the perigee. [From EFG =91° 19'], subtract 
angle EFL=CEF [=1°50']. The remainder = angle LFG = arc LG = 
20 89° 29'. KG = the remainder [when LG is subtracted] from the semicircle = 
90° 31' = the planet’s parallactic anomaly as measured from the uniform higher 
apse of its orbit. This is what we wanted for this hour of my observation. 

In Timocharis’ observation, however, the corresponding figure = 252° 5'. 
In the intervening period, then, besides 1115 complete revolutions, there are 
os 198° 26' [= (90° 31'+360° = 450° 31'(- 252° 5']. From dawn on the 18th day of 
the month Mesori in Ptolemy Philadelphus’ year 13 to 7 V 2 hours after noon on 
12 March 1529 C.E., there are 1800 Egyptian years 236 days plus about 40 day- 

minutes. Multiply the motion in 1115 revolutions plus 198° 26' by 365 days. 
Divide the product by 1800 years 236 days 40 day-minutes. The result will be the 
30 annual motion = 3 x60° plus 45° T 45" 3'" 40"". When this figure is distributed 
over 365 days, the outcome = the daily motion = 36' 59" 28'". This was the 
basis on which was constructed the Table exhibited above [after V, 1]. 


[Earlier version of the concluding paragraph of V, 23: 

In the preceding observation by Ptolemy, however, the value was 230°. In the interval, therefore, 
35 in addition to complete revolutions there are 220° 31' [= (90° 31' + 360°= 450° 31')—230°]. 
From Antoninus [Pius’] year 2, 8 l / 4 hours before noon, Cracow time, on the 20th day of the 
month Tybi until 1529 C.E., 12 March, 7 Va hours after noon, there are 1391 Egyptian years, 
69 days, 39 day-minutes, 23 day-seconds. In this time there are likewise counted 220° 31' in 
addition to complete revolutions, which are 859 according to the Table of Mean Motions [after 
40 V, 1], which therefore is correct. Meanwhile, the positions of the eccentric’s apsides have remained 
unchanged at 48 V 3 ° and 228° 20']. 


THE PLACES OF VENUS’ ANOMALY Chapter 24 

[Earlier version: 

THE PLACES OF VENUS’ MEAN ANOMALY 
45 Hence the places of Venus’ parallactic anomaly are easily established. For from the birth of 
Christ to Ptolemy’s observation there are 138 Egyptian years, 18 days, 9 1 / 2 day-minutes. The motion 


277 



corresponding to this interval is 105° 25'. When this value is subtracted from the 230° of 
Ptolemy’s observation, the remainder is Venus’ anomaly of 124 ° 35' [ = 230° —105° 25'] at 
midnight preceding 1 January [1 C.E.]. Then, in accordance with the reckoning of the motion and 
the time, which has often been repeated, the remaining places are, for the 1st Olympiad, 318° 9'; 
for Alexander, 79° 14'; for Caesar, 70° 48']. 5 


[Printed version: 

From the 1st Olympiad to dawn on the 18th day of the month Mesori in Ptol¬ 
emy Philadelphus’ year 13 there are 503 Egyptian years 228 days 40 day-minutes, 
during which the motion is computed = 290° 39'. Subtract this figure from 252° 5' 
plus 1 revolution [612° 5'-290° 39'], and the remainder = 321° 26' = the place io 
of the 1st Olympiad. From this place, the remaining places are obtained by 
computing the motion and the time, which has often been mentioned: 
Alexander’s = 81° 52', Caesar’s = 70° 26', and Christ’s = 126° 45'. 


MERCURY 


Chapter 25 


Now that I have shown how Venus is linked with the earth’s motion, and is 
beneath what ratio of its circles its uniform motion lies concealed. Mercury re¬ 
mains. It too will doubtless conform to the same basic assumption, even though 
it wanders in more convolutions than does Venus or any [other] of the [planets] 
discussed above. As is clear from the experience of the ancient observers, the 
narrowest of Mercury’s [greatest] elongations from the sun occur in the sign of so 
the Balance, and wider [greatest] elongations (as is proper) in the opposite sign 
[the Ram]. Yet its widest [greatest] elongations do not occur in this place, but in 
certain others to either side [of the Ram], namely, in the Twins and Water Bearer, 
especially in Antoninus [Pius’] time, according to Ptolemy’s conclusion [Syntaxis, 
IX, 8]. This displacement occurs in no other planet. ss 

The explanation of this phenomenon was believed by the ancient astronomers 
to be the earth’s motionlessness and Mercury’s motion on its large epicycle, 
[carried] by an eccentric. They realized that a single, simple eccentric could not 
account for these phenomena (even when they permitted the eccentric to move 
not around its own center, but around a different center). They were further so 
obliged to grant that the same eccentric which carried the epicycle moved on 
another circlet, such as they accepted in connection with the moon’s eccentric 
[IV, 1]. Thus there were three centers: namely, that belonging to the eccentric 
which carried the epicycle; secondly, to the circlet; and thirdly, to that circle 
which more recent astronomers call the “equant”. Passing over the first two as 
centers, the ancients allowed the epicycle to move uniformly only around the 
equant’s center. This procedure was in gross conflict with the true center [of 
the epicycle’s motion], its relative [distances], and the prior centers of both 
[other circles]. The ancients were convinced that the phenomena of this planet 
could be explained in no other way than that expounded at considerable length 40 
in Ptolemy’s Syntaxis [IX, 6]. 

However, in order that this last planet too may be rescued from the affronts 
and pretenses of its detractors, and that its uniform motion, no less than that 


278 



BOOK V CH. 25 


of the other aforementioned planets, may be revealed in relation to the earth’s 
motion, I shall attribute to it too, [as the circle mouilted] on its eccentric, an eccen¬ 
tric instead of the epicycle accepted in antiquity. The pattern, however, is different 
from Venus’ [V, 22], and yet on the [outer] eccentric there moves an epicyclet. The 
5 planet is carried not around the epicyclet’s circumference, but up and down along 
its diameter. This [motion along a straight line] can be the result also of uniform 
circular motions, as was shown above in connection with the precession of the 
equinoxes [III, 4]. There is nothing surprising in this, since Proclus too in his 
Commentary on Euclid’s Elements declares that a straight line can also be produced by 
io multiple motions. Mercury’s appearances will be demonstrated by all these [de¬ 
vices]. But to make the hypothesis clearer, let the earth’s grand circle be AB, with 
its center at C. On diameter ACB, between points B and C, take D as center and 
with radius = 1 / 3 CD describe circlet EF, so that the greatest distance from C 
is at F, and at E the least distance. Around F as center describe HI as Mercury’s 
is [outer eccentric] circle. Then, around its higher apse I, taken as center, add the 
epicyclet [ KL ] traversed by the planet. Let HI, an eccentreccentric, function as 
an epicycle on an eccentric. 

After the diagram has been drawn in this way, let all these [points] occur in 
order on straight line AHCEDFKILB. But meanwhile put the planet at K, that 
» is, at the least distance = KF from F = the center of the circle carrying the 
epicyclet. Make this [X] the beginning of Mercury’s revolutions. Conceive center 
F performing two revolutions to one of the earth’s and in the same direction, 
that is, eastward. The same [speed applies] also to the planet on KL, but up and 
down along the diameter with respect to the center of circle HI. 


B 



279 



REVOLUTIONS 


From these arrangements it follows that whenever the earth is in A or B, 
the center of Mercury’s [outer eccentric] circle is at F = its greatest distance 
from point C. But when the earth is midway [between A and £] at a quadrant’s 
distance from them, [the center of Mercury’s outer eccentric] is at E = its closest 
[approach to C]. In accordance with this sequence the pattern is the opposite 5 
of Venus’ [V, 22]. Furthermore, as a result of this rule, while Mercury traverses 
the diameter of epicyclet KL , it is closest to the center of the circle carrying the 
epicyclet, that is, it is at K, when the earth crosses diameter AB. When the earth 
on either side is at the places midway [between A and B\, the planet arrives at 
L = its greatest distance [from the center of the circle carrying the epicyclet]. 10 
In this way, commensurate with the earth’s annual period, two double revolutions 
equal to each other occur, that of the center of the [outer eccentric] circle on 
the circumference of the circlet EF, and that of the planet along diameter LK. 

But in the meantime the epicyclet or line FI moves uniformly with its own 
motion around circle HI and its center in about 88 days, completing one revolu- is 
tion independently with respect to the sphere of the fixed stars. However, in 
what I call the “motion in parallax”, which exceeds the earth’s motion, the epi¬ 
cyclet overtakes the earth in 116 days, as can be inferred more precisely from 
the Table of Mean Motions [after V, 1]. It therefore follows that in its own motion 
Mercury does not always describe the same circular circumference. On the contra- 20 
ry, in proportion to its distance from the center of its deferent, it traces an ex¬ 
ceedingly varying circuit, smallest in point K, greatest in L, and mean in I. 
Almost the same variation may be noticed in the lunar epicyclepicyclet [IV, 3]. 
But what the moon does along the circumference, Mercury accomplishes along 
the diameter in a reciprocating motion. Yet this is compounded out of uniform as 
motions. How this is done, I explained above in connection with the precession 
of the equinoxes [III, 4]. However, I shall add some other remarks about this 
subject later on in connection with the latitudes [VI, 2]. The foregoing hypothesis 
suffices for all the observed phenomena of Mercury, as will become clear from 
a review of the observations made by Ptolemy and others. so 

THE PLACE OF MERCURY’S HIGHER AND Chapter 26 
LOWER APSIDES 

Ptolemy observed Mercury in Antoninus [Pius’] year 1 on the 20th day of the 
month Epiphi after sunset, when the planet was at its greatest evening elongation 

from the sun’s mean place [Syntaxis, IX, 7]. This = 138 C.E., 188 days, 42 1 L 35 
day-minutes, Cracow time. According to my computation, therefore, the sun’s 
mean place = 63° 50', and the planet [was observed] through the instrument 
(as Ptolemy says) at 7° within the Crab [= 97°]. But after the subtraction of 
the equinoctial precession, then = 6° 40', Mercury’s place clearly = 90° 20' 
[=97°-6°40'] from the beginning of the Ram in the sphere of the fixed stars, « 
and its greatest elongation from the mean sun = 26 V 2 0 [= 90° 20'-63° 50']. 

Ptolemy made a second observation at dawn on the 19th day of the month 
Phamenoth in Antoninus [Pius’] year 4 = 140 years 67 days from the beginning 
of the Christian era, plus about 12 day-minutes, with the mean sun at 303° 19'. 
Through the instrument Mercury appeared at 13 7 2 ° within the Goat [= 283 72°]> 46 
but at about 276° 49' [s 283 1 l 2 °-6° 40'] from the beginning of the Ram 


280 



BOOK V CH. 26-27 


among the fixed stars. Therefore, its greatest morning elongation likewise = 
26 V 2 0 [= 303° 19-276° 49']. The limits of its elongations from the sun’s mean 
place being equal on both sides, Mercury’s apsides must be halfway between both 
places, that is, between 276° 49' and 90° 20': 3° 34' and, diametrically opposite, 
5 183° 34' [276° 49-90° 20' = 186° 29'; 186° 29' + 2 » 93° 15'; 276° 49 - 93° 
15' = 183° 34'; 183° 34'-180° = 3° 34']. These must be the places of both of 
Mercury’s apsides, the higher and the lower. 

These are distinguished, as in the case of Venus [V, 20] by two observations. 
The first of these was made [by Ptolemy, Syntaxis, IX, 8 ] at dawn on the 15th 
xo day of the month Athyr in Hadrian’s year 19, with the sun’s mean place = 
182° 38'. Mercury’s greatest morning elongation from it = 19° 3', since Mercury’s 
apparent place = 163° 35' [+19° 3' = 182° 38']. In the same year 19 of 
Hadrian = 135 C.E., on the 19th day of the Egyptian month Pachon at twilight 
Mercury was found with the aid of the instrument at 27° 43' in the sphere of the 
15 fixed stars, with the sun in its mean motion = 4° 28'. Once more [as in the case 
of Venus, V, 20] the planet’s greatest evening elongation = 23° 15' was larger 
than the previous [morning elongation = 19° 3']. Hence Mercury’s apogee quite 
clearly was nowhere else but at about 183 Vs 0 [= 183° 34'] at that time. Q. E. D. 

THE SIZE OF MERCURY’S ECCENTRICITY, Chapter 27 
m AND THE RATIO OF ITS CIRCLES 

By means of these observations the distance between the centers and the sizes 
of the circles are likewise demonstrated at the same time. For let straight line AB 
pass through Mercury’s apsides, A the higher, and B the lower, and let AB also 
be the diameter of the [earth’s] grand circle with center C. With center D, describe 
25 the planet’s orbit. Then draw lines AE and BF tangent to the orbit. Join DE and 
DF. 

In the former of the two observations above, the greatest morning elongation 
was seen = 19° 3'; therefore, angle CAE = 19° 3'. But in the other observation 
the greatest evening elongation was seen = 23 74°- Consequently, in both right 
30 triangles AED and BFD, the angles being given, the ratios of the sides will also 
be given. Thus, with AD = 100,000p, ED = the radius of the orbit = 32,639p. 
However, with BD = 100,000p, in those units FD = 39,474p. Yet FD (being 
a radius of the orbit) = ED = 32,639p whereof AD = 100,000p. In those units 
DB, the remainder [of AB -AD] = 82,685p. Hence AC = V 2 [AD+DB = 
35 100,000p+82,685p = 182,685p] = 91,342p, and CD = the remainder [= AD- 
AC = 100,000p-91,342p] = 8658p = the distance between the centers [of the 
earth’s orbit and Mercury’s orbit]. With AC = Ip or 60', however, the radius 
of Mercury’s orbit = 21' 26", and CD = 5' 41". With AC = 100,000p, DF = 
35,733p, and CD = 9479p. Q. E. D. 

40 But these sizes too do not remain everywhere the same, and they are quite 
different from those occurring near the mean apsides, as is shown by the apparent 
morning and evening elongations observed in those positions, as reported by Theon 
and Ptolemy [Syntaxis, IX, 9]. Theon observed Mercury’s greatest evening elonga¬ 
tion after sunset on the 18th day of the month Mesori in Hadrian’s year 14 = 
45 129 years 216 days 45 day-minutes after the birth of Christ, with the sun’s mean 
place = 93 72 °> that is, near Mercury’s mean apse [= 72 (183 ° 34' -3°34'); = 90° 


281 



REVOLUTIONS 


+3° 34']. Through the instrument the planet was seen at 3 s l 6 ° east of the Little 
King in the Lion. Therefore its place = 119 s / 4 ° [=3° 50'+115° 50'], and its 
greatest evening elongation = 26 V 4 0 [= 119 8 / 4 °-93 V 2 0 ]. The other greatest 
elongation was reported by Ptolemy as observed by himself at dawn on the 21 st 
day of the month Mesori in Antoninus [Pius’] year 2 = 138 years 219 days 6 
12 day-minutes in the Christian calendar. In like manner the sun’s mean place = 

93° 39', from which he found Mercury’s greatest morning elongation = 20 x / 4 °, 
since it was seen at 73 a / 6 ° in the sphere of the fixed stars [73°24'+20° 15' = 

930 39 '] 

Now reproduce ACDB as the diameter of the [earth’s] grand circle. As before, 10 
let it pass through Mercury’s apsides. At point C erect the perpendicular CE as 
the line of the sun’s mean motion. Between C and D take point F. Around it 
describe Mercury’s orbit, to which straight lines EH and EG are tangent. Join 
FG, FH, and EF. 

It is proposed once more to find point F, and the ratio of radius FG to AC. 15 
Angle CEG is given = 26 V 4 °> and CEH = 20 1 / i °. Therefore, the whole of 
E HEG [= CEH+CEG = 20° 15'+26° 15'] = 46 V 2 °. HEF = % [HEG = 46 V 2 °] = 

23 V 4 °. CEF = the remainder [= HEF-CEH = 23 7 4 °-20 V 4 °] = 3°. There¬ 
fore, in right triangle CEF, side CF is given = 524 p , and hypotenuse FE = 10,014 p 
whereof CE = AC = 10,000 p . The whole of CD has been shown above [earlier ao 
in V, 27] = 948 p when the earth is in the planet’s higher or lower apse. DF = the 
diameter of the circlet traversed by the center of Mercury’s orbit = the excess 
[of CD = 948 p over CF = 524 p ] = 424 p , and radius IF = 212 p [= Va diameter 
DF]. Hence, the whole of CFI [= CF+FI = 524 p +212 p ] 3 736 1 / 2 P . 

Similarly, in triangle HEF (in which H is a right angle) HEF is also given = as 
23 1 / i °. Hence, FH clearly = 3947 p whereof EF = 10,000 p . But with EF = 
10,014 p whereof CE = 10,000 p , FH = 3953 p . However, FH was shown above 
[at the beginning of V, 27, where it was lettered DF] = 3573 p . Let FK — 3573 p . 
Then HK = the remainder [= this FH-FK = 3953 p -3573 p ] = 380 p = the 
greatest variation in the planet’s distance from F = the center of its orbit, which 30 
occurs [as the planet moves] from the higher and lower apsides to the mean apsides. 

On account of this distance and its variation, the planet describes around F, 
the center of its orbit, unequal circles depending on the various distances, the 
smallest = 3573 p [= FK], and the greatest = 3953 p [= FH]. The mean between 
them must be =3763 p [380 p -^2 = 190 p ; 190 p +3573 p ; 3953 p -190 p ], Q. E. D. s 6 

WHY MERCURY’S ELONGATIONS AT ABOUT Chapter 28 
THE SIDE OF A HEXAGON [= 60°, FROM 
THE PERIGEE] LOOK BIGGER THAN 
THE ELONGATIONS OCCURRING AT PERIGEE 

Furthermore, it will therefore not seem surprising that at about [the points « 
where] the sides of a hexagon [touch a circumscribed] circle. Mercury’s elongations 
are greater than at perigee. [These elongations at 60° from perigee] exceed even 
those which I have already demonstrated [at the end of V, 27]. Consequently, 
the ancients believed that Mercury’s orbit comes closest to the earth twice in one 
revolution of the earth. 46 

Construct angle BCE = 60°. Hence angle BIF = 120°, since F is assumed 


282 



BOOK V CH. 28-29 


to make two revolutions for one of E = the earth. Join EF and EL [In V, 27] Cl 
was shown = 736 x / 2 p whereof EC = 10,000 p , and angle ECI is given = 60°. 
Therefore in triangle ECI, the remaining side El = 9655 p , and angle CEI s 
3° 47'. CEI = ACE-CIE. But ACE is given = 120° [= supplement of {BCE = 

5 60°) by construction]. Therefore CIE = 116° 13' [= ACE-CEI = 120°-3° 47']. 
But angle FIB likewise = 120° = 2 x ECI [= 60°] by construction. CIF, which 
[together with FIB = 120°] completes the semicircle, = 60°. EIF = the remain¬ 
der [= CIE-CIF = 116° 13'-60°] = 56° 13'. But IF was shown [in V, 27] = 
212 p whereof El = 9655p [V, 28, above]. These sides enclose angle EIF given 
io [=56° 13']. This information yields angle FEI = 1° 4'. CEF = the remainder 
[= CEI-FEI = 3° 47'- 1° 4'] = 2° 43' = the difference between the center 
of the planet’s orbit and the sun’s mean place. The remaining side EF [in triangle 
EFI] = 9540P. 

Now describe Mercury’s orbit GH around center F. From E draw EG and E 
is EH tangent to the orbit. Join FG and FH. We must first ascertain the size of radius 
FG or FH in this situation. We shall do so in the following way. Take a circlet 
whose diameter KL = 380p [= greatest variation; V, 27] whereof AC = 10,000p. 
Along this diameter, or its equivalent, conceive the planet approaching toward, 
or receding from, center F on straight line FG or FH in the manner explained 
ao above in connection with the precession of the equinoxes [III, 4]. According 
to the hypothesis that BCE intercepts an arc = 60°, take KM = 120° in the 
same degrees. Draw MN perpendicular to KL. MN = half the chord subtend¬ 
ing 2 xKM or 2 XML, will intercept LN = 1 / i of the diameter = 95p [= 

1 / i x380p], as is proved in Euclid’s Elements , XIII, 12, combined with V, 15. 

25 Then KN = the remaining 3 / i of the diameter = 285 p [= 380 - 95]. This, 
added to the planet’s least distance [= 3573P; V, 27] = the desired line FG 
or FH in this instance = 3858 p [= 3573 p +285 p ], with AC similarly = 10,000 p 
and EF also shown = 9540 p [V, 28 above]. Therefore, in right triangle FEG or FEH, 
two sides are given [EF with FG or FH]. Hence angle FEG or FEH will also be 
30 given. With EF = 10,000p, FG or FH = 4044 p , subtending an angle = 23°52 1 / 2 '. 
Thus, the whole of GEH [= FEG+FEH = 2x23° 52 */,'] = 47° 45'. But at the 
lower apse only 46 1 / 2 ° were seen; and at the mean apse, similarly 46 1 / 2 ° [V, 27]. 
Consequently, here the angle has become greater than in both those situations 
by 1° 14' [s 47° 45'-46° 30']. The reason is not that the planet’s orbit is nearer 
35 to the earth than it is at perigee, but that here the planet describes a larger circle 
than it does there. All these results are in agreement with both past and present 
observations, and are produced by uniform motions. 

ANALYSIS OF MERCURY’S MEAN MOTION Chapter 29 

Among the more ancient observations [Syntaxis, IX, 10] there is found an 
40 appearance of Mercury, at dawn on the 19th day of the Egyptian month Thoth 
in Ptolemy Philadelphus’ year 21,2 lunar diameters east of the straight line passing 
through the first and second of the stars in the Scorpion’s forehead, and 1 lunar 
diameter north of the first star. The place of the first star is known = 209° 40' 
longitude, 1 1 / 3 ° north latitude; of the second star = 209° longitude, 1 ° V 2 0 V 3 0 = 

45 1 6 / e ° south latitude. From this information Mercury’s place was inferred = 
210° 40' longitude [= 209° 40'+(2 xV 2 °)], s 1 s / 6 ° north latitude [= 1 7 8 0 +7 2 °]. 


283 


REVOLUTIONS 


From Alexander’s death there were 59 years 17 days 45 day-minutes; the sun’s 
mean place = 228° 8', according to my computation; and the planet’s morning 
elongation = 17° 28'. This was still increasing, as was noticed during the next 
4 days. Hence the planet had certainly not yet reached its greatest morning 
elongation nor the point of tangency on its orbit, but was still traveling in the s 
lower arc, closer to the earth. Since the higher apse — 183° 20' [V, 26], its distance 
from the sun’s mean place = 44° 48' [= 228° 8'-183° 20']. 

Then once more let ACB = the grand circle’s diameter, as above [V, 27]. 
From C = the [grand circle’s] center, draw CE as the line of the sun’s mean 
motion so that angle ACE = 44° 48'. With I as center, describe the circlet which io 
carries the eccentric’s center = F. Take angle BIF by hypothesis = 2 xACE 
[ = 2 X44° 48'] = 89° 36'. Join EF and El. 

In triangle ECI two sides are given: Cl = 736 1 { 2 P [V, 27] whereof CE = 10,000 p . 
These sides enclose angle ECI given = 135° 12' = supplement of ACE [= 
44° 48']. The remaining side El = 10,534 p , and angle CEI = 2° 49' = ACE - is 
EIC. Therefore CIE is given = 41° 59' [= 44° 48'-2° 49']. But CIF = supple¬ 
ment of BIF [= 89° 36'] = 90° 24'. Hence, the whole of EIF [= CIF+EIC = 
90° 24'+41° 59'] = 132° 23'. 

In triangle EFI, EIF is likewise enclosed by given sides, namely, El = 
10,534 p , and IF = 211 7 2 p , whereof AC is assumed = 10,000 p . This information 20 
discloses angle FEI = 50', with the remaining side EF = 10,678 p . CEF = 
the remainder [= CEI - FEI = 2° 49'- 50'] = 1 0 59'. 

Now take circlet LM, with diameter LM = 380 p whereof AC = 10,000 p . 
Let arc LN — 89° 36' by hypothesis. Draw its chord ZJV, and NR perpendicular 
to LM. Then (LN ) 2 = LM xLR. According to this given ratio, LR in particular 26 
is given as a length = 189 p whereof diameter LM = 380 p . Along this straight 
line [LR], or its equivalent, the planet is known to have diverged from F, the center 
of its orbit, while line EC has traversed angle ACE. Hence, when these [189] 
units are added to 3573 p = the minimum distance [V, 27], in this situation the 
sum = 3762 p . 30 

Therefore, with center F, and radius = 3762 p , describe a circle. Draw EG, 
cutting the convex circumference [of Mercury’s orbit] at point G so that angle 
CEG = 17° 28' = the planet’s apparent elongation from the sun’s mean place 
[= 228° 8'-210° 40']. Join FG, and FK parallel to CE. When angle CEF is sub¬ 
tracted from the whole of CEG, the remainder FEG = 15° 29' [= 17° 28'-1 0 59']. 35 
Hence, in triangle EFG, two sides are given: EF = 10,678 p , and FG = 3762 p , 
as well as angle FEG = 15° 29'. This information yields angle EFG = 33° 46'. 
EFG - (EFK — CEF [its alternate interior angle]) = KFG — arc KG = 31 0 47' 

[= 33° 46'-1 0 59']. This is the planet’s distance from its orbit’s mean perigee = K. 

If a semicircle is added to KG, the sum = 211° 47' [= 180°+31° 47'] = the 40 
mean motion in parallactic anomaly in this observation. Q. E. D. 

MORE RECENT OBSERVATIONS Chapter 30 

OF MERCURY’S MOTIONS 

The foregoing method of analyzing this planet’s motion was shown to us by 
the ancients. But they were helped by clearer skies where the Nile fit is said) 45 
does not give off such mists as does the Vistula for us. We inhabitants of a more 


284 


BOOK V CH. 30 


severe region have been denied that advantage by nature. The less frequent calm¬ 
ness of our air, in addition to the great obliquity of the sphere, allows us to see 
Mercury more rarely, even when it is at its greatest elongation from the sun. 
For, Mercury’s rising in the Ram and Fishes is not visible to us nor, on the other 
6 hand, is its setting in the Virgin and Balance. Indeed, in the Crab or Twins it 
does not show itself in any position whatsoever when there is only twilight or 
dawn, whereas it never appears at night unless the sun has moved well into the 
Lion. This planet has accordingly inflicted many perplexities and labors on us in 
our investigation of its wanderings. 

10 I have therefore borrowed three positions from those which were carefully 
observed at Nuremberg. The first was determined by Bernhard Walther, Regio¬ 
montanus’ pupil, 5 uniform hours after midnight on 9 September = 5 days 
before the Ides, 1491 C.E., by means of an armillary astrolabe directed toward 
Palili-cium [ = Aldebaran]. He saw Mercury at 13 1 / 2 ° within the Virgin [= 
is i63>®/ 2 ?J}rth latitude. At that time the planet was beginning to set in the morning, 
while it had steadily diminished its morning appearances during the preceding 
days. From the beginning of the Christian era there were 1491 Egyptian years 
258 days 12 y 2 day-minutes. The sun’s mean place in itself = 149° 48', but in 
relation to the vernal equinox = 26° 47' within the Virgin [= 176° 47']. Hence 
20 Mercury’s elongation = 13 1 / 4 ° [176° 47'-163° 30' = 13° 17']. 

The second position was observed by Johann Schoner 6 1 / 2 hours after mid-night 
on 9 January 1504 C.E., when 10° within the Scorpion were culminating over 
Nuremberg. He saw the planet at 3 1 / 3 ° within the Goat, 0° 45' north latitude. The 
sun’s mean place in relation to the vernal equinox was computed =21° T 25 
within the Goat [= 297° 7'], with Mercury 23° 47' to the west in the morning. 
The third observation was made by the same Johann [Schoner] on 18 March 
in the same year 1504. He found Mercury at 26° 55' within the Ram, about 3° 
north latitude, when 25° within the Crab were culminating over Nuremberg. 
His armillary sphere was directed toward the same star Palilicium [Aldebaran] 
so at 7 Y 2 hours after noon, with the sun’s mean place in respect to the vernal equi¬ 
nox = 5° 39' within the Ram, and Mercury’s elongation from the sun in the 
evening = 21 0 17' [s 26° 55'- 5° 39']. 

From the first position to the second, there are 12 Egyptian years 125 days 
3 day-minutes 45 day-seconds. During this time the sun’s simple motion = 
as 120° 14' and Mercury’s anomaly in parallax = 316° 1'. In the second interval 
there are 69 days 31 day-minutes 45 day-seconds; the sun’s mean simple mo¬ 
tion = 68° 32', and Mercury’s mean anomaly in parallax = 216°. 

I wish to analyze Mercury’s motion at the present time on the basis of these 
three observations. In them, I believe it must be granted, the measurements of 
40 the circles have remained valid from Ptolemy until now, since also in the other 
planets the earlier sound writers are not found to have gone astray in this respect. 
If in addition to these observations we had the place of the eccentric’s apse, nothing 
further would be missing in the apparent motion of this planet too. I have assumed 
that the place of the higher apse =211 7 2 °, that is, 18 1 j 2 ° within the sign of the 
45 Scorpion. For I might not make it smaller without injuring the observers. Thus 
we shall have the eccentric’s anomaly, I mean, the distance of the sun’s mean 
motion from the apogee, at the first determination, = 298° 15'; at the second, = 
58°29'; and at the third, = 127° 1'. 


285 



REVOLUTIONS 


A 




Now draw the diagram according to the preceding model, except that angle 
ACE is taken = 61° 45' [= 360°-298° 15'] = the distance by which the line 
of the mean sun was west of the apogee in the first observation. Let everything 
which follows therefrom be in agreement with the hypothesis. IC is given [V, 
29] = 736 V 2 p whereof AC = 10,000 p . In triangle ECI, angle EC1 also is given s 
[= 180°-(ACE = 61° 45') - 118° 15']. Angle CEI will be given too = 3° 35', 
and side IE = 10,369 p whereof EC = 10,000 p , and IF = 211 V 2 p [V, 29]. 

Then also in triangle EFI, there are two sides having a given ratio [IE : IF = 
10,369 p : 211 Va p ]- By construction angle BIF = 123 V 2 0 = 2 xACE [= 61° 45']. 
CIF = the supplement [of BIF = 123 1 / 2 °] = 56 1 / 2 °. Therefore the whole 10 
of ElF [= CIF+EIC =56 0 30 '+(EIC = ACE-CEI = 61° 45'- 3 0 35' = 58° 10')] = 
114° 40'. Therefore IEF = 1° 5', and side EF = 10,37l p . Hence angle CEF = 

2 V 2 ° [= CEI-IEF = 3° 35'-1 0 5']. 

However, in order to determine how much the motion of approach and with¬ 
drawal has increased [the distance of] the circle centered at F from the apogee 15 
or perigee, describe a circlet quadrisected by diameters LM and NR at center O. 
Take angle POL = 2 xACE [=61° 45'] = 123 1 / 2 °. From point P drop PS 
perpendicular to LM. Then, according to the given ratio, OP (or its equivalent 
LO ) : OS = 10,000 p : 5519 p = 190 : 105. These numbers, added together, 
constitute LS = 295 p whereof AC = 10,000 p , and the extent to which the planet 20 
has become more remote from center F. When 295 p is added to 3573 p = the 
least distance [V, 27], the sum = 3868 p = the present value. 

With this as radius, describe circle HG around center F. Join EG, and extend 
EF as straight line EFH. Angle CEF has been shown = 2 1 / 2 °- GEC was ob¬ 
served = 13 1 / i ° = the distance between the planet in the morning and the mean 25 
sun [in the observation attributed to Walther]. Then the whole of FEG [= GEC+ 
CEF = 13° 15'+2° 30'] = 15 s / 4 °. But in triangle EFG, EF : FG = 10,371 p : 
3868 p , and angle E is given [=15° 45']. This information will give us also angle 
EGF = 49° 8'. Hence the remaining exterior angle [GFH = EGF+GEF = 
49° 8'+15° 45'] = 64° 53'. When this quantity is subtracted from the whole so 
circle, the remainder = 295° 7' = the true anomaly in parallax. To this, add 
angle CEF [=2° 30'], and the sum = the mean and uniform [anomaly in par¬ 
allax] = 297° 37', which we were looking for. To this, add 316° T [= the paral¬ 
lactic anomaly between the first observation and the second], and for the 
second observation we shall have the uniform parallactic anomaly = 253 ° 38' 35 
[= 297° 37'+316° T = 613° 38'-360°], which I shall also show to be correct 
and in agreement with the observation. 

As the measure of the anomaly of the eccentric in the second observation, let 
us take angle ACE = 58° 29'. Then, once more, in triangle CEI two sides are 
given: IC = 736 p [previously and hereafter 736 X / 2 P ] whereof EC = 10,000 p , 40 
and also angle ECI, the supplement [of ACE = 58° 29'] = 121° 3T. Therefore, 
the third side El = 10,404 p in the same units, and angle CEI = 3° 28'. Similarly, 
in triangle EIF, angle EIF = 118° 3', and side 7F = 211 V 2 p whereof IE = 
10,404 p . Therefore, the third side EF = 10,505 p in the same units, and angle 
IEF = 61'. Hence, the remainder FEC [= CEI-IEF = 3° 28'-1° 1'] = 2° 27' = 45 
the eccentric’s prosthaphaeresis. When this quantity is added to the mean motion 
in parallax, the sum = the true [motion in parallax] = 256° 5' [= 2° 27'+ 
253° 38']. 


286 



BOOK V CH. 30 


Now on the epicyclet [which produces the] approach and withdrawal let us 
take arc LP or angle LOP — 2 xACE [= 58° 29'] = 116° 58'. Once more, 
then, in right triangle OPS, because the ratio of the sides OP : OS is given = 
10,000 p : 4535 p , OS = 86 p whereof OP or LO = 190 p . As a length the whole 
s of LOS [= LO+OS = 190 p +86 p ] = 276 p . When this quantity is added to the 
smallest distance = 3573 p [V, 27], the sum = 3849 p . 

With this as radius, around F as center describe circle HG so that the apogee 
of the parallax is at point H. Let the planet’s distance from point H be arc HG, 
extending westward 103° 55'. This is the amount by which an entire revolution 
io differs from the corrected motion in parallax [= mean motion + additive pros- 
thaphaeresis = true motion] = 256° 5' [+103° 55' = 360°]. Therefore EFG, 
the supplement [of HFG = 103° 55'] = 76° 5'. Thus again in triangle EFG 
two sides are given: FG = 3849 p whereof EF — 10,505 p . Hence angle FEG = 

21° 19'. When this quantity is added to CEF [= 2° 27'], the whole of CEG = 
is 23° 46' = the apparent distance between*C = the center of the grand circle, 
and the planet G. This distance too takes only a little away from the observed elon¬ 
gation [=23° 47']. 

This agreement will be further confirmed a third time when we take angle 
ACE = 127° T or its supplement BCE = 52° 59'. Again we shall have a triangle 
20 [j ECP\ , two of whose sides are known: Cl — 736 1 / 2 P whereof EC = 10,000 p . 
These sides enclose angle EC I = 52° 59'. From this information angle CEI 
is shown = 3° 31', and side IE = 9575 p whereof EC = 10,000 p . By construction 
angle EIF is given = 49° 28', and also is enclosed by given sides FI — 211 1 / 2 p 
whereof El = 9575 p . Hence [in triangle EIF] the remaining side [EF] = 9440 p 
25 in those units, and angle IEF = 59'. When this quantity is subtracted from the 
whole of IEC [= 3° 31'], the remainder = FEC = 2° 32'. This is the subtractive 
prosthaphaeresis of the eccentric’s anomaly. When this quantity [2° 32'] is added 
to the mean parallactic anomaly, which I determined by adding 216° [= the 
mean parallactic anomaly] of the second interval [to 253° 38' = the uniform 
so parallactic anomaly in the second observation; 216°+253°38' = 469° 38'- 
360°] = 109° 38', the true [parallactic anomaly] comes out = 112° 10' [= 2° 32'+ 

109° 38']. E 

Now on the epicyclet take angle LOP = 2 XECI [=52° 59'] = 105° 58'. 
Here too, on the basis of the ratio PO : OS, we shall have OS = 52 p, so that the 
35 whole of LOS = 242 p [= LO+OS = 190 p +52 p ]. When this quantity [242 p ] 
is added to the smallest distance = 3573 p , we shall have the corrected [distance] = 
3815 p . With this as radius, around F as center describe a circle in which the 
parallax’s higher apse = H on EFH, prolonged as a straight line. As a measure 
of the true parallactic anomaly, take arc HG = 112° 10', and join GF. Then 
40 the supplementary angle GFE = 67° 50'. This is enclosed by the given sides 
GF = 3815 p whereof EF = 9440 p . From this information angle FEG will be 
determined = 23° 50'. From this quantity subtract the prosthaphaeresis CEF 
[= 2° 32'], and the remainder CEG = 21° 18' = the apparent distance between 
the evening planet [G] and [CJ the center of the grand circle. This is practically 
45 the same distance as was found by observation [= 21° 17']. 

This agreement of these three positions with the observations, therefore, 
unquestionably guarantees that the eccenlric’s higher apse is located, as I assumed, 
at 211 V 2 0 4n th e sphere of the fixed stars in our time, and also that the entailed 


287 


REVOLUTIONS 


consequences are correct; namely, the uniform parallactic anomaly in the first 
position = 297° 37', in the second = 253° 38', and in the third = 109° 38'. 
These are the results we were seeking. 

In that ancient observation at dawn on the 19th day of Thoth, the 1st Egyptian 
month, in Ptolemy Philadelphus’ year 21, the place of the eccentric’s higher apse 5 
(in Ptolemy’s opinion) = 183° 20' in the sphere of the fixed stars, while the mean 
parallactic anomaly = 211° 47' [V, 29]. The interval between this most recent 
and that ancient observation = 1768 Egyptian years 200 days 33 day-minutes. 

In that time the eccentric’s higher apse moved 28° 10' [= 211° 30'-183° 20'] 
in the sphere of the fixed stars, and the parallactic motion, in addition to 5570 10 
whole revolutions = 257° 51' [+211° 47' = 469° 38'; 469° 38'-360° = 109° 38' 
in the 3rd observation]. For in 20 years about 63 periods are completed, 
amounting in [20 x88 =] 1760 years to [88 X63 =] 5544 periods. In the rem aining 
8 years 200 days there are 26 revolutions [20 : 8 x / 2 ^ 63 : 26]. Accordingly in 
1768 years 200 days 33 day-minutes there is an excess, after 5570 revolutions is 
[= 5544+26], of 257° 51'. This is the difference between the observed places 
in that first ancient observation and ours. This difference also agrees with the 
numbers set down in my Tables [after V, 1]. When we compare to this interval 
the 28° 10' through which the eccentric’s apogee moved, its motion will be 
recognized = 1° in 63 years, provided it was uniform [1768 1 j 2 y -j- 28 1 l e = 20 
63*]. 

DETERMINING MERCURY’S PLACES Chapter 31 

From the beginning of the Christian era to the most recent observation there 
are 1504 Egyptian years 87 days 48 day-minutes. During that time Mercury’s 
parallactic motion in anomaly = 63° 14', disregarding whole revolutions. When 25 
this quantity is subtracted from 109° 38' [the anomaly in the third modem observa¬ 
tion], the remainder =46° 24' = the place of Mercury’s parallactic anomaly at the 
beginning of the Christian era. From that time backward to the beginning of the 
1st Olympiad there are 775 Egyptian years 12 x / 2 days. For this interval the compu¬ 
tation is 95° 3' after complete revolutions. When this quantity is subtracted from 3° 
the place of Christ (one revolution being borrowed), the remainder = the place 
of the 1st Olympiad = 311° 21' [= 46° 24'+360° = 406° 24-95° 3']. Moreover, 
the computation being made for the 451 years 247 days from this time to Alexan¬ 
der’s death, his place comes out = 213° 3'. 

AN ALTERNATIVE ACCOUNT Chapter 32 35 

OF APPROACH AND WITHDRAWAL 

Before leaving Mercury, I have decided to consider another method, no less 
plausible than the foregoing, by which that approach and withdrawal can be pro¬ 
duced and explained. Let circle GHKP be quadrisected at center F. Around F 
describe a concentric circlet LM. In addition describe another circle OR, with « 
center L and radius LFO = FG or FH. Suppose that this whole combination 
of circles, together with their intersections GFR and HFP, moves eastward away 
from the apogee of the planet’s eccentric around center F about 2° 7' every day, 
that is, as much as the planet’s parallactic motion exceeds the earth’s motion in 


288 



BOOK V CH. 32 


the ecliptic. Let the planet meanwhile supply the rest of the parallactic motion, 
nearly equal to the earth’s motion, away from point G on its own circle OR. 
Also assume that in this same revolution, which is annual, the center of OR, 
the circle which carries the planet, moves back and forth, as was stated above 
5 [V, 25], in a motion of libration along diameter LFM, which is twice as great 
as the one posited previously. 

Now that these arrangements have been made, put the earth in its mean motion 
opposite the apogee of the planet’s eccentric. At that time place the center of the 
planet-carrying circle at L, but the planet itself at point O. Since it is then at its 
io least distance from F, as the entire [configuration] moves, the planet will describe 
the smallest circle, whose radius is FO. What follows thereafter is that when the 
earth is near the middle apse, the planet arrives at point H, corresponding to its 
greatest distance from F, and describes the largest arcs, that is, along the circle 
centered at F. For then the deferent OR will coincide with the circle GH because 
is their centers merge in F. As the earth proceeds from this position in the direction 
of the perigee [of the planet’s eccentric], and the center of the circle OR [oscillates] 
to the other limit M, the circle itself rises above GK, and the planet at R will 
again attain its least distance from F, and traverse the paths assigned to it at the 
start. For here the three equal revolutions coincide, namely, the earth’s return to 
20 the apogee of Mercury’s eccentric, the libration of the center along diameter LM, 
and the planet’s circuit from line FG to the same line. The only deviation from 
these revolutions is the motion [s 2° 7' daily] of the intersections G, H, K, 
and P away from the eccentric’s apse, as I said [earlier in V, 32]. 

Thus nature has played a game with this planet and its remarkable variability, 
25 which has nevertheless been confirmed by its perpetual, precise, and unchangeable 
orderliness. But here it should be noted that the planet does not pass through 
the middle regions of quadrants GH and KP without a deviation in longitude. 
For, as the variation in the centers intervenes, it must produce a prosthaphaeresis. 
Yet the center’s impermanence interposes an obstacle. For example, suppose that 
so while the center remained at L, the planet started out from O. Near H it would 
undergo its greatest deviation, as measured by eccentricity FL. But it follows from 
the assumptions that as the planet moves away from O, it initiates and increases 
the deviation which must be produced by the distance FL of the centers. However, 
as the movable center approaches its mean position at F, more and more of the 
35 anticipated deviation diminishes and is overcome so that it entirely disappears 
near the middle intersections H and P, where the greatest deviation should have 
been expected. Nevertheless (as I admit) even when the deviation becomes small, 
it is hidden in the sun’s rays, and is not perceived at all along the circumference 
of the circle when the planet rises or sets in the morning or evening. I did not 
40 wish to omit this model, which is no less reasonable than the foregoing model, 
and which will be highly suitable for use in connection with the variations in 
latitude [VI, 2], 



289 



REVOLUTIONS 


TABLES OF THE PROSTHAPHAERESES Chapter 33 

OF THE FIVE PLANETS 

The uniform and apparent motions of Mercury and the other planets have 
been demonstrated above and expounded by computations, which will serve 
as examples to open the way to calculating the differences in these motions at 5 
any other places. However, for the purpose of facilitating the procedure, for each 
planet I have prepared its own Tables, consisting of 6 columns and 30 rows 
in steps of 3°, in the usual manner. The first 2 columns will contain the common 
numbers not only of the eccentric’s anomaly but also of the parallaxes. The 3rd 
column shows the eccentric’s collected, I mean, total differences occurring between 10 
the uniform and nonuniform motions of those circles. In the 4th column there 
are the proportional minutes, computed as sixtieths, by which the parallaxes 
increase or decrease on account of the earth’s greater or smaller distance. In the 
5th column there are the prosthaphaereses themselves, which are the parallaxes 
occurring at the higher apse of the planet’s eccentric with reference to the grand 15 
circle. In the 6th and last column are found the surpluses by which the parallaxes 
occurring at the higher apse are exceeded by those happening at the eccentric’s 
lower apse. The Tables are as follows. 


290 



BOOK V CH. 33 


TABLE OF SATURN’S PROSTHAPHAERESES 


Common 

Numbers 

Correction 
of the Eccentric 

Propor¬ 

tional 

Minutes 

Parallaxes of 1 
the Grand Circle 
[at the Higher Apse] 

Surplus of 
the Parallax [at 
the Lower Apse] 

o 

o 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

3 

357 

0 

20 

0 

0 

17 


2 

6 

354 

0 

40 

0 

0 

34 

1 

4 

9 

351 

0 

58 

0 

0 

51 

1 

6 

12 

348 

■ 

17 

0 

1 

7 

1 

8 

15 

345 

i 

36 

1 

1 

23 

I 1 

10 

18 

342 

1 

55 

1 

1 


0 

12 

21 

339 

2 

13 

1 

1 

56 

1 

14 

24 

336 

2 

31 

2 

2 

11 

D 

16 

27 

333 

2 

49 

2 

2 

26 

Ira 

18 

30 

330 

3 

6 

3 

2 

42 

0 

19 

33 

327 

3 

23 

3 

2 

56 

I 

21 

36 

324 

3 

39 

4 

3 

10 

D 

23 

39 

321 

3 

55 

4 

3 

25 

99 

24 

42 

318 

4 

10 

5 

3 

38 

H 

26 

45 

315 

4 

25 

6 

3 

52 

if 

27 

48 

312 

4 

39 

7 

4 

5 

0 

29 

51 

309 

4 

52 

8 

4 

17 

0 

31 

54 

306 

5 

5 

9 

4 

28 

0 

33 

57 

303 

5 

17 

10 

4 

38 

0 

34 

60 

300 

5 

29 

11 

4 

49 

0 

35 

63 

297 

5 

41 

12 

4 

59 

0 

36 

66 

294 

5 

50 

13 

5 

8 

0 

37 

69 

291 

5 

59 

14 

5 

17 

0 

38 

72 

288 

6 

7 

16 

5 

24 

0 

38 

75 

285 

6 

14 

17 

5 

31 

0 

39 

78 

282 

6 

19 

18 

5 

37 

0 

39 

81 

279 

6 

23 

19 

5 

42 

0 

40 

84 

276 

6 

27 

21 

5 

46 

0 

41 

87 

273 

6 

29 

22 

5 

50 

0 

42 

90 

_ 

270 

6 

31 

23 

5 

52 

0 

42 


291 























REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF SATURN’S PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 

of the Eccentric 

Propor¬ 

tional 

Minutes 

Parallaxes of 
the Grand Circle 
at the Higher Apse 

Surplus [of 
the Parallax] at 
the Lower Apse 









0 

O 

O 

/ 


O 

/ 

O 


93 

267 

6 

31 

25 

5 

52 

0 

43 

96 

264 

6 

30 

27 

5 

53 

0 

44 

99 

261 

6 

28 

29 

5 

53 

0 

45 

102 

258 

6 

26 

31 

5 

51 

0 

46 

105 

255 

6 

22 

32 

5 

48 

0 

46 

108 

252 

6 

17 

34 

5 

45 

0 

45 

111 

249 

6 

12 

35 

5 

40 

0 

45 

114 

246 

6 

6 

36 

5 

36 

0 

44 

117 

243 

5 

58 

38 

5 

29 

0 

43 

120 

240 

5 

49 

39 

5 

22 

0 

42 

123 

237 

5 

40 

41 

5 

13 

0 

41 

126 

234 

5 

28 

42 

5 

3 

0 

40 

129 

231 

5 

16 

44 

4 

52 

0 

39 

132 

228 

5 

3 

46 

4 

41 

0 

37 

135 

225 

4 

48 

47 

4 

29 

0 

35 

138 

222 

4 

33 

48 

4 

15 

0 

34 

141 

219 

4 

17 

50 

4 

1 

0 

32 

144 

216 

4 

0 

51 

3 

46 

0 

30 

147 

213 

3 

42 

52 

3 

30 

0 

28 

150 

210 

3 

24 

53 

3 

13 

0 

26 

153 

207 

3 

6 

54 

2 

56 

0 

24 

156 

204 

2 

46 

55 

2 

38 

0 

22 

159 

201 

2 

27 

56 

2 

21 

0 

19 

162 

198 

2 

7 

57 

2 

2 

0 

17 

165 

195 

1 

46 

58 

1 

42 

0 

14 

168 

192 

1 

25 

59 

1 

22 

0 

12 

171 

189 

1 

4 

59 

1 

2 

0 

9 

174 

186 

0 

43 

60 

0 

42 

0 

7 

177 

183 

0 

22 

60 

0 

21 

0 

4 

180 

180 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


292 









BOOK V CH. 33 


TABLE OF JUPITER’S PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 
of the Eccentric 

Proportional 


Surplus [of 
the Parallax at 
the Lower Apse] 

0 

O 

O 

/ 

Minutes 

Seconds 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

3 

357 

0 

16 

0 

3 

0 

28 

0 

2 

6 

354 

0 

31 

0 

12 

0 

56 

0 

4 

9 

351 

0 

47 

0 

18 

1 

25 

0 

6 

12 

348 

1 

2 

0 

30 

1 

53 

0 

8 

15 

345 

1 

18 

0 

45 

2 

19 

0 

10 

18 

342 

1 

33 

1 

3 

2 

46 

0 

13 

21 

339 

1 

48 

1 

23 

3 

13 

0 

15 

24 

336 

2 

2 

1 

48 

3 

40 

0 

17 

27 

333 

2 

17 

2 

18 

4 

6 

0 

19 

30 

330 

2 

31 

2 

50 

4 

32 

0 

21 

33 

327 

2 

44 

3 

26 

4 

57 

0 

23 

36 

324 

2 

58 

4 

10 

5 

22 

0 

25 

39 

321 

3 

11 

5 

40 

5 

47 

0 

27 

42 

318 

3 

23 

6 

43 

6 

11 

0 

29 

45 

315 

3 

35 

7 

48 

6 

34 

0 

31 

48 

312 

3 

47 

8 

50 

6 

56 

0 

34 

51 

309 

3 

58 

9 

53 

7 

18 

0 

36 

54 

306 

4 

8 

10 

57 

7 

39 

0 

38 

57 

303 

4 

17 

12 

0 

7 

58 

0 

40 

60 

300 

4 

26 

13 

10 

8 

17 

0 

42 

63 

297 

4 

35 

14 

20 

8 

35 

0 

44 

66 

294 

4 

42 

15 

30 

8 

52 

0 

46 

69 

291 

4 

50 

16 

50 

9 

8 

0 

48 

72 

288 

4 

56 

18 

10 

9 

22 

0 

50 

75 

285 

5 

1 

19 

17 

9 

35 

0 

52 

78 

282 

5 

5 

20 

40 

9 

47 

0 

54 

81 

279 

5 

9 

22 

20 

9 

59 

0 

55 

84 

276 

5 

12 

23 

50 

10 

8 

0 

56 

87 

273 

5 

14 

25 

23 

10 

17 

0 

57 

90 

270 

5 

15 

26 

57 

10 

24 

0 

58 


293 











REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF JUPITER’S PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 
of the Eccentric 

Proportional 

Parallaxes of [the 
Grand] Circle [at 
the Higher Apse] 

Surplus [of 
the Parallax] at 
[the Lower Apse] 

O 

O 

O 

' 

Minutes 

Seconds 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

93 

267 

5 

15 

28 

33 

10 

25 

0 

59 

96 

264 

5 

15 

30 

12 

10 

33 

1 

0 

99 

261 

5 

14 

31 

43 

10 

34 

1 

1 

102 

258 

5 

12 

33 

17 

10 

34 

1 

1 

105 

255 

5 

10 

34 

50 

10 

33 

1 

2 

108 

252 

5 

6 

36 

21 

10 

29 

1 

3 

111 

249 

5 

1 

37 

47 

10 

23 

1 

3 

114 

246 

4 

55 

39 

0 

10 

15 

1 

3 

117 

243 

4 

49 

40 

25 

10 

5 

1 

3 

120 

240 

4 

41 

41 

50 

9 

54 

1 

2 

123 

237 

4 

32 

43 

18 

9 

41 

1 

1 

126 

234 

4 

23 

44 

46 

9 

25 

1 

0 

129 

231 

4 

13 

46 

11 

9 

8 

0 

59 

132 

228 

4 

2 

47 

37 

8 

56 

0 

58 

135 

225 

3 

50 

49 

2 

8 

27 

0 

57 

138 

222 

3 

38 

50 

22 

8 

5 

0 

55 

141 

219 

3 

25 

51 

46 

7 

39 

0 

53 

144 

216 

3 

13 

53 

6 

7 

12 

0 

50 

147 

213 

2 

59 

54 

10 

6 

43 

0 

47 

150 

210 

2 

45 

55 

15 

6 

13 

0 

43 j 

153 

207 

2 

30 

56 

12 

5 

41 

0 

39 

156 

204 

2 

15 

57 

0 

5 

7 

0 

35 

159 

201 

1 

59 

57 

37 

4 

32 

0 

31 

162 

198 

1 

43 

58 

6 

3 

56 

0 

27 

165 

195 

1 

27 

58 

34 

3 

18 

0 

23 

168 

192 

1 

11 

59 

3 

2 

40 

0 

19 

171 

189 

0 

53 

59 

36 

2 

0 

0 

15 

174 

186 

0 

35 

59 

58 

1 

20 

0 

11 

177 

183 

0 

17 

60 

0 

0 

40 

0 

6 

180 

180 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


294 






BOOK V CH. 33 


TABLE OF MARS’ PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 
of the Eccentric 

Proportional 

Parallaxes of [the 
Grand] Circle [at 
the Higher Apse] 

Surplus of 
the Parallax [at 
the Lower Apse] 

O 

O 

O 

/ 

Minutes 

Seconds 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

3 

357 

0 

32 

0 

0 

1 

8 

0 

8 

6 

354 

1 

5 

0 

2 

2 

16 

0 

17 

9 

351 

1 

37 

0 

7 

3 

24 

0 

25 

12 

348 

2 

8 

0 

15 

4 

31 

0 

33 

15 

345 

2 

39 

0 

28 

5 

38 

0 

41 

18 

342 

3 

10 

0 

42 

6 

45 

0 

50 

21 

339 

3 

41 

0 

57 

7 

52 

0 

59 

24 

336 

4 

11 

1 

13 

8 

58 

1 

8 

27 

333 

4 

41 

1 

34 

10 

5 

1 

16 

30 

330 

5 

10 

2 

1 

11 

11 

1 

25 

33 

327 

5 

38 

2 

31 

12 

16 

1 

34 

36 

324 

6 

6 

3 

2 

13 

22 

1 

43 

39 

321 

6 

32 

3 

32 

14 

26 

1 

52 

42 

318 

6 

58 

4 

3 

15 

31 

2 

2 

45 

315 

7 

23 

4 

37 

16 

35 

2 

11 

48 

312 

7 

47 

5 

16 

17 

39 

2 

20 

51 

309 

8 

10 

6 

2 

18 

42 

2 

30 

54 

306 

8 

32 

6 

50 

19 

45 

2 

40 

57 

303 

8 

53 

7 

39 

20 

47 

2 

50 

60 

300 

9 

12 

8 

30 

21 

49 

3 

0 

63 

297 

9 

30 

9 

27 

22 

50 

3 

11 

66 

294 

9 

47 

10 

25 

23 

48 

3 

22 

69 

291 

10 

3 

11 

28 

24 

47 

3 

34 

72 

288 

10 

19 

12 

33 

25 

44 

3 

46 

75 

285 

10 

32 

13 

38 

26 

40 

3 

59 

78 

282 

10 

42 

14 

46 

27 

35 

4 

11 

81 

279 

10 

50 

16 

4 

28 

29 

4 

24 

84 

276 

10 

56 

17 

24 

29 

21 

4 

36 

87 

273 

11 

1 

18 

45 

30 

12 

4 

50 

90 

270 

11 

5 

20 

8 

31 

0 

5 

5 


295 




REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF MARS’ PROSTHAPHAERESES 


Common I Correction 

Numbers I of the Eccentric 



Propor¬ 

tional 

Minutes Seconds 


Parallaxes of [the Surplus [of 
Grand] Circle [at the Parallax at 
the Higher Apse] the Lower Apse] 



































BOOK V CH. 33 


TABLE OF VENUS’ PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 

of the Eccentric 

Propor¬ 

tional 

Parallaxes of [the 
Grand] Circle [at 
the Higher Apse] 

Surplus [of 
the Parallax at 
the Lower Apse] 

O 

O 

O 

/ 

Minutes 

Seconds 

O 

' 

O 

/ 

3 

357 

0 

6 

0 

0 

1 

15 

0 

1 

6 

354 

0 

13 

0 

0 

2 

30 

0 

2 

9 

351 

0 

19 

0 

10 

3 

45 

0 

3 

12 

348 

0 

25 

0 

39 

4 

59 

0 

5 

15 

345 

0 

31 

0 

58 

6 

13 

0 

6 

18 

342 

0 

36 

1 

20 

7 

28 

0 

7 

21 

339 

0 

42 

1 

39 

8 

42 

0 

9 

24 

336 

0 

48 

2 

23 

9 

56 

0 

11 

27 

333 

0 

53 

2 

59 

11 

10 

0 

12 

30 

330 

0 

59 

3 

38 

12 

24 

0 

13 

33 

327 

1 

4 

4 

18 

13 

37 

0 

14 

36 

324 

1 

10 

5 

3 

14 

50 

0 

16 

39 

321 

1 

15 

5 

45 

16 

3 

0 

17 

42 

318 

1 

20 

6 

32 

17 

16 

0 

18 

45 

315 

1 

25 

7 

22 

18 

28 

0 

20 

48 

312 

1 

29 

8 

18 

19 

40 

0 

21 

51 

309 

1 

33 

9 

31 

20 

52 

0 

22 

54 

306 

1 

36 

10 

48 

22 

3 

0 

24 

57 

303 

1 

40 

12 

8 

23 

14 

0 

26 

60 

300 

1 

43 

13 

32 

24 

24 

0 

27 

63 

297 

1 

46 

15 

8 

25 

34 

0 

28 

66 

294 

1 

49 

16 

35 

26 

43 

0 

30 

69 

291 

1 

52 

18 

0 

27 

52 

0 

32 

72 

288 

1 

54 

19 

33 

28 

57 

0 

34 

75 

285 

1 

56 

21 

8 

30 

4 

0 

36 

78 

282 

1 

58 

22 

32 

31 

9 

0 

38 

81 

279 

1 

59 

24 

7 

32 

13 

0 

41 

84 

276 

2 

0 

25 

36 

33 

17 

0 

43 

87 

273 

2 

0 

27 

5 

34 

20 

0 

45 

90 

270 

2 

0 

28 

28 

35 

21 

0 

47 


297 




REVOLUTIONS 


TABLE OF VENUS’ PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

Correction 
of the Eccentric 

Propor¬ 

tional 

Parallaxes [of the 
Grand Circle at 
the Higher Apse] 

Surplus [of 
the Parallax at 
the Lower Apse] 

O 

O 

O 

' 

Minutes 

Seconds 

O 

' 

O 

' 

93 

267 

2 

0 

29 

58 

36 

20 

0 

50 

96 

264 

2 

0 

31 

28 

37 

17 

0 

53 

99 

261 

1 

59 

32 

57 

38 

13 

0 

55 

102 

258 

1 

58 

34 

26 

39 

7 

0 

58 

105 

255 

1 

57 

35 

55 

40 

0 

1 

0 

108 

252 

1 

55 

37 

23 

40 

49 

1 

4 

111 

249 

1 

53 

38 

52 

41 

36 

1 

8 

114 

246 

1 

51 

40 

19 

42 

18 

1 

11 

117 

243 

1 

48 

41 

45 

42 

59 

1 

14 


240 

1 

45 

43 

10 

43 

35 

1 

18 

123 

237 

1 

42 

44 

37 

44 

7 

1 

22 

126 

234 

1 

39 

46 

6 

44 

32 

1 

26 

129 

231 

1 

35 

47 

36 

44 

49 

1 

30 

132 

228 

1 

31 

49 

6 

45 

4 

1 

36 

135 

225 

1 

27 

50 

12 

45 

10 

1 

41 

138 

222 

1 

22 

51 

17 

45 

5 

1 

47 

141 

219 

1 

17 

52 

33 

44 

51 

1 

53 

144 

216 

1 

12 

53 

48 

44 

22 

2 

0 

147 

213 

1 

7 

54 

28 

43 

36 

2 

6 


210 

1 

1 

55 

0 

42 

34 

2 

13 

153 

207 

0 

55 

55 

57 

41 

12 

2 

19 

156 

204 

0 

49 

56 

47 

39 

20 

2 

34 

159 

201 

0 

43 

57 

33 

36 

58 

2 

27 

162 

198 

0 

37 

58 

16 

33 

58 

2 

27 

165 

195 

0 

31 

58 

59 

30 

14 

2 

27 

168 

192 

0 

25 

59 

39 

25 

42 

2 

16 

171 

189 

0 

19 

59 

48 

20 

20 

1 

56 

174 

186 

0 

13 

59 

54 

14 

7 

1 

26 

177 

183 

0 

7 

59 

58 

7 

16 

0 

46 

180 

180 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

16 

0 

0 


298 





















BOOK V CH. 33 


TABLE OF MERCURY’S PROSTHAPHAERESES 

Common 

Numbers 

' 

Correction 

of the Eccentric 

Propor¬ 

tional 

| Parallaxes [of the 
Grand Circle at 
the Higher Apse] 

Surplus of 
the Parallax [at 
the Lower Apse] 

O 

O 

O 

/ 

| Minutes 

Seconds 

O 


O 

/ 

3 

357 

0 

8 

0 

3 

0 

44 

0 

8' 

6 

354 

0 

17 

0 

12 

1 

28 

0 

15 

9 

351 

0 

26 

0 

24 

2 

12 

0 

23 

12 

348 

0 

34 

0 

50 

2 

56 

0 

31 

15 

345 

0 

43 

1 

43 

3 

41 

0 

38 

18 

342 

0 

51 

2 

42 

4 

25 

0 

45 

21 

339 

0 

59 

3 

51 

5 

8 

0 

53 

24 

336 

1 

8 

5 

10 

5 

51 

1 

1 

27 

333 

1 

16 

6 

41 

6 

34 

1 

8 

30 

330 

1 

24 

8 

29 

7 

15 

1 

16 

33 

327 

1 

32 

10 

35 

7 

57 

1 

24 

36 

324 

1 

39 

12 

50 

8 

38 

1 

32 

39 

321 

1 

46 

15 

7 

9 

18 

1 

40 

42 

318 

1 

53 

17 

26 

9 

59 

1 

47 

45 

315 

2 

0 

19 

47 

10 

38 

1 

55 

48 

312 

2 

6 

22 

8 

11 

17 

2 

2 

51 

309 

2 

12 

24 

31 

11 

54 

2 

10 

54 

306 

2 

18 

26 

17 

12 

31 

2 

18 1 

57 

303 

2 

24 

29 

17 

13 

7 

2 

26 

60 

300 

2 

29 

31 

39 

13 

41 

2 

34 

63 

297 

2 

34 

33 

59 

14 

14 

2 

42 

66 

294 

2 

38 

36 

12 

14 

46 

2 

51 

69 

291 

2 

43 

38 

29 

15 

17 

2 

59 

72 

288 

2 

47 

40 

45 

15 

46 

3 

8 

75 

285 

2 

50 

42 

58 

16 

14 

3 

16 

78 

282 

2 

53 

45 

6 

16 

40 

3 

24 

81 

279 

2 

56 

46 

59 

17 

4 

3 

32 

84 

276 

2 

58 

48 

50 

17 

27 

3 

40 

87 

273 

2 

59 

50 

36 

17 

48 

3 

48 

90 

270 

3 

0 

52 

2 

18 

6 

3 

56 


299 







REVOLUTIONS 



30i 




























BOOK V CH. 34 


HOW TO COMPUTE THE LONGITUDINAL Chapter 34 
PLACES OF THESE FIVE PLANETS 

By means of these Tables so drawn up by me, we shall compute the longitudinal 
places of these five planets without any difficulty. For nearly the same computa- 
5 tional procedure applies to them all. Yet in this respect the three outer planets 
differ somewhat from Venus and Mercury. 

Hence let me speak first about Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, for which the 
computation proceeds as follows. For any given time seek the mean motions, 
I mean, the sun’s simple motion and the planet’s parallactic motion, by the method 
io explained above [III, 14; V, 1]. Then subtract the place of the higher apse of the 
planet’s eccentric from the sun’s simple place. From the remainder subtract the 
parallactic motion. The resulting remainder is the anomaly of the planet’s eccentric. 
We look up its number among the common numbers in either of the first two col¬ 
umns of the Table. Opposite this number we take the normalization of the eccen- 
15 trie from the 3rd column, and the proportional minutes from the following column. 
We add this correction to the parallactic motion, and subtract it from the eccentric’s 
anomaly, if the number with which we entered the Table is found in the 1st 
column. Conversely, we subtract it from the parallactic anomaly and add it to 
the eccentric’s anomaly, if the [initial] number occupied the 2nd column. The 
20 sumor remainder will be the normalized anomalies of the parallax and the eccentric, 
while the proportional minutes are reserved for a purpose soon to be explained. 

Then we look up also this normalized parallactic anomaly among the common 
numbers in the first [two columns], and opposite it in the 5th column we take the 
parallactic prosthaphaeresis, together with its surplus, placed in the last column. 
25 In accordance with the number of proportional minutes we take the proportional 
part of this surplus. We always add this proportional part to the prosthaphaeresis. 
The sum is the planet’s true parallax. This must be subtracted from the normalized 
parallactic anomaly if that is less than a semicircle, or added if the anomaly is 
greater than a semicircle. For in this way we shall have the planet’s true and 
an apparent distance westward from the sun’s mean place. When this distance is 
subtracted from the [place of the] sun, the remainder will be the required place 
of the planet in the sphere of the fixed stars. Finally, if the precession of the 
equinoxes is added to the place of the planet, its distance from the vernal equinox 
will be ascertained. 

35 In the cases of Venus and Mercury, instead of the eccentric’s anomaly we use 
the higher apse’s distance from the sun’s mean place. With the aid of this anomaly 
we normalize the parallactic motion and the eccentric’s anomaly, as has already 
been explained. But the eccentric’s prosthaphaeresis, together with the normalized 
parallax, if they are of one direction or kind, are simultaneously added to or 
io subtracted from the sun’s mean place. However, if they are of different kind, the 
smaller is subtracted from the larger. Operate with the remainder as I just explained 
about the additive or subtractive property of the larger number, and the result 
will be the apparent place of the required planet. 


301 



REVOLUTIONS 


THE STATIONS AND RETROGRADATIONS Chapter 35 
OF THE FIVE PLANETS 

Evidently there is a connection between the explanation of the (planets’] 
motion in longitude and the understanding of their stations, regressions, and retro- 
gradations, and of the place, time, and extent of these phenomena. These topics 5 
too were discussed not a little by astronomers, especially Apollonius of Perga 
[Ptolemy, Syntaxis, XII, 1 ]. But their discussion proceeded as though the planets 
moved with only one nonuniformity, that which occurs with respect to the sun, 
and which I have called the parallax due to the motion of the earth’s grand circle. 

Suppose the earth’s grand circle to be concentric with the planets’ circles, 10 
by which all the planets are carried at unequal speeds in the same direction, that 
is, eastward. Also assume that a planet, like Venus and Mercury, inside the grand 
circle is faster on its own orbit than the earth’s motion. From the earth draw 
a straight line intersecting the planet’s orbit. Bisect the segment within the orbit. 
This half-segment has the same ratio to the line extending from our observatory, i 5 
which is the earth, to the lower and convex arc of the intersected orbit as the 
earth’s motion has to the planet’s velocity. The point then made by the line so 
drawn to the perigean arc of the planet’s circle separates the retrogradation from 
the direct motion, so that the planet gives the appearance of being stationary 
when it is located in that place. 20 

The situation is similar in the remaining three outer planets, whose motion 
is slower than the earth’s speed. A straight line drawn through our eye will intersect 
the grand circle so that the half-segment within that circle has the same ratio 
to the line extending from the planet to our eye located on the nearer and convex 
arc of the grand circle as the planet’s motion has to the earth’s speed. To our 25 
eye the planet at that time and place will give the impression of standing still. 

But if the ratio of the half-segment within the aforesaid [inner] circle to the 
remaining outer segment exceeds the ratio of the earth’s speed to the velocity 
of Venus or Mercury, or the ratio of the motion of any of the three outer planets 
to the earth’s speed, the planet will advance eastward. On the other hand, if the 30 
[first] ratio is smaller [than the second], the planet will retrograde westward. 

For the purpose of proving the foregoing statements Apollonius adduces 
a certain auxiliary theorem. Although it conforms to the hypothesis of a stationary 
earth, nevertheless it is compatible also with my principles based on the mobility 
of the earth, and therefore I too shall use it. I can enunciate it in the following 35 
form. Suppose that in a triangle a longer side is divided so that one of the segments 
is not less than the adjoining side. The ratio of that segment to the remaining 
segment will exceed the inverse ratio of the angles at the divided side [the angle 
at the remaining segment: the angle at the adjoining side]. In triangle ABC let 
the longer side be BC. On it take CD not less than AC. I say that CD : BD > angle 40 
ABC : angle BCA. 

The proof proceeds as follows. Complete parallelogram ADCE. Extend BA 
and CE to meet at point F. With center A and radius AE describe a circle. This 
will pass through C or beyond it, since AE [= CD] is not smaller than AC. For 
the present let the circle pass through C, and let it be GEC. Triangle AEF is 45 
greater than sector AEG. But triangle AEG is smaller than sector AEC. Therefore, 
triangle AEF : [triangle] AEC > sector AEG : sector AEC. But triangle AEF : 


302 



BOOK V CH. 35 


triangle AEC = base FE : base EC. Therefore FE : EC > angle FAE : angle 
EAC. But FE : EC = CD : DB, since angle FAE = angle ABC, and angle 
EAC = angle BCA. Therefore CD : DB > angle ABC : angle ACB. The [first] 
ratio will clearly be much greater, moreover,'if CD, that is, AE, is assumed not 
5 equal to AC, but AE is taken greater than AC. 

Now around D as center let ABC be Venus’ or Mercury’s circle. Outside the 
circle let the earth E move around the same center D. From our observatory at E 
draw straight line ECDA through the center of the circle. Let A be the place 
most distant from the earth, and C the place nearest to the earth. Assume that 
10 the ratio DC : CE is greater than the ratio of the observer’s motion to the planet’s 
speed. Therefore a line EFB can be found such that 1 / 2 BF : FE = observer’s 
motion: planet’s speed. For as line EFB recedes from center D, along FB it shrinks 
and along EF it lengthens until the required condition occurs. I say that when the 
planet is located at point F, it will give us the appearance of being stationary, 
is However little arc we choose on either side of F, in the direction of the apogee 
we shall find it progressive, but retrogressive if toward the perigee. 

First, take arc FG extending toward the apogee. Prolong EGK. Join BG, 
DG, and DF. In triangle BGE, segment BF of the longer side BE exceeds BG. 
Hence BF : EF > angle FEG : angle GBF. Therefore 1 / 2 BF : FE > angle 
20 FEG : 2 xangle GBF = angle GDF. But 1 / 2 BF : FE = earth’s motion : planet’s 
motion. Therefore angle FEG : angle GDF < earth’s speed : planet’s speed. 
Consequently, the angle which has the same ratio to angle FDG as the ratio of the 
earth’s motion to the planet’s motion exceeds angle FEG. Let this greater angle = 
FEL. Hence, during the time in which the planet traverses arc GF of the circle, 
25 our line of sight will be thought to have passed through an opposite distance, that 
lying between line EF and line EL. Clearly, in the same interval in which arc GF 
has transported the planet, as seen by us, westward through the smaller angle 
FEG, the earth’s passage has drawn the planet back eastward through the greater 
angle FEL. As a result the planet is still retrojected through angle GEL, and seems 
30 to have progressed, not to have, remained stationary. 

The reverse of this proposition will clearly be demonstrated by the same 
means. In the same diagram suppose that we take 1 / 2 GK : GE = earth’s motion : 
planet’s speed. Assume that arc GF extends toward the perigee from straight line 
EK. Join KF, making triangle KEF. In it GE is drawn longer than EF. KG : GE < 
36 angle FEG : angle FKG. So also 1 / 2 KG : GE < angle FEG : 2 x angle FKG — 
angle GDF. This relation is the reverse of that demonstrated above. By the same 
means it will be established that angle GDF : angle FEG < planet’s speed : speed 
of the [line of] sight. Accordingly, when these ratios become equal as angle GDF 
becomes greater, the planet will likewise execute a greater movement westward 
40 than the forward motion demands. 

These considerations make it clear also that if we assume arcs FC and CM 
to be equal, the second station will be at point M. Draw line EMN. Just like 
1 / 2 BF : FE, so too 1 j 2 MN : ME = earth’s speed : planet’s speed. Therefore, 
points F and M will occupy both stations, delimit the whole of arc FCM as 
45 retrogressive, and the rest of the circle as progressive. It also follows that at 
whatever distances DC : CE does not exceed the ratio earth’s speed : planet’s 
speed, another straight line cannot be drawn having a ratio equal to the ratio 
earth’s speed : planet’s speed, and the planet will seem to be neither stationary 


303 



REVOLUTIONS 


nor retrogressive. For in triangle DGE, when straight line DC is assumed to be 
not smaller than EG, angle CEG : angle CDG < DC : CE. But DC : CE does 
not exceed the ratio earth’s speed : planet’s speed. Therefore, angle CEG : CDG < 
earth’s speed : planet’s speed. When this occurs, the planet will move eastward, 
and we will not find anywhere on the planet’s orbit an arc through which it would s 
seem to retrograde. The foregoing discussion applies to Venus and Mercury, 
which are inside the grand circle. 

For the three other outer planets the proof proceeds in the same way and with 
the same diagram (only the designations being changed). We make ABC the 
earth’s grand circle and the orbit of our observatory. In E we put the planet, 10 
whose motion on its own orbit is slower than the speed of our observatory on the 
grand circle. As for the rest, the proof will proceed in all respects as before. 

HOW THE TIMES, PLACES, AND ARCS Chapter 36 

OF RETROGRESSION ARE DETERMINED 

Now if the circles which carry the planets were concentric with the grand 15 
circle, what the preceding demonstrations promise would readily be confirmed 
(since the ratio planet’s speed : observatory’s speed would always remain the 
same). However, these circles are eccentric, and this is the reason why the apparent 
motions are nonuniform. Consequently we must everywhere assume disparate 
and normalized motions with variations in their velocities, and use them in our so 
proofs, and not simple and uniform motions, unless the planet happens to be 
near its middle longitudes, the only places on its orbit where it seems to be carried 
with a mean motion. 

I shall demonstrate these propositions by the example of Mars, which will 
clarify the retrogradations of the other planets too. Let the grand circle be ABC, *s 
on which our observatory is situated. Put the planet at point E, from which draw 
straight line ECDA through the center of the grand circle. Also draw EFB, 
and DG perpendicular to EFB; 1 / 2 BF = GF. GF : EF = planet’s momentary 
speed : observatory’s speed, which exceeds the planet’s speed. 

Our task is to find FC = % of the arc of retrogression, or ABF [= 180°-FC], 30 
in order to know the planet’s greatest [angular] distance from A when the planet 
is stationary, and the amount of angle FEC. For, from this information, we shall 
predict the time and place of this planetary phenomenon. Put the planet near 
the eccentric’s middle apse, where its observed motions in longitude and anomaly 
differ little from the uniform motions. 35 

In the case of the planet Mars, when its mean motion = Ip 8' 7" = line GF, 
its parallactic motion, that is, the motion of our [line of] sight: planet’s mean mo¬ 
tion = Ip = straight line EF. Hence the whole of EB = 3p 16' 14" [=2 x 
Ip 8' 7" (= 2p 16' 14")+ Ip], and rectangle BE xEF likewise = 3p 16' 14". But 
I have shown [V, 19] that radius DA = 6580® whereof DE = 10,000p. 40 

[Earlier version: 

The whole of EA — 16580 [= 6580+10000], and the remainder EC [when 2 xDA = 13160 
is subtracted from EA — 16580] - 3420. The rectangle formed by AEx EG — 56,703,600 = 
the rectangle formed by BEx EF. But BE : EF is the given ratio from which we obtain the ratio 
of the rectangle EBx EF (to which the rectangle AEx EC is equal, namely, 56, 703, 600) to ( EF ) s . 46 
We shall therefore also have EF as a length = 4164^, whereof DE = lOOOOf and DF = 6580f 


304 



BOOK V CH. 36 


[as well as the other whole line EB = 13618 and the remainder GF [= 1 / t (BF = 13618 - 4164 = 
9454)] = 4727®. In triangle DFG, sides DF and FG are given [= 6580, 4727] while G is a right 
angle. Hence we shall have angle FDG = 39° 15']. In triangle DBF, the sides being given [DE = 
10000; DF = 6580; EF = 4164], angles FED = 17° 3' and FDE = 17° 2' are given. Hence 
5 ABF, the arc of the anomaly to the first stationary point, = 162° 58' [+17° 2' = 180°]. When 
we add to this value 2 xFC [= 17° 2'], we shall have 197° 2' [= 162° 58'+(2x 17° 2' = 34° 4')] 
for the second arc measured from A. By means of arc FC we shall know how much time elapsed 
from the first stationary point to the opposition, which is G. When this time is doubled, it shows us 
the entire period of the retrogradation. 

to The foregoing is what happens at the middle longitudes of the eccentric. But according to the 
computations performed for the greatest distance, the prosthaphaeresis, which approximates 1°, 
makes the ratio of the planet’s disparate motion to the disparate motion of [the line of] sight or of 
the parallactic anomaly, that is, line GF : line EF = 10000 : 8917, and [(2x GF)+EF =] the 
whole of BE : EF = 28917 : 8917. DE has been shown = 10960® whereof AD = 6580® [V, 19], 
15 Therefore, with DE = 10000®, AD = 6004® [6003.6]. The whole of AE [= AD+DE = 6004+ 
10000] = 16004. The remainder EG [= DE- (DC = AD) = 10000 - 6004] = 3996. The included 
rectangle [.i4i?x2?C= 16004 x 3996] = 63,951,984 is less than (EF) 2 , in proportion to the ratio 
BE : EF. Hence we shall have EF as a length = 4441® whereof DE = 10000® or DF = 6004®. 
Therefore we again have triangle DEF with its sides given, and angles...] 

20 [Printed version: 

However, with DE = 60®, in such units AD = 39® 29'. [DE+AD = 60®+ 
39® 29' =] the whole of AE : EC = 99p 29' : 20p 31' [= 60p-39p 29' = DE-DC], 
A rectangle formed from these [segments AE xEC] = 2041p 4', known = BE x 
EF. The result of the comparison, I mean, the division of 204Ip 4' by 3® 16' 14" 
25 [= the previous value of BE xEF] = 624p 4', and a side [= square root] of it = 
24® 58' 52" = EF in units whereof DE was assumed = 60®. However, with 
DE = 10,000p, EF = 4163® 5' whereof DF = 6580p. 

Since the sides of triangle DEF arc given, we shall have angle DEF = 27° 15' = 
angle of planet’s retrogradation, and CDF = angle of parallactic anomaly = 
30 16° 50'. At its first station the planet appears along line EF, and along EC at 
opposition. If the planet did not move eastward at all, arc CF = 16° 50' would 
comprise the 27° 15' of retrogradation found in angle AEF. However, in accordance 
with the established ratio planet’s speed : observatory’s speed, to the parallactic 
anomaly of 16° 50' corresponds a planetary longitude of approximately 19° 6' 39". 
35 When this quantity is subtracted from 27° 15', the remainder from the second 
station to opposition = 8° 8', and about 36 1 / 2 days. In that time that longitude 
of 19°6'39" is traversed, and hence the entire retrogression ofl6°16' [=2X 
8° 8'] is completed in 73 days [=2 X36 V 2 days]. 

The foregoing analysis is made for the eccentric’s middle longitudes. 

40 [Earlier version: 

But according to the computations executed for the greatest distance, the prosthaphaeresis 
which retards the uniform motions makes the ratio of the planet’s disparate motion to the disparate 
motion of [the line of] sight or the parallactic anomaly, that is, line GF : lin eEF = 46' 20" 6'" : 1®. 
[2X (GF = 46' 20") = Ip 32' 40", +(1® = EF)} = the whole of BE : EF = 2® 32' 40" : 1®, and 
45 the rectangle formed by BEx EF likewise = 2® 32' 40". At the higher apse DE has been shown = 
10960® whereof DA = 6580® [V, 19]. Hence, with DE = 60®, DA = 36® 1' 20". Thus, the whole 
of AE [= DE+DA = 60®+36® 1'20"] = 96®1'20". The remainder [= EC, when 2 xDA is 
subtracted from AE] = 23® 58' 40", and AEx EG = 2302® 23' 58". When this [product] is divided 
by 2® 32'40" [= BE], the quotient is 904® 51' 12" [should be 52'23"]. A side [square root] of 
so this = 30® 4' 51", and this is the line EF in units whereof DE = 60. But with DE = 100,000, 
EF = 50135 and DF = 60037 also in those units. In triangle DEF, therefore, all the sides being 
given, the angles are given: DEF = 27° 18' 40" for the motion of the retrograding planet, and 


305 



REVOLUTIONS 


EDF = 22° 9' 50" for the parallactic anomaly of [the line of] sight. Connected with them, according 
to the proportion of the apogee, is the disparate longitude = 17° 19' 3", whereas the uniform 
motion = 20° 59' 3". Half of the retrogradation is estimated = 9° 59'37" in approximately 40 
days, while the entire retrogradation = 19° 59' 14" [=2x9° 59' 37"] in 80 days. 

With regard to the perigee we shall also reason in like manner. There we find the ratio of the 5 
planet’s disparate motion: disparate motion of [the line of] sight = 1® 50' 40" : 1® = GF : FE. 
Hence, the rectangle formed by BExEF = 4p 41'21" [2x(GF = Ip 50' 40") = 3® 41'20"; 

3 P 41' 20''+l p = 4 p41'20"X1p]. But line DE has been shown = 9040® whereof AD = 6580® 

[V, 19]. Hence, with DE = 60p, in such units AD = 43® 40' 21"; the whole of AE [= AD +DE = 

43® 40'21"+ 60®] = 103® 40'21"; and the remainder GE [= AE-2XAD = 103p 40' 21"- lo 
87 p 20'42"] = 16p 19'39". Hence the rectangle formed by AExEC [= 103® 40' 21" X 
16® 19' 39"] = 1672® 42' 52" [should be 1692®]. When this value is divided by 4® 41' 21" [= BE X 
EF], the quotient is 360® 59' 1", of which a side [square root] = EF = 18® 59' 58" whereof DE = 
60®. But with DE = 100,000®, in such units EF = 31665 and also DF = 72787P. Hence in triangle 
DEFsAl the sides being given, the angles are given: DBF = 25° 45' 16" = the planet’s retrogressive 15 
parallax, and EDF = 10° 53' 13", the angular separation between [the line of] sight and the mid¬ 
point of the retrogression at opposition. However, in the interval in which [the line of] sight passes 
through arc FG = 10° 53' 13", in its disparate motion the planet traverses 19° 44' 58", but 
16° 17' 21" in its uniform motion, crossing half of the retrogression S 6° in 31 Vis days, while 
the entire retrogression amounts to 12° 1' in about 62 */« days]. 20 

[Printed version: 

For other places the procedure is similar, but the planet’s momentary velocity 
as determined by the place is always applied, as I pointed out [near the beginning 
of V, 36]. 

Hence, the same method of analysis is available for Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, 25 
no less than for Venus and Mercury, provided that we put the observatory in the 
planet’s place and the planet in the observatory’s place. Naturally, in these orbits 
enclosed by the earth, what occurs is the opposite of what happens in the orbits 
surrounding the earth. Therefore, let the foregoing remarks suffice, lest I repeat 
the same song over and over again. 30 

Nevertheless, as the planet’s motion varies with the line of sight, it produces 
no small difficulty and uncertainty concerning the stations. That assumption 
on the part of Apollonius [V, 35] provides us no relief from these perplexities. 
Hence I do not know whether it would not be better to investigate the stations 
simply and in relation to the nearest place. In like manner we seek the opposition 35 
of a planet by its impingement on the line of the sun’s mean motion, or the con¬ 
junction of any planets from the known quantities of their motions. I leave this 
problem for everybody to pursue to his own satisfaction. 


End of the Fifth Book of the Revolutions 


306 



Book Six 


INTRODUCTION 

I have to the best of my ability indicated how the assumed revolution of the 
5 earth influences and affects the planets’ apparent motion in longitude, and how it 
forces all these phenomena into a precise and necessary regularity. It remains for 
me to consider the movements which impart to the planets a deviation in latitude, 
and to show how the earth’s motion exercises control over these phenomena too, 
and prescribes rules for them also in this division. This division of the science is 
10 indispensable because the planets’ deviations [in latitude] produce no small 
modification in the risings and settings, first visibilities, occultations, and other 
phenomena which were explained in general above. Indeed, the planets’ true 
places are said to be known when their longitude is determined together with 
their latitudinal deviation from the ecliptic. What the ancient astronomers believed 
15 they had demonstrated here too by means of a stationary earth, I shall accomplish 
perhaps more compactly and more appropriately by assuming that the earth 
moves. 

GENERAL EXPLANATION OF THE FIVE Chapter 1 

PLANETS’ DEVIATION IN LATITUDE 

2 q In all these planets the ancients found a twofold deviation in latitude, cor¬ 
responding to the twofold longitudinal nonuniformity of each of these planets. 
One [of these latitudinal deviations, in their opinion,] was produced by the ec¬ 
centrics, and the other by the epicycles. Instead of these epicycles I have accepted 
the earth’s one grand circle (which has already been mentioned often). [I did] 
o 5 not [accept the grand circle] because it deviates in any way from the plane of the 
ecliptic, with which it is conjoined once and for all, since they are identical. On 
the other hand, [I did accept the grand circle] because the planets’ orbits are 
inclined to this plane [the ecliptic] at an angle which is not fixed, and this variation 
is geared to the motion and revolutions of the earth’s grand circle. 

30 The three outer planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, however, move in longitude 

according to certain principles different from [those governing the longitudinal 
motion of] the other two. In their latitudinal motion, too, the outer planets differ 
not a little. Hence the ancients first investigated the location and quantity of the 
extreme limits of their northern latitudes. For Saturn and Jupiter, Ptolemy found 
3 s those limits near the beginning of the Balance, but for Mars near the end of the 
Crab close to the eccentric’s apogee [ Syntaxis , XIII, 1]. 

In our time, however, I have found these northern limits for Saturn at 7° 
within the Scorpion, for Jupiter at 27° within the Balance, and for Mars at 27° 
within the Lion, just as the apogees have likewise shifted in the period extending 
40 to us [V, 7,12,16], since the motion of those circles is followed by the inclinations 
and cardinal points of the latitudes. At a normalized or apparent quadrant’s distance 


307 



REVOLUTIONS 


from these limits [these planets] seem to make absolutely no deviation in latitude, 
wherever the earth may happen to be at that time. At these middle longitudes, 
then, these planets are understood to be at the intersection of their orbits with the 
ecliptic, like the moon at its intersections with the ecliptic. In the present instance 
Ptolemy [Syntaxis, XIII, 1] calls these intersections the “nodes”; from the ascend- 5 
ing node the planet enters the northern regions, and from the descending node it 
crosses over into the southern regions. [These deviations do] not [occur] because 
the earth’s grand circle, which always remains invariably in the plane of the 
ecliptic, produces any latitude in these planets. On the contrary, the entire devia¬ 
tion in latitude comes from them, and reaches its peak at the places midway 10 
between the nodes. When the planets are seen there in opposition to the sun and 
culminating at midnight, as the earth approaches they always execute a greater 
deviation than in any other position of the earth, moving northward in the northern 
hemisphere and southward in the southern hemisphere. This deviation is greater 
than is required by the earth’s approach and withdrawal. This circumstance led 15 
to the recognition that the inclination of the planets’ orbits is not fixed, but shifts 
in a certain motion of libration commensurable with the revolutions of the earth’s 
grand circle, as will be explained a little later on [VI, 2]. 

Venus and Mercury, however, seem to deviate in certain other ways, although 
they conform to a precise rule linked with their middle, higher, and lower apsides. 2 ° 
For at their middle longitudes, that is, when the line of the sun’s mean motion 
is at a quadrant’s distance from their higher or lower apse, and the planets them¬ 
selves in the evening or morning are at the distance of a quadrant of their orbits 
away from the same line of [the sun’s] mean motion, the ancients found in them 
no deviation from the ecliptic. Through this circumstance the ancients recognized 25 
that these planets were then at the intersection of their orbits and the ecliptic. 
Since this intersection passes through their apogees and perigees, when they are 
farther from or closer to the earth, at those times they execute conspicuous devia¬ 
tions. But these are at their maximum when the planets are at their greatest distance 
from the earth, that is, around first visibility in the evening or setting in 30 
the morning, when Venus is seen farthest north, and Mercury farthest south. 

On the other hand, at a place nearer to the earth, when they set in the evening 
or rise in the morning, Venus is to the south, and Mercury to the north. Con¬ 
versely, when the earth is opposite this place and in the other middle apse, that 
is, when the anomaly of the eccentric = 270°, Venus appears to the south at 35 
a greater distance from the earth, and Mercury to the north. At a place nearer to 
the earth, Venus appears to the north, and Mercury to the south. 

But when the earth approached the apogees of these planets, Ptolemy found 
Venus’ latitude northern in the morning and southern in the evening. The opposite 
was true for Mercury, whose latitude was southern in the morning and northern 40 
in the evening. At the opposite place, [with the earth near these planets’] perigee, 
these directions are similarly reversed, so that Venus as the morning star is seen 
in the south, and as evening star in the north, whereas in the morning Mercury 
is to the north, and to the south in the evening. However, [with the earth] in both 
these places [the apogee and perigee of these planets], the ancients found Venus’ 45 
deviation always greater to the north than to the south, and Mercury’s greater 
to the south than to the north. 

On account of this fact, for this situation [with the earth at the planetary 


308 



BOOK VI CH. 1-2 


apogees and perigees], the ancients devised a twofold latitude, and in general 
a threefold latitude. The first, which occurs at the middle longitudes, they called 
the “declination”. The second, which takes place at the higher and lower apsides, 
they named the “obliquation”. The last, linked with the second, they labeled the 
5 “deviation”, always to the north for Venus, and to the south for Mercury. Between 
these four limits [the higher, lower, and two middle apsides] the latitudes mingle 
with one another, alternately increasing and decreasing, and give way to one anoth¬ 
er. To all these phenomena I shall assign the appropriate circumstances. 

THE THEORY OF THE CIRCLES BY WHICH Chapter 2 
io THESE PLANETS ARE MOVED IN LATITUDE 

The orbits of these five planets, then, must be assumed to be tilted at a variable 
but regular inclination to the plane of the ecliptic, the intersection being a diameter 
of the ecliptic. Around that intersection as an axis, in the cases of Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars, the angle of intersection undergoes a certain oscillation, such as I dem- 
15 onstrated in connection with the precession of the equinoxes [III, 3 ]. In these 
three planets, however, it is simple and commensurable with the motion in parallax, 
with which it increases and decreases in a definite period. Thus, whenever the 
earth is at its nearest to the planet, namely, when this culminates at midnight, 
the inclination of the planet’s orbit reaches its maximum; its minimum, in the 
20 opposite position; and its mean, halfway between. As a result, when the planet 
is at the limit of its greatest northern or southern latitude, its latitude appears 
much greater with the earth close than when it is at its greatest distance. The 
sole cause of this variation could be the earth’s unequal distance, on the prin¬ 
ciple that things look bigger when nearer than when farther away. However, 
25 the latitudes of these planets increase and decrease with a greater variation [than 
would be produced solely by variations in the earth’s distance]. This cannot 
happen unless the tilt of their orbits also oscillates. But, as I said above [III, 3 ], 
in motions which oscillate, a mean must be accepted between the extremes. 

For the purpose of clarifying these remarks, in the plane of the ecliptic let 
30 ABCD be the grand circle with its center at E. Let the planet’s orbit be inclined 
to the grand circle. Let FGKL be the orbit’s mean and abiding declination, with 
F at the northern limit of its latitude, K at the southern limit, G at the descending 
node of the intersection, and L at the ascending node. Let the intersection [of the 
planet’s orbit and the earth’s grand circle] be BED. Extend BED along straight 
35 lines GB and DL. These four limits are not to shift except with the motion of the 
apsides. The planet’s motion in longitude, however, is to be understood as occur¬ 
ring not in the plane of circle FG, but in another circle OP, concentric with FG 
and inclined to it. Let these circles intersect each other in that same straight line 
GBDL. Therefore, while the planet is carried on circle OP, that circle at times 
40 coincides with plane FK, and as a result of the motion in libration crosses over 
in both directions, and for that reason makes the latitude appear to vary. 

Thus, first let the planet be at its greatest northern latitude at point O and at 
its closest to the earth, situated at A. At that time the planet’s latitude will increase 
in accordance with angle OGF = the greatest inclination of orbit OGP. Its 
45 motion is an approach and withdrawal, because by hypothesis it is commensurable 
with the molion in parallax. Then if the earth is in B, O will coincide with F, 


309 



REVOLUTIONS 



K 


and the planet’s latitude will appear smaller than before in the same place. It will 
even appear much smaller if the earth is at point C. For O will cross over to the 
outermost opposite part of its oscillation, and it will leave only as much latitude 
as exceeds the subtractive libration of the northern latitude, namely, the angle 
equal to OGF. Thereafter throughout CDA , the remaining semicircle, the northern 5 
latitude of the planet situated near F will increase until [the earth] returns to the 
first point A, from which it started out. 

When the planet is located in the south near point K, its behavior and vicissi¬ 
tudes will be the same, when the earth’s motion is taken as beginning at C. But 
suppose that the planet is in either node G or L, in opposition to or conjunction 10 
with the sun. Even though at that time circles FK and OP may be at their greatest 
inclination to each other, no latitude will be perceived in the planet since it occupies 
an intersection of the circles. From the foregoing remarks it is readily understood 
(I believe) how the planet’s northern latitude decreases from F to G, and its 
southern latitude increases from G to K, while disappearing completely and 15 
crossing over to the north at L. 

The three outer planets behave in the foregoing manner. Just as Venus and 
Mercury differ from them in longitude, so there is no little difference in latitude, 
because [the grand circle] is intersected by the orbits of the inner planets at their 
apogees and perigees. At their middle apsides, on the other hand, their greatest 2 o 
inclinations, like those of the outer planets, are varied by an oscillation. The inner 
planets, however, undergo an additional oscillation different from the former. 
Nevertheless, both are commensurable with the earth’s revolutions, but not in 
the same way. For, the first oscillation has the property that while the earth returns 
once to the apsides of the inner planets, the motion in oscillation revolves twice, 25 
having as its axis the aforementioned fixed intersection through the apogees and 
perigees. As a result, whenever the line of the sun’s mean motion is in their perigee 
or apogee, the angle of the intersection attains its maximum, whereas it is always 
at its minimum in the middle longitudes. 

On the other hand, the second oscillation, which is superimposed on the first, 30 
differs from it in having a movable axis. As a result, when the earth is situated 
in a middle longitude of Venus or Mercury, the planet is always on the axis, that 


310 



BOOK VI CH. 2 


is, on this oscillation’s intersection. By contrast, the planet is at its greatest di¬ 
vergence [from the axis of the second oscillation] when the earth is aligned with 
the planet’s apogee or perigee, Venus inclining always to the north, as I said 
[VI, 1], and Mercury to the south. Yet at those times these planets would have 
6 had no latitude arising from the first and simple declination. 

Thus, for example, suppose that the sun’s mean motion is at Venus’ apogee, 
and the planet is in the same place. Clearly, since at that time the planet is at the 
intersection of its orbit with the plane of the ecliptic, it would have no latitude 
due to the simple declination and first oscillation. But the second oscillation, which 
io has its intersection or axis along a transverse diameter of the eccentric, super¬ 
imposes its greatest divergence on the planet, because it cuts at right angles the 
diameter which passes through the higher and lower apsides. On the other hand, 
suppose that the planet is at either of the points at a quadrant’s distance [from 
its apogee] and near the middle apsides of its orbit. At that time the axis of this 
is [second] oscillation will coincide with the line of the sun’s mean motion. To 
the northern divergence Venus will add the greatest deviation, which it will 
subtract from the southern divergence, leaving it diminished. In this way the 
deviation’s oscillation is commensurate with the earth’s motion. 

[Earlier version: 

20 Thus, when the line of the sun’s mean motion passes through the apogee or perigae of the planet, 

that body is then at its greatest deviation, in whatever part of its orbit it may be located, whereas 
it will have no deviation [when the line of the sun’s mean motion] is near [the planet’s] middle 
apsides]. 

To make the foregoing remarks likewise easier to understand, reproduce 
25 ABCD, the grand circle; FGKL , Venus’ or Mercury’s orbit, eccentric to circle 
ABC and inclined to it with a mean obliquity; and their intersection FG, through 
F, the orbit’s apogee, and G, its perigee. For the sake of a more convenient dem¬ 
onstration, let us first take the inclination of GKF, the eccentric orbit, to be 
simple and constant or, if preferred, halfway between the minimum and maxi- 
30 mum, except that intersection FG shifts with the motion of the perigee and apogee. 
When the earth is on the intersection, that is, at A or C, and the planet is on the 
same line, it would obviously have no latitude at that time. For its entire latitude 
lies at the sides in semicircles GKF and FLG. There the planet deviates to the 


A 



311 



REVOLUTIONS 


north or south, as was said [earlier in VI, 2], in accordance with the inclination 
of circle FKG to the plane of the ecliptic. This deviation of the planet is called 
the “obliquation” by some astronomers, and the “reflexion” by others. On the 
other hand, when the earth is in B or D, that is, at the planet’s middle apsides, 
FKG and GLF, which are called the “declinations”, will be the same latitudes, 5 
above and below. Thus they differ from the former in name rather than in fact, 
and at the middle places even the names are interchanged. 

However, the angle of inclination of these circles is found to be greater in the 
obliquation than in the declination. Accordingly, this disparity was conceived to 
occur as a result of an oscillation, swinging around intersection FG as its axis, 10 
as was said earlier [in VI, 2]. Hence, when we know this angle of intersection 
on both sides, from the difference between them we would readily infer the amount 
of the oscillation from its minimum to its maximum. 

Now conceive another circle of deviation, inclined to GKFL. Let it be con¬ 
centric in the case of Venus; and in the case of Mercury, eccentreccentric, as will is 
be indicated later [in VI, 2]. Let their intersection RS serve as this oscillation’s 
axis, which moves in a circle according to the following rule. When the earth is 
in A or B, the planet is at the extreme limit of its deviation, wherever it may be, 
for instance, at point T. To the extent that the earth proceeds away from A, 
the planet is understood to move an equivalent distance away from T. Meanwhile, 20 
the obliquity of the circle of deviation diminishes. As a result, when the earth 
has traversed quadrant AB, the planet is understood to have arrived at this lati¬ 
tude’s node, that is, R. At that time, however, the planes coincide at the oscilla¬ 
tion’s midpoint, and proceed in opposite directions. Therefore, the remaining 
semicircle of deviation, which previously was southern, jumps northward. As 25 
Venus advances into this semicircle, it leaves the south and proceeds northward, 
never to turn south as a result of this oscillation. In like manner Mercury pursues 
the opposite direction and remains southern. Mercury differs also in swinging not 
on a concentric of the eccentric, but on an eccentreccentric. I used an epicyclet in 
demonstrating the nonuniformity of its motion in longitude [V, 25]. There, 30 
however, its longitude is considered apart from its latitude; here, its latitude is 
considered apart from its longitude. These are comprised in one and the same 
revolution, and are equally completed thereby. TTierefore, quite evidently, both 
variations could be produced by a single motion and the same oscillation, at once 
eccentric and oblique. There is no other arrangement than the one which I just 35 
described and which I shall discuss further below [VI, 5-8]. 

HOW MUCH ARE THE ORBITS OF SATURN, Chapter 3 
JUPITER, AND MARS INCLINED? 

Having explained the theory of the latitudes of the five planets, I must now 
turn to the facts and analyze the details. First [I must determine] how much the 40 
individual circles are inclined. We compute these inclinations by means of the 
great circle which passes through the poles of the inclined circle at right angles 
to the ecliptic. On this great circle the deviations in latitude are determined. 
When these arrangements are understood, the road will be open to ascertaining 
the latitudes of each planet. « 

Once more let us begin with the three outer planets. At their farthest southern 


312 



BOOK VI CH. 3 


limits of latitude, as shown in Ptolemy’s Table [Fywfaxis, XIII, 5], when they 
are in opposition, Saturn deviates 3° 5', Jupiter 2° 7', and Mars 7° 7'. On the other 
hand, in the opposite places, that is, when they are in conjunction with the sun, 
Saturn deviates 2° 2', Jupiter 1 ° 5', and Mars only 5', so that it almost grazes the 
s ecliptic. These values could be inferred from the latitudes observed by Ptolemy 
around the time of the planets’ disappearances and first visibilities. 

Now that the above assertions have been set forth, let a plane perpendicular 
to the ecliptic pass through its center and intersect the ecliptic in AB. But let its 
intersection with the eccentric of any of the three outer planets be CD, passing 
i° through the farthest southern and northern limits. Let the ecliptic’s center be E; 
the diameter of the earth’s grand circle, FEG; the southern latitude, D; and the 
northern, C. Join CF, CG, DF, and DG. 

[Earlier version: 

Now as an example I shall use Mars because it exceeds all the other planets in latitude. Thus, 
13 when it is in opposition at point D, with the earth at G [corrected from F], angle AFC was known = 
7° 7'. But C is given as Mars’ position at apogee. From the previously established sizes of the circle, 
CE = Ip 22' 20", with FG [a slip for FE] = Ip. In triangle CEF, the ratio of the sides CE and EF 
is given, as well as angle CFE. Hence we shall also have as given CEF = the greatest angle of the 
eccentric’s inclination = 5° 11', according to the doctrine of plane triangles. However, when 
20 the earth is in the opposite place, that is, at G [should have been corrected to F], while the planet 
is still at C, CGF — the angle of the apparent latitude = 4']. 

[Printed version: 

For each planet the ratio of EG, [the radius] of the earth’s grand circle, to ED, 
[the radius] of the planet’s eccentric, has already been shown above for any given 
25 places of earth and planet. But the places of the maximum latitudes are also given 
by observation. Therefore BGD, the angle of the greatest southern latitude, is 
given as an exterior angle of triangle EGD. In accordance with the theorems on 
Plane Triangles, the opposite interior angle GED will also be given as the angle 
of the eccentric’s maximum southern inclination to the plane of the ecliptic. By 
so means of the minimum southern latitude we shall likewise demonstrate the min¬ 
imum inclination, for example, by means of angle EFD. In triangle EFD, the ratio 
of sides EF : ED is given as well as angle EFD. Therefore we shall have exterior 
angle GED given as the angle of the minimum southern inclination. Accordingly, 
from the difference between both inclinations we shall obtain the whole oscillation 
35 of the eccentric in relation to the ecliptic. Furthermore, by means of these angles 
of inclination we shall compute the opposite northern latitudes, such as AFC 
and EGC. If these agree with the observations, they will indicate that we have 
made no error. 

However, as an example I shall use Mars, because it exceeds all the other 
40 planets in latitude. Its maximum southern latitude was noted by Ptolemy as about 
7° when Mars was at perigee, and its masimum northern latitude at apogee as 
4° 20' [Syntaxts, XIII, 5]. However, having determined angle BGD =6° 50', 
I found the corresponding angle AFC ^ 4° 30'. Given FG : ED = l p : l p 22' 26” 
[V, 19], from these sides and angle BGD we shall obtain angle DEG of the 
45 maximum southern inclination s 1° 51'. Since EF : CE = l p : l p 39' 57” [V, 19] 
and angle CEF = DEG = 1°51', consequently the aforementioned exterior 
angle CFA = 4 1 / 2 ° when the planet is in opposition. 

Similarly, at the opposite place when it is in conjunction with the sun, suppose 
that we assume angle DFE = 5'. From the given sides DE and EF together with 


313 



REVOLUTIONS 


angle EFD, we shall obtain angle EDF, and exterior angle DEG of the minimum 
inclination = 9'. This will furnish us also with angle CGE of the northern lati¬ 
tude = 6'. Hence, if we subtract the minimum inclination from the maximum, 
that is, l°51'-9', the remainder £ 1°41'. This is the oscillation of this incli¬ 
nation, and x / 2 [of the oscillation] = 50 x / 2 '. 5 

In like manner the angles of inclination of the other two planets, Jupiter and 
Saturn, were determined together with their latitudes. Thus, Jupiter’s maximum 
inclination = 1°42'; its minimum inclination = 1° 18'; hence, its entire oscilla¬ 
tion comprises not more than 24'. On the other hand, Saturn’s maximum inclina¬ 
tion = 2° 44'; its minimum inclination = 2° 16'; the intervening oscillation = 10 
28'. Hence, through the smallest angles of inclination, which occur in the opposite 
place, when the planets are in conjunction with the sun, their deviations in latitude 
from the ecliptic will emerge as 2° 3' for Saturn and 1°6' for Jupiter. These 
values had to be determined and retained for the construction of the Tables below 
[after VI, 8]. is 

GENERAL EXPLANATION OF ANY OTHER Chapter 4 

LATITUDES OF THESE THREE PLANETS 

From what has been expounded above, the particular latitudes of these three 
planets will likewise be clear in general. As before, conceive the intersection AB 
of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and passing through the limits of their 20 
farthest deviations, with the northern limit at A. Also let straight line CD be the 
intersection of the planet’s orbit [with the ecliptic], and let CD intersect AB in 
point D. With D as center, describe EF as the earth’s grand circle. From E, 
where the earth is aligned with the planet in opposition, take any known arc EF. 
From F and from C, the place of the planet, drop CA and FG perpendicular to AB. 25 
Join FA and FC. 

In this situation we first seek the size of ADC, the angle of the eccentric’s 
inclination. It has been shown [VI, 3] to be at its maximum when the earth is 
in point E. Its entire oscillation, moreover, as is required by the oscillation’s 
nature, was revealed to be commensurate with the earth’s revolution on circle 30 
EF, as determined by diameter BE. Therefore, because arc EF is given, ratio 
ED : EG will be given, and this is the ratio of the entire oscillation to that which 
was just detached from angle ADC. Hence in the present situation angle ADC 
is given. 

Consequently, in triangle ADC, the angles being given, all its sides are given. 35 
But ratio CD : ED is given by the foregoing. Also given, therefore, is [the ratio 
of CD] to DG, the remainder [when EG is subtracted from ED]. Consequently 
the ratios of both CD and AD to GD are known. Accordingly, AG, the remainder 
[when GD is subtracted from AD], is also given. From this information FG is 
likewise given, since it is half of the chord subtending twice EF. Therefore, in 40 
right triangle AGF, two sides [AG and FG] being given, hypotenuse AF is given, 
and so is ratio AF : AC. Thus, finally, in right triangle ACF, two sides [AF and 
AC] being given, angle AFC will be given, and this is the angle of the apparent 
latitude, which was sought. 

Again I shall exemplify this analysis with Mars. Let its maximum limit of 45 
southern latitude, which occurs near its lower apse, be in the vicinity of A. How- 


314 



BOOK VI CH. 4-5 


ever, let the place of the planet be C, where ADC, the angle of the inclination, 
was shown [VI, 3] to be at its maximum, namely, 1 ° 50', when the earth was at 
point E. Now let us put the earth at point F, and the motion in parallax along 
arc EF = 45°. Therefore, straight line FG is given = 7071? whereof ED = 
5 10,000 p , and GE, the remainder [when GD = FG = 7071 p is subtracted] from 
the radius [= ED = 10,000 p ] = 2929 p . But half of ADC, the angle of the oscillation, 
has been shown = 0°50 V 2 ' [VI, 3]. In this situation its ratio of increase and 
decrease = DE : GE = 50 V 2 ' : 15'. When we subtract this latter quantity 
from 1 ° 50', the remainder = 1 ° 35' = ADC, the angle of the inclination in the 
io present situation. Therefore, the angles and sides of triangle ADC will be given. 
CD was shown above to be = 9040 p whereof ED = 6580 p [V, 19]. Hence, in those 
same units FG = 4653 p ; AD = 9036 p ; AEG, the remainder [when GD = FG = 
4653 p is subtracted from AD = 9036 p ] = 4383 p , and AC = 249 V 2 p . Therefore, 
in right triangle AFG, perpendicular AG = 4383 p , and base FG — 4653 p ; 
15 hence, hypotenuse AF = 6392 p . Thus, finally, triangle ACF has CAF as a right 
angle, together with given sides AC and AF [= 249 1 / 2 P , 6392 p ]. Hence, angle AFC 
is given = 2° 15' = the apparent latitude when the earth is situated at F. We 
shall pursue the analysis in the same way for the other two planets, Saturn and 
Jupiter. 

20 THE LATITUDES OF VENUS AND MERCURY Chapter 5 

Venus and Mercury remain. Their deviations in latitude, as I said [VI, 1], 
will be demonstrated jointly by three interrelated latitudinal excursions. In order 
to be able to separate these from one another, I shall begin with the one called the 
“declination”, since it is simpler to treat. It is the only one which sometimes 
25 happens to be separated from the others. This [separation occurs] near the middle 
longitudes and near the nodes when, as reckoned by the corrected motions in 
longitude, the earth is located a quadrant’s distance from the planet’s apogee and 
perigee. When the earth is near the planet, [the ancients] found 6° 22' of southern 
or northern latitude in Venus, and 4° 5' in Mercury; but with the earth at its 
30 greatest distance [from the planet], 1 ° 2' in Venus, and 1 ° 45' in Mercury [Ptolemy, 
Syntaxis, XIII, 5]. Under these circumstances the planets’ angles of inclination 
are made known through the established tables of corrections [after VI, 8]. Therein, 
when Venus is at its greatest distance from the earth with its latitude = 1 ° 2', 
and at its least distance [from the earth with its latitude =] 6 °22', an arc of approx- 
35 imately 2 1 / 2 ° of orbital [inclination] fits both cases. When Mercury is most 
remote [from the earth], its latitude = 1° 45', and when it is closest [to the earth, 
its latitude =] 4° 5' require an arc of 6 1 j i ° [as the inclination] of its orbit. Hence, 
the orbits’ angles of inclination =2° 30' for Venus, but for Mercury 6 X U°, 
with 360° = 4 right angles. Under these circumstances each of their particular 
40 latitudes in declination can be explained, as I shall presently demonstrate, and 
first for Venus. 

Let the ecliptic be the plane of reference. Let a plane perpendicular to it and 
passing through its center intersect it in ABC. Let [the ecliptic’s] intersection 
with Venus’ orbital plane be DBE. Let the earth’s center be A; the center of the 
46 planet’s orbit, B; and the angle of the orbit’s inclination to the ecliptic, ABE. 
With B as center, describe orbit DFEG. Draw diameter FBG perpendicular to 


315 



REVOLUTIONS 


diameter DE. Let the orbit’s plane be conceived to be so related to the assumed 
perpendicular plane that lines drawn therein perpendicular to DE are parallel 
to one another and to the plane of the ecliptic, in which FBG is the only [such 
perpendicular]. 

From the given straight lines AB and BC, together with ABE, the given angle 5 
of inclination, it is proposed to find how much the planet deviates in latitude. 

! Thus, for example, let the planet be at a distance of 45° away from E, the point 
nearest to the earth. Following Ptolemy [Syntaxis, XIII, 4], I have chosen this 
point in order that it may be clear whether the inclination of the orbit produces 
any variation in the longitude of Venus or Mercury. For, such variations would 10 
have to be seen at their maximum about halfway between the cardinal points D, F, 

E, and G. The principal reason therefor is that when the planet is located at these 
four cardinal points, it experiences the same longitudes as it would have without 
any declination, as is self-evident. 

Therefore, let us take arc EH = 45°, as was said. Drop HK perpendicular u 
to BE. Draw KL and HM perpendicular to the ecliptic as the plane of reference. 
Join HB, LM, AM, and AH. We shall have LKHM as a parallelogram with 4 right 
angles, since HK is parallel to the plane of the ecliptic [KL and HM having been 
drawn perpendicular to the ecliptic]. The side [LM of the parallelogram] is 
enclosed by LAM, the angle of the longitudinal prosthaphaeresis. But angle HAM 20 
embraces the deviation in latitude, since HM also falls perpendicularly on the 
same plane of the ecliptic. Angle HBE is given = 45°. Therefore, HK = half 
the chord subtending twice HE = 7071p whereof EB = 10,000p. 

Similarly, in triangle BKL, angle KBL is given = 2 1 / 2 ° [VI, 5, above], 
BLK is a right angle, and hypotenuse BK = 7071p whereof BE = 10,000p. 25 
In the same units, the remaining sides KL = 308p and BL = 7064p. But, as was 
shown above [V, 21], AB : BE = 10,000p : 7193p. In the same units, therefore, 
the remaining sides HK = 5086P; HM = KL = 221p; and BL = 5081p. Hence 
LA, the remainder [when BL = 5081p is subtracted from AB = 10,000p] = 
4919P. Now once more, in triangle ALM, sides AL and LM = HK are given 30 
[= 4919P, 5086p], and ALM is a right angle. Hence we shall have hypotenuse 
AM = 7075p, and angle MAL = 45°57' = Venus’ prosthaphaeresis or great 
parallax, as computed. 

Similarly, in triangle [MAH], side AM is given = 7075 p, and side MH = 
KL [= 221p]. Hence, angle MAH is obtained = 1° 47' = the latitudinal declina- 35 
tion. But if it is not boring to consider what variation in longitude is produced 
by this declination of Venus, let us take triangle ALH, understanding LH to be 
a diagonal of parallelogram LKHM = 5091p whereof AL = 4919p. ALH is a right 
angle. From this information hypotenuse AH is obtained = 7079 p. Hence, the 
ratio of the sides being given, angle HAL = 45° 59'. But MAL was shown = 40 
45° 57'. Therefore, the excess is only 2'. Q. E. D. 

Again, in like manner I shall demonstrate the latitudes of declination in Mer¬ 
cury by a construction similar to the foregoing. Therein assume arc EH — 45°, 
so that each of the straight lines HK and KB is taken, as before, = 7071 p whereof 
hypotenuse HB = 10,000p. In this situation, as can be inferred from the differ- 45 
ences in longitude as shown above [V, 27], radius BH = 3953p and AB = 9964p. 

In such units BK and KH will both be = 2795 p. ABE, the angle of inclination, 
was shown [VI, 5, above] = 6° 15', with 360° = 4 right angles. Hence, in right 


316 


BOOK VI CH. 5-6 


triangle BKL the angles are given. Accordingly, in the same units base KL = 
304 p , and the perpendicular BL = 2778 p . Therefore, AL, the remainder [when 
BL = 2778 p is subtracted from AB = 9964 p ] = 7186 p . But LM = HK = 2795 p . 
Hence, in triangle ALM, L is a right angle, and two sides, AL and LM, are given 
a [ = 7186 p , 2795 p ]. Consequently, we shall have hypotenuse AM = 7710 p , and 
angle LAM =21° 16' = the computed prosthaphaeresis. 

Similarly, in triangle AMH, two sides are given: AM [= 7710 p ], and MH = 
KL [= 304 p ], forming right angle M. Hence, angle MAH is obtained = 2° 16' = 
the latitude we were seeking. It may be asked how much [of the latitude] is owing 
10 to the true and apparent prosthaphaeresis. Take LH, the diagonal of the parallelo¬ 
gram. From the sides we obtain it = 281 l p , and^Z. = 7186 p . These show angle 
LAH = 21° 23' = the apparent prosthaphaeresis. This exceeds the previous 
calculation [of angle LAM = 21° 16'] by about 7'. Q. E. D. 

VENUS’ AND MERCURY’S SECOND Chapter 6 

» LATITUDINAL DIGRESSION, DEPENDING 
ON THE INCLINATION OF THEIR 
ORBITS AT APOGEE AND PERIGEE 

The foregoing remarks concerned that latitudinal digression of these planets 
which occurs near the middle longitudes of their orbits. These latitudes, as I said 
20 [VI, 1], are called the “declinations”. Now I must discuss the latitudes which 
happen near the perigees and apogees. With these latitudes is mingled the devia¬ 
tion or third [latitudinal] digression. Such a deviation does not occur in the three 
outer planets, but [in Venus and Mercury] it can more easily be distinguished 
and separated out in thought, as follows, 
as Ptolemy observed [Syntaxis, XIII, 4] that these [perigeal and apogeal] latitudes 

appeared at their maximum when the planets were on the straight lines drawn 
from the center of the earth tangent to their orbits. This happens, as I said [V, 21, 
27], when the planets are at their greatest distances from the sun in the morning 
and evening. Ptolemy also found [Syntaxis, XIII, 3] that Venus’ northern latitudes 
30 were 1 j z ° greater than the southern, but Mercury’s southern latitudes were about 
1 V2 0 greater than the northern. However, out of a desire to take into account the 
difficulty and labor of the computations, he accepted 2 V2 0 as a sort of average 
quantity for the varying values of the latitude, mainly because he believed that 
no perceptible error would thereby arise, as I too shall soon show [VI, 7]. These 
35 degrees are subtended by the latitudes on the circle around the earth and at 
right angles to the ecliptic, the circle on which the latitudes are measured. If we 
now take 2 1 / 2 ° as the equal digression to either side of the ecliptic and for the 
time being exclude the deviation, our demonstrations will be simpler and easier 
until we have ascertained the latitudes of the obliquations. 

4° Then we must first show that this latitude’s digression reaches its maximum 
near the eccentric’s point of tangency, where the longitudinal prosthaphaereses 
are also at their peak. Let the planes of the ecliptic and the eccentric, whether 
Venus’ or Mercury’s, intersect [in a line] through the [planet’s] apogee and perigee. 
On the intersection take A as the place of the earth, and B as the center of the 
« eccentric circle CDEFG, which is inclined to the ecliptic. Hence, [in the eccentric] 
any straight lines drawn perpendicular to CG form angles equal to the inclination 


317 



REVOLUTIONS 


[of the eccentric to the ecliptic]. Draw AE tangent to the eccentric, and AFD 
as any secant. From points D, E, and F, furthermore, drop DH, EK, and EL 
perpendicular to CG; and also DM, EN, and FO perpendicular to the horizon¬ 
tal plane of the ecliptic. Join MH, NK, and OL, as well as AN and AOM. 
For, AOM is a straight line, since three of its points are in two planes, namely, 5 
the plane of the ecliptic, and the plane ADM perpendicular to the plane of the 
ecliptic. For the assumed inclination, then, angles HAM and KAN enclose 
the longitudinal prosthaphaereses of these planets, whereas their digressions in 
latitude are embraced by angles DAM and EAN. 

I say, first, that the greatest of all the latitudinal angles is EAN, which is formed 10 
at the point of tangency, where the longitudinal prosthaphaeresis also is nearly at 
its maximum. For, angle EAK is the greatest of all [the longitudinal angles]. 
Therefore KE : EA > HD : DA and LF : FA. But EK : EN = HD : DM = 

LF : FO, since the angles subtended [by the second members of these ratios] 
are equal, as I said. Moreover, M, N, and O are right angles. Consequently, is 
NE : EA > MD : DA and OF : FA. Once more, DMA, ENA, and FOA are 
right angles. Therefore, angle EAN is greater than DAM and all the [other] 
angles which are formed in this way. 

Of the difference in longitudinal prosthaphaeresis caused by this obliquation, 
consequently, clearly the maximum is also that which occurs at the greatest elonga- 20 
tion near point E. For on account of the equality of the angles subtended [in the 
similar triangles], HD : HM = KE : KN = LF : LO. The same ratio holds good 
for their differences [HD-HM,KE- KN,LF- LO]. Consequently, the differ¬ 
ence EK-KN has a greater ratio to EA than the remaining differences have to 
sides like AD. Hence it is also clear that the ratio of the greatest longitudinal 26 
prosthaphaeresis to the maximum latitudinal digression will be the same as the 
ratio of the longitudinal prosthaphaereses of segments of the eccentric to the latitu¬ 
dinal digressions. For, the ratio of KE to EN is equal to the ratio of all the sides 
like LF and HD to the sides like FO and DM. Q. E. D. 

THE SIZE OF THE OBLIQUATION ANGLES Chapter 7 30 
OF BOTH PLANETS, VENUS AND MERCURY 

Having made the foregoing preliminary remarks, let us see how great an angle 
is contained in the inclination of the planes of both these planets. Let us recall 
what was said above [VI, 5], that each of the planets, when [midway] between 
its greatest and least distances [from the sun], becomes farther north or south 35 
at the most by 5°, in opposite directions depending on its position in its orbit. 
For, at the eccentric’s apogee and perigee Venus’ digression makes a deviation 
imperceptibly greater or smaller than 5°, from which Mercury departs by 1 I 2 °, 
more or less. 

As before, let ABC be the intersection of the ecliptic and the eccentric. Around 40 
B as center, describe the planet’s orbit inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in the 
manner explained [previously]. From the center of the earth draw straight line 
AD tangent to the [planet’s] orbit at point D. From D drop perpendiculars, DF 
on CBE, and DG on the horizontal plane of the ecliptic. Join BD, FG, and AG. 
Also assume that in the case of both planets angle DAG, comprising half of the 45 
aforementioned difference in latitude, = 2 1 j 2 °> with 4 right angles = 360°. 


BOOK VI CH. 7 


Let it be proposed to find, for both planets, the size of the angle of inclination 
of the planes, that is, angle DFG. 

In the case of the planet Venus, in units whereof the orbit’s radius = 7193 p , 
the planet’s greatest distance [from the earth], which occurs at the apogee, has 
5 been shown = 10,208 p , and its least distance, at perigee, = 9792 p [V, 21-22 : 
10,000 ±208]. The mean between these values = 10,000 p , which I have adopted 
for the purposes of this demonstration. Ptolemy wanted to take laboriousness 
into account and, as far as possible, seek out short cuts [Syntaxis, XIII, 3, end]. 
For where the extreme values did not produce a manifest difference, it was 
io better to accept the mean value. 

Accordingly, AB : BD = 10,000 p : 7193 p , and ADB is a right angle. Then 
we shall have side AD = 6947 p in length. Similarly, BA : AD = BD : DF, 
and we shall have DF = 4997 p in length. Again, angle DAG is assumed = 2 %% 
and AGD is a right angle. In triangle [ADG, then], the angles being given, side 
is DG = 303 p whereof AD = 6947 p . Thus also [in triangle DFG\ with two sides, 
DF and DG, being given [= 4997,303], and DGF a right angle, DFG, the angle 
of inclination or obliquation, =3° 29'. The excess of angle DAF over FAG 
comprises the difference in longitudinal parallax. Then the difference must be 
derived from the known sizes [of those angles]. 

20 It has already been shown that in units whereof DG = 303 p , hypotenuse 
AD = 6947 p , and DF = 4997 p ,and also that (AD) 2 -(DG) 2 = (AG) 2 , and (FD) 2 - 
(DG) 2 = (GF) 2 . Then as a length AG is given = 6940 p , and FG = 4988 p . In 
units whereof AG = 10,000 p , FG = 7187 p , and angle FAG = 45° 57'. In units 
whereof AD = 10,000 p , DF = 7193 p , and angle DAF s 46°. In the greatest 
25 obliquation, therefore, the parallactic prosthaphaeresis is diminished by about 
3' [=46 °- 45 ° 57']. At the middle apse, however, clearly the angle of the inclination 
between the circles was 2 V 2 °- Here, however, it has increased [to 3° 29'] by nearly 
a whole degree, which was added by that first libratory motion which I men¬ 
tioned. 

30 For Mercury the demonstration proceeds in the same way. In units whereof 
the orbit’s radius = 3573 p , the orbit’s greatest distance from the earth = 10,948 p ; 
its least distance = 9052 p ; and between these values the mean = 10,000 p [V, 27]. 
AB : BD = 10,000 p : 3573 p . Then [in triangle ABD] we shall have the third side 
AD = 9340 p . AB : AD = BD : DF. Therefore DF = 3337 p in length. DAG = 
35 the angle of the latitude, is assumed = 2 V 2 0 . Hence DG = 407 p whereof DF = 
3337 p . Thus in triangle DFG, with the ratio of these two sides being given, and 
with G a right angle, we shall have angle DFG = 7°. This is the angle at which 
Mercury’s orbit is inclined or oblique to the plane of the ecliptic. Near the middle 
longitudes at a quadrant’s [distance from apogee and perigee], however, the angle 
40 of inclination was shown = 6° 15' [VI, 5]. Therefore, 45' [= 7°-6° 15'] have 
now been added by the motion of the first libration. 

Similarly, for the purpose of ascertaining the angles of prosthaphaeresis and 
their difference, it may be noticed that straight line DG has been shown = 407 p 
whereof AD = 9340 p and DF = 3337 p . (AD) 2 - (DG) 2 = (AG) 2 , and (DF) 2 - 
45 (DG) 2 = (FG) 2 . Then we shall have as a length AG = 9331 p , and FG = 3314 p . 
From this information is obtained GAF = the angle of the prosthaphaeresis = 
20° 48', whereas DAF = 20° 56', than which GAF, which depends on the ob¬ 
liquation, is about 8' smaller. 


319 



REVOLUTIONS 


It still remains for us to see whether these angles of obliquation and the lati¬ 
tudes connected with the orbit’s maximum and minimum distance [from the earth] 
are found to conform with those obtained by observation. For this purpose in the 
same diagram again assume, in the first place, for the greatest distance of Venus’ 
orbit [from the earth] that AB : BD = 10,208p : 7193p. Since ADB is a right s 
angle, as a length AD = 7238p in the same units. AB : AD = BD : DF. Then 
in those units DF = 5102p in length. But DFG = the angle of the obliquity, 
was found = 3° 29' [earlier in VI, 7]. The remaining side DG = 309p whereof 
AD = 7238p. Then, in units whereof AD = 10,000p, DG = 427p. Hence, angle 
DAG is inferred = 2° 27' at the [planet’s] greatest distance from the earth. How- « 
ever, in units whereof BD = the orbit’sradius = 1\92>^,AB = 9792p [= 10,000-208] 
at the [planet’s] least [distance from the earth]. AD, perpendicular to BD, = 6644p. 
AB : AD = BD : DF. Similarly, as a length DF is given = 4883p in those units. 
But angle DFG has been put = 3° 29'. Therefore, DG is given = 297p whereof 
AD = 6644P. Consequently in triangle [ADG], the sides being given, angle is 
DAG is given =2° 34'. However, neither 3' nor 4' [2° 30'= 3'+2° 27'= 

2° 34'-4'] are large enough to be registered instrumentally with the aid of astro¬ 
labes. Hence, what was regarded as the maximum latitudinal digression in the 
planet Venus stands up well. 

In like manner assume that the greatest distance of Mercury’s orbit [from the so 
earth is to the radius of Mercury’s orbit], that is, AB :BD = 10,948p :3573p [V,27]. 
Thus, by demonstrations like the foregoing, we obtain AD = 9452p, and DF = 
3085p. But here again we have DFG , the angle of the inclination [between Mer¬ 
cury’s orbit and the plane of the ecliptic] known = 7°, and for that reason straight 
line DG = 376p whereof DF = 3085p or DA = 9452p. Hence in right triangle 25 
DAG, whose sides are given, we shall have angle DAG = 2° 17' = the greatest 
digression in latitude. 

At the [orbit’s] least distance [from the earth], however, AB : BD is put = 
9052p : 3573p. Hence, in those units AD = 8317p, and DF = 3283p. However, 
on account of the same inclination [= 7°], DF : DG is put = 3283p : 400p 30 
whereof AD = 8317p. Hence, angle DAG =2° 45'. 

The latitudinal digression associated with the mean value [of the distance 
of Mercury’s orbit from the earth] is here too assumed = 2 1 / 2 °. From this quantity 
the latitudinal digression at apogee, where it reaches its minimum, differs by 13' 
[=2° 30'- 2° 17']. At perigee, however, where the latitudinal digression attains its 35 
maximum, it differs [from the mean value] by 15' [= 2 °45'-2°30']. Instead of these 
[apogeal and perigeal differences], in computations based on the mean value, 
above it and below it I shall use 1 / 4 °> which does not differ perceptibly from the 
observations. 

As a result of the foregoing demonstrations, and also because the greatest 40 
longitudinal prosthaphaereses have the same ratio to the greatest latitudinal di¬ 
gression as the partial prosthaphaereses in the remaining portions of the orbit 
have to the several latitudinal digressions, we shall obtain all the latitudinal 
quantities occurring on account of the inclination of the orbits of Venus and 
Mercury. But only the latitudes midway between apogee and perigee, as I said 45 
[VI, 5], are available. It has been shown that of these latitudes the maximum = 

2 V 2 0 [VI, 6], while Venus’ greatest prosthaphaeresis = 46°, and Mercury’s = 

22° [VI, 5 : 45° 57', 21° 16']. And now in the tables of their nonuniform motions 


320 



BOOK VI CH. 7-8 


[after V, 33] we have the prosthaphaereses alongside the individual portions of the 
orbits. To the extent that each of the prosthaphaereses is smaller than the maxi¬ 
mum, I shall take the corresponding part of those 2 x /a° for each planet. I shall 
record that part numerically in the Table which is to be set out below [after VI, 
5 8]. In this way we shall have in detail every individual latitude of obliquation 
which occurs when the earth is at the higher and lower apsides of these planets. 
In like manner I have recorded the latitudes of their declinations [when the earth 
is] at a quadrant’s distance [midway between the planets’ apogee and perigee], 
and [the planets are] at their middle longitudes. What occurs between these four 
10 critical points [higher, lower, and both middle apsides] can be derived by the 
subtlety of the mathematical art from the proposed system of circles, not without 
labor, however. Yet Ptolemy was everywhere as compact as possible. He recognized 
[Sytitaxis, XIII, 4, end] that by themselves both of these kinds of latitude [declina¬ 
tion, obliquation] as a whole and in all their parts increased and decreased pro- 
15 portionally like the moon’s latitude. He therefore multiplied each of their parts 
by twelve, since their maximum latitude = 5° = Via X60°. He made these 
[products] into proportional minutes, which he thought should be used not only 
in these two planets but also in the three outer planets, as will be explained below 
[VI, 9]. 

20 the THIRD KIND OF LATITUDE, Chapter 8 

WHICH IS CALLED THE “DEVIATION”, 

IN VENUS AND MERCURY 

Now that the foregoing topics in their turn have been thus expounded, some¬ 
thing still remains to be said about the third motion in latitude, which is the 
25 deviation. The ancients, who station the earth in the middle of the universe, 
think that the deviation is produced by an oscillation of the eccentric, in phase 
with that of the epicycle, around the earth’s center, the maximum occurring when 
the epicycle is located at the [eccentric’s] apogee or perigee [Ptolemy, Sytitaxis, 
XIII, 1]. In Venus the deviation is always 1 j 6 ° to the north, but in Mercury always 
so s / 4 ° to the south, as I said above. 

Yet it is not quite clear whether the ancients regarded this inclination of the 
circles as constant and always the same. For, this immutability is indicated by their 
numerical quantities when they ordain that Ye of the proportional minutes always 
be taken as Venus’ deviation, and 3 / 4 as Mercury’s [Ptolemy, Sytitaxis, XIII, 6]. 
35 These fractions do not hold good unless the angle of inclination always remains 
the same, as is required by the scheme of those minutes which are based on that 
angle. Moreover, even if the angle does remain the same, it will be impossible to 
understand how this latitude of those planets suddenly rebounds from the inter¬ 
section into the same latitude as that from which it previously came. You may 
M say that this rebound happens like the reflection of light (as in optics). Here, 
however, we are discussing a motion which is not instantaneous, but by its very 
nature takes a determinable time. 

It must be admitted, consequently, that these planets have a libration such as 
I have explained [VI, 2]. It makes the parts of the circle change [from one latitude] 
« into the opposite. It is also a necessary consequence for their numerical quantities 
to vary, by V 5 0 in the case of Mercury. Hence there should be no occasion for 


321 



REVOLUTIONS 


surprise if, according to my hypothesis, also this latitude varies and is not abso¬ 
lutely constant. Yet it does not produce a perceptible irregularity, distinguishable 
as such in all its variations. 

Let the horizontal plane be perpendicular to the ecliptic. In the intersection 
[AEBC of these two planes] let A = the center of the earth; and at the greatest 5 
or least distance from the earth let B = the center of a circle CDF, which virtually 
passes through the poles of the oblique orbit. When the center of the orbit is at 
apogee and perigee, that is, on AB, the planet is at its greatest deviation, wherever 
it may be as determined by a circle parallel to the orbit. Of this circle parallel 
[to the orbit], the diameter DF is parallel to CBE, the diameter of the orbit. Of 10 
these [parallel circles], which are perpendicular to the plane of CDF, these diam¬ 
eters [DF and CBE] are taken to be the intersections [with CDF]. Bisect DF 
at G, which will be the center of the [circle] parallel [to the orbit]. Join BG, AG, 
AD, and AF. Put angle BAG = Ye 0 } as at Venus’ greatest deviation. Then in 
triangle ABG, with a right angle at B, we have the ratio of the sides AB : BG = 15 
10,000p : 29d. But in those same units the whole of ABC — 17,1930 [CB = CA - 
BA = 17,193p- 10,0000 = 7,193p;C£ = 2 x7193p = 14,386p] and AE = the re¬ 
mainder [when CE = 14,3860 is subtracted from AC = 17,1930] = 28070. Half 
of the chords subtending twice CD and EF = BG. Therefore, angle CAD = 6', 
and EAF s 15'. They differ from BAG [= 10'], in the former instance by only 4', 20 
and in the latter instance by 5', quantities which are generally ignored on account 
of their small size. Then Venus’ apparent deviation, when the earth is located at 
its apogee and perigee, will be slightly greater or smaller than 10', in whatever 
part of its orbit the planet may be. 

In the case of Mercury, however, we put angle BAG = z j t °. AB : BG = as 
10,000 p : 1310, ABC = 13,5730, and the remainder AE = 64270 [= AB-BE = 
10,000p- 35730]. Then angle CAD = 33', and .EAF ^ 70'. In the former instance, 
therefore, 12' are lacking [= 45 -33'], and in the latter instance there is an excess 
of 25' [= 70'-45']. Yet these differences are practically obliterated by the sun’s 
rays before Mercury becomes visible to us. Hence the ancients investigated only 30 
its perceptible deviation, as though this were invariant. 


[Earlier version: 

Nevertheless, if anybody wishes to scrutinize also those divagations of Mercury which 
are hidden by the sun, he will expend more labor [on them] than on any of the aforementioned 
latitudes. Let me therefore disregard this topic, and use the space for the calculations of the ancients, 36 
which do not depart much from the truth, lest in such a minor matter I seem to have struggled 
over the shadow of an ass (as the saying goes). And let the foregoing statements suffice for the devia¬ 
tions of the five planets in latitude, concerning which I have drawn up another Table in 30 lines, 
like the previous Tables [after V, 33]. 

[Printed version: 40 

Nevertheless, if anybody is not wearied by the labor and wishes to obtain 
an exact knowledge also of those divagations which are hidden by the sun, I shall 
explain how to do so in the following way. 

As the example I shall use Mercury, because its deviation is more notable 
than Venus’. Let the straight line AB be in the intersection of the planet’s orbit 45 
and the ecliptic. Let the earth at A be at the apogee or perigee of the planet’s 
orbit. Put line AB = 10,000p without any variation as the length midway between 
the maximum and minimum, as I did with regard to the obliquation [VI, 7]. 


322 



BOOK VI CH. 8 


With C as center, describe circle DEF, parallel to the eccentric orbit at distance 
CB. Conceive the planet as undergoing its maximum deviation at that time on this 
parallel circle. Let this circle’s diameter be DCF , which must likewise be parallel 
to AB, while both lines are in the same plane, perpendicular to the planet’s orbit. 

5 Assume EF = 45°, for example, the arc at which we investigate the planet’s 
deviation. Drop EG perpendicular to CF, as well as EK and GH perpendicular 
to the horizontal plane of the orbit. By joining HK, complete the rectangle. Also 
join AE, AK, and EC. 

On the basis of the maximum deviation in Mercury, BC = 131? whereof 
10 AB = 10,000p and CE = 3573?. In right triangle [CEG\, the angles being given, 
side EG = KH = 2526p. When BH = EG = CG [= 2526p] is subtracted 
[from AB = 10,000p], the remainder AH = 7474?. In triangle AHK, therefore, 
the sides forming right angle H being given [= 7474?, 2526p], hypotenuse AK = 
7889?.But [KE\ = CB = GH has been taken = 131?. Hence in triangle AKE two 
i6 given sides, AK and KE, form right angle K, and angle KAE is given. This cor¬ 
responds to the deviation which we were seeking for the assumed arc EF, and it 
differs little from the observations. Proceeding similarly in the other [deviations 
of Mercury] and in Venus, I shall enter the results in the subjoined Table. 

Having made the foregoing explanation, for the deviations between these 
20 limits I shall adjust the sixtieths or proportional minutes in both Venus and Mer¬ 
cury. Let circle ABC be the eccentric orbit of Venus or Mercury. Let A and C 
be the nodes of this latitude. Let B be the limit of the maximum deviation. With B 
as center, describe a circlet DFG, whose transverse diameter is DBF. Let the 
libration of the motion in deviation occur along DBF. It is assumed that when 
25 the earth is in the apogee or perigee of the planet’s eccentric orbit, the planet 
executes its greatest deviation at point F, where the planet’s deferent is tangent to 
the circlet. 

Now let the earth be at any distance whatever from the apogee or perigee of 
the planet’s eccentric. In accordance with this motion take FG as a similar arc 
30 on the circlet. Describe AGC as the planet’s deferent. AGC will intersect the 
circlet and [cut; its] diameter DF in point E. On AGC put the planet at K, with 
arc EK similar to FG by hypothesis. Drop KL perpendicular to circle ABC. 

From FG, EK, and BE it is proposed to find magnitude KL = the planet’s 
distance from circle ABC. From arc FG, EG is kiown as though it were a straight 



D 



323 


REVOLUTIONS 


line barely different from a circular or convex line. Likewise, EF will be given 
in the same units as the whole of BF and BE, the remainder [when EF is subtracted 
from BF], BF : BE = chord subtending twice the quadrant CE : chord subtend¬ 
ing twice CK = BE : KL. Therefore, if we compare both BF and the radius of 
CE to the same number 60, from them we shall obtain the value of BE. When 5 
this is squared, and the product is divided by 60, we shall obtain KL = the 
desired proportional minutes of arc EK. In like manner I have entered these 
minutes in the fifth and last column of the Table which follows. 


324 



BOOK VI CH. 8 


LATITUDES OF SATURN, JUPITER, AND MARS 




Saturn’s Latitude 

Jupiter’s 

Latitude 

Mars* Latitude 

Propor- 

Lommon 

Numbers 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern 

tional 

Minutes 

o 

o 

O 

t 

o 

' 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

' 

0 

/ 

Min. 

Sec. 

3 

357 

2 

3 

2 

2 

1 

6 

1 

5 

0 

6 

0 

5 

59 

48 

6 

354 

2 

4 

2 

2 

1 

7 

1 

5 

0 

7 

0 

5 

59 

36 

9 

351 

2 

4 

2 

3 

1 

7 

1 

5 

0 

9 

0 

6 

59 

6 

12 

348 

2 

5 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

9 

0 

6 

58 

36 

15 

345 

2 

5 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

10 

0 

8 

57 

48 

18 

342 

2 

6 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

11 

0 

8 

57 

0 

21 

339 

2 

6 

2 

4 

1 

9 

1 

7 

0 

12 

0 

9 

55 

48 

24 

336 

2 

7 

2 

4 

1 

9 

1 

7 

0 

13 

0 

9 

54 

36 

27 

333 

2 

8 

2 

5 

1 

10 

1 

8 

0 

14 

0 

10 

53 

18 

30 

330 

2 

8 

2 

5 

1 

10 

1 

8 

0 

14 

0 

11 

52 

0 

33 

327 

2 

9 

2 

6 

1 

11 

1 

9 

0 

15 

0 

11 

50 

12 

36 

324 

2 

10 

2 

7 

1 

11 

1 

9 

0 

16 

0 

12 

48 

24 

39 

321 

2 

10 

2 

7 

1 

12 

1 

10 

0 

17 

0 

12 

46 

24 

42 

318 

2 

11 

2 

8 

1 

12 

1 

10 

0 

18 

0 

13 

44 

24 

45 

315 

2 

11 

2 

. 9 

1 

13 

1 

11 

0 

19 

0 

15 

42 

12 

48 

312 

2 

12 

2 

10 

1 

13 

1 

11 

0 

20 

0 

16 

40 

0 

51 

309 

2 

13 

2 

11 

1 

14 

1 

12 

0 

22 

0 

18 

37 

36 

54 

306 

2 

14 

2 

12 

1 

14 

1 

13 

0 

23 

0 

20 

35 

12 

57 

303 

2 

15 

2 

13 

1 

15 

1 

14 

0 

25 

0 

22 

32 

36 

60 

300 

2 

16 

2 

15 

1 

16 

1 

16 

0 

27 

0 

24 

30 

0 

63 

297 

2 

17 

2 

16 

1 

17 

1 


0 

29 

0 

25 

27 

12 

66 

294 

2 

18 

2 

18 

1 

18 

1 


0 

31 

0 

27 

24 

m 

69 

291 

2 


2 

19 

1 

19 

1 


0 

33 

0 

29 

21 

m 

72 

288 

2 

21 

2 

21 

1 

21 

1 

21 

0 

35 

0 

31 

18 

18 

75 

285 

2 

22 

2 

22 

1 

22 

1 

22 

0 

37 

0 

34 

15 

15 

78 

282 

2 

24 

2 

24 

1 

24 

1 

24 

0 

40 

0 

37 

12 

12 

81 

279 

2 

25 

2 

26 

1 

25 

1 

25 

0 

42 

0 

39 

9 

9 

84 

276 

2 

27 

2 

27 

1 

27 

1 

27 

0 

45 

0 

41 

6 

24 

87 

273 

2 

28 

2 

28 

1 

28 

1 

28 

0 

48 

0 

45 

3 

12 

m 


2 

30 

2 

30 

1 

30 

1 

30 

0 

51 

0 

49 

0 

0 

























REVOLUTIONS 


[LATITUDES OF SATURN, 

JUPITER, 

AND MARS 








1 

Saturn’s Latitude 

Jupiter’s Latitude 

Mars’ Latitude 

Propor- 

Lommon 

Numbers 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern. 

tional 

Minutes 

o 

O 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

» 

O 

/ 

Min. 

Sec. 

93 

267 

2 

31 

2 

31 

1 

31 

1 

31 

0 

55 

0 

52 

3 

12 

96 

264 

2 

33 

2 

33 

1 

33 

1 

33 

0 

59 

0 

56 

6 

24 

99 

261 

2 

34 

2 

34 

1 

34 

1 

34 

1 

2 

1 

0 

9 

9 

102 

258 

2 

36 

2 

36 

1 

36 

1 

36 

1 

6 

1 

4 

12 

12 

105 

255 

2 

37 

2 

37 

1 

37 

1 

37 

1 

11 

1 

8 

15 

15 

108 

252 

2 

39 

2 

39 

1 

39 

1 

39 

1 

15 

1 

12 

18 

18 

111 

249 

2 

40 

2 

40 

1 

40 

1 

40 

1 

19 

1 

17 

21 

21 

114 

246 

2 

42 

2 

42 

1 

42 

1 

42 

1 

25 

1 

22 

24 

24 

117 

243 

2 

43 

2 

43 

1 

43 

1 

43 

1 

31 

1 

28 

27 

12 

120 

240 

2 

45 

2 

45 

1 

45 

1 

44 

1 

36 

1 

34 

30 

0 

123 

237 

2 

46 

2 

46 

1 

46 

1 

46 

1 

41 

1 

40 

32 

36 

126 

234 

2 

47 

2 

48 

1 

47 

1 

47 

1 

47 

1 

47 

35 

12 

129 

231 

2 

49 

2 

49 

1 

49 

1 

49 

1 

54 

1 

55 

37 

36 

132 

228 

2 

50 

2 

51 

1 

50 

1 

51 

2 

2 

2 

5 

40 

0 

135 

225 

2 

52 

2 

53 

1 

51 

1 

53 

2 

10 

2 

15 

42 

12 

138 

222 

2 

53 

2 

54 

1 

52 

1 

54 

2 

19 

2 

26 

44 

24 

141 

219 

2 

54 

2 

55 

1 

53 

1 

55 

2 

29 

2 

38 

46 

24 

144 

216 

2 

55 

2 

56 

1 

55 

1 

57 

2 

37 

2 

48 

48 

24 

147 

213 

2 

56 

2 

57 

1 

56 

1 

58 

2 

47 

3 

4 

50 

12 

150 

210 

2 

57 

2 

58 

1 

58 

1 

59 

2 

51 

3 

20 

52 

0 

153 

207 

2 

58 

2 

59 

1 

59 

2 

1 

3 

12 

3 

32 

53 

18 

156 

204 

2 

59 

3 

0 

2 

0 

2 

2 

3 

23 

3 

52 

54 

36 

159 

201 

2 

59 

3 

1 

2 

1 

2 

3 

3 

34 

4 

13 

55 

48 

162 

198 

3 

0 

3 

2 

2 

2 

2 

4 

3 

46 

4 

36 

57 

0 

165 

195 

3 

0 

3 

2 

2 

2 

2 

5 

3 

57 

5 

0 

57 

48 

168 

192 

3 

1 

3 

3 

2 

3 

2 

5 

4 

9 

5 

23 

58 

36 

171 

189 

3 

1 

3 

3 

2 

3 

2 

6 

4 

17 

5 

48 

59 

6 

174 

186 

3 

2 

3 

4 

2 

4 

2 

6 

4 

23 

6 

15 

59 

36 

177 

183 

3 

2 

3 

4 

2 

4 

2 

7 

4 

27 

6 

35 

59 

48 

180 

180 

3 

2 

3 

5 

2 

4 

2 

7 

4 

30 

6 

50 

60 

0 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


326 





BOOK VI CH. 8 


LATITUDES OF VENUS AND MERCURY 


Common 

Numbers 

Venus 

Mercury 

Venus 

Mercury 

Pro] 

tional 

3or- 

Min- 

>fthe 

ation 

Declination 

Obliqua- 

tion 

Decli¬ 

nation 

Obliqua- 

tion 

Deviation 

Deviation 

utes 

Devi 

O 

O 

o 

/ 

o 

' 

o 

/ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

n 

o 

■1 

Min. 

Sec. 

3 

357 

1 

2 

0 

4 

1 

45 

0 

5 

0 

7 

0 

33 

59 

36 

6 

354 

1 

2 

0 

8 

1 

45 

0 

11 

0 

7 

0 

33 

59 

12 

9 

351 

1 

1 

0 

12 

1 

45 

0 

16 

0 

7 

0 

33 

58 

25 

12 

348 

1 

1 

0 

16 

1 

44 

0 

22 

0 

7 

0 

33 

57 

14 

15 

345 

1 

0 

0 

21 

1 

44 

0 

27 

0 

7 

0 

33 

55 

41 

18 

342 

1 

0 

0 

25 

1 

43 

0 

33 

0 

7 

0 

33 

54 

9 

21 

339 

0 

59 

0 

29 

1 

42 

0 

38 

0 

7 

0 

33 

52 

12 

24 

336 

0 

59 

0 

33 

1 

40 

0 

44 

0 

7 

0 

34 

49 

43 

27 

333 

0 

58 

0 

37 

1 

38 

0 

49 

0 

7 

0 

34 

47 

21 

30 

330 

0 

57 

0 

41 

1 

36 

0 

55 

0 

8 

0 

34 

45 

4 

33 

327 

0 

56 

0 

45 

1 

34 

1 

0 

0 

8 

0 

34 

42 

0 

36 

324 

0 

55 

0 

49 

1 

30 

1 

6 

0 

8 

0 

34 

39 

15 

39 

321 

0 

53 

0 

53 

1 

27 

1 

11 

0 

8 

0 

35 

35 

53 

42 

318 

0 

51 

0 

57 

1 

23 

1 

16 

0 

8 

0 

35 

32 

51 

45 

315 

0 

49 

1 

1 

1 

19 

1 

21 

0 

8 

0 

35 

29 

41 

48 

312 

0 

46 

1 

5 

1 

15 

1 

26 

0 

8 

0 

36 

26 

40 

51 

309 

0 

44 

1 

9 

1 

11 

1 

31 

0 

8 

0 

36 

23 

34 

54 

306 

0 

41 

1 

13 

1 

8 

1 

35 

0 

8 

0 

36 

20 

39 

57 

303 

0 

38 

1 

17 

1 

4 

1 


0 

8 

0 

37 

17 

40 

60 

300 

0 

35 

1 

20 

0 

59 

1 

44 

0 

8 

0 

38 

15 

0 

63 

297 

0 

32 

1 

24 

0 

54 

1 

48 

0 

8 

0 

38 

12 

20 

66 

294 

0 

29 

1 

28 

0 

49 

1 

52 

0 

9 

0 

39 

9 

55 

69 

291 

0 

26 

1 

32 

0 

44 

1 

56 

0 

9 

0 

39 

7 

38 

72 

288 

0 

23 

1 

35 

0 

38 

2 

0 

0 

9 

0 


5 

39 

75 

285 

0 

20 

1 

38 

0 

32 

2 

3 

0 

9 

0 


3 

57 

78 

282 

0 

16 

1 

42 

0 

26 

2 

7 

0 

9 

0 

42 

2 

34 

81 

279 

0 

12 

1 

46 

0 

21 

2 

10 

0 

9 

0 

42 

1 

28 

84 

276 

0 

8 

1 

50 

0 

16 

2 

14 

0 

10 

0 

43 

0 

40 

87 

273 

0 

4 

1 

54 

0 

8 

2 

17 

0 

10 

0 

44 

0 

10 

90 

270 

0 

0 

1 

57 

0 

0 

2 

20 

0 

10 

0 

45 

0 

0 


327 
























REVOLUTIONS 


LATITUDES OF VENUS AND MERCURY 

Common 

Numbers 

Venus 

Mercury 

Venus 

Mercury 

Propor¬ 
tional Min¬ 
utes of the 
Deviation 

Declination 

Obliqua- 

tion 

Decli¬ 

nation 

Obliqua- 

tion 

Deviation 

Deviation 

O 

O 

O 

' 

o 

/ 

o 

' 

o 

' 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

Min. 

Sec . 

93 

267 

0 

5 

2 

0 

0 

8 

2 

23 

0 

10 

0 

45 

0 

10 

96 

264 

0 

10 

2 

3 

0 

15 

2 

25 

0 

10 

0 

46 

0 

40 

99 

261 

0 

15 

2 

6 

0 

23 

2 

27 

0 

10 

0 

47 

1 

28 

102 

258 

0 

20 

2 

9 

0 

31 

2 

28 

0 

11 

0 

48 

2 

34 

105 

255 

0 

26 

2 

12 

0 

40 

2 

29 

0 

11 

0 

48 

3 

57 

108 

252 

0 

32 

2 

15 

0 

48 

2 

29 

0 

11 

0 

49 

5 

39 

111 

249 

0 

38 

2 

17 

0 

57 

2 

30 

0 

11 

0 

50 

7 

38 

114 

246 

0 

44 

2 

20 

1 

6 

2 

30 

0 

11 

0 

51 

9 

55 

117 

243 

0 

50 

2 

22 

1 

16 

2 

30 

0 

11 

0 

52 

12 

20 

120 

240 

0 

59 

2 

24 

1 

25 

2 

29 

0 

12 

0 

52 

15 

0 

123 

237 

1 

8 

2 

26 

1 

35 

2 

28 

0 

12 

0 

53 

17 

40 

126 

234 

1 

18 

2 

27 

1 

45 

2 

26 

0 

12 

0 

54 

20 

39 

129 

231 

1 

28 

2 

29 

1 

55 

2 

23 

0 

12 

0 

55 

23 

34 

132 

228 

1 

38 

2 

30 

2 

6 

2 

20 

0 

12 

0 

56 

26 

40 

135 

225 

1 

48 

2 

30 

2 

16 

2 

16 

0 

13 

0 

57 

29 

41 

138 

222 

1 

59 

2 

30 

2 

27 

2 

11 

0 

13 

0 

57 

32 

51 

141 

219 

2 

11 

2 

29 

2 

37 

2 

6 

0 

13 

0 

58 

35 

53 

144 

216 

2 

25 

2 

28 

2 

47 

2 

0 

0 

13 

0 

59 

39 

15 

147 

213 

2 

43 

2 

26 

2 

57 

1 

53 

0 

13 

1 

0 

42 

0 

150 

210 

3 

3 

2 

22 

3 

7 

1 

46 

0 

13 

1 

1 

45 

4 

153 

207 

3 

23 

2 

18 

3 

17 

1 

38 

0 

13 

1 

2 

47 

21 

156 

204 

3 

44 

2 

12 

3 

26 

1 

29 

0 

14 

1 

3 

49 

43 

159 

201 

4 

5 

2 

4 

3 

34 

1 

20 

0 

14 

1 

4 

52 

12 

162 

198 

4 

26 

1 

55 

3 

42 

1 

10 

0 

14 

1 

5 

54 

9 

165 

195 

4 

49 

1 

42 

3 

48 

0 

59 

0 

14 

1 

6 

55 

41 

168 

192 

5 

13 

1 

27 

3 

54 

0 

48 

0 

14 

1 

7 

57 

14 

171 

189 

5 

36 

1 

9 

3 

58 

0 

36 

0 

14 

1 

7 

58 

25 

174 

186 

5 

52 

0 

48 

4 

2 

0 

24 

0 

14 

1 

8 

59 

12 

177 

183 

6 

7 

0 

25 

4 

4 

0 

12 

0 

14 

1 

9 

59 

36 

180 

180 

6 

22 

0 

0 

4 

5 

0 

0 

0 

14 

1 

10 

60 

0 


328 







BOOK VI CH. 9 


COMPUTING THE LATITUDES Chapter 9 

OF THE FIVE PLANETS 

The method of computing the latitudes of the five planets by means of the 
foregoing Tables is as follows. In Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars we obtain the common 
8 numbers from the adjusted or normalized anomaly of the eccentric. In Mars we 
keep the anomaly as it is; in Jupiter we first subtract 20°; but in Saturn we add 
50°. Then we record the results in the last column under the sixtieths or propor¬ 
tional minutes. 

Similarly, from the adjusted parallactic anomaly we take each planet’s number 
10 as its associated latitude. We take the first and northern latitude if the proportional 
minutes [descend from] higher [to lower]. This happens when the eccentric’s 
anomaly falls below 90° or exceeds 270°. But we take the second and southern 
latitude if the proportional minutes [rise from] lower [to higher], that is, if the 
eccentric’s anomaly (with which we enter the Table) is more than 90° or less than 
is 270°. If we then multiply either of these latitudes by its sixtieths, the product 
will be the distance north or south of the ecliptic, depending on the classification 
of the assumed numbers. 

In Venus and Mercury, on the other hand, from the adjusted parallactic 
anomaly we must first take the three latitudes which occur: declination, 
20 obliquation, and deviation. These are recorded separately. By an exception, in 
Mercury Yio °f the obliquation is subtracted if the eccentric’s anomaly and its 
number are found in the upper part of the Table, or an equal fraction is added if 
[the eccentric’s anomaly and its number are found] in the lower [part of the 
Table]. The remainder or sum resulting from these operations is retained, 
as However, the classification of these latitudes as northern or southern must 
be ascertained. Suppose that the adjusted parallactic anomaly lies in the apogeal 
semicircle, that is, is less than 90° or more than 270°, and also that the eccentric’s 
anomaly is less than a semicircle. Or again, suppose that the parallactic anomaly 
lies in the perigeal arc, namely, is more than 90° and less than 270°, and the 
ao eccentric’s anomaly is larger than a semicircle. Then, Venus’ declination will 
be northern, and Mercury’s southern. On the other hand, suppose that the par¬ 
allactic anomaly lies in the perigeal arc while the eccentric’s anomaly is less than 
a semicircle, or that the parallactic anomaly lies in the apogeal region, while the 
eccentric’s anomaly is greater than a semicircle. Then, conversely, Venus’ declina- 
35 tion will be southern, and Mercury’s northern. In the obliquation, however, 
if the parallactic anomaly is less than a semicircle and the eccentric’s anomaly 
is apogeal, or if the parallactic anomaly is greater than a semicircle and the eccen¬ 
tric’s anomaly is perigeal, Venus’ obliquation will be northern and Mercury’s 
southern; here too the converse holds true. However, the deviations always remain 
40 northern for Venus and southern for Mercury. 

Then, with the adjusted anomaly of the eccentric take the proportional minutes 
common to all five planets. Those proportional minutes which are ascribed to the 
three outer planets, even though they are so ascribed, are to be assigned to the 
obliquation, and the remainder to the deviation. Thereafter add 90° to that same 
45 anomaly of the eccentric. The common proportional minutes which are con¬ 
nected with this sum are again to be applied to the latitude of declination. 

When all these quantities have been so arranged in order, multiply by its own 


329 



REVOLUTIONS 


P. 


proportional minutes each of the three separate latitudes that have been set down. 
They will all emerge corrected for time and place, so that finally we have the 
complete account of the three latitudes in these two planets. If all the latitudes 
are of the same classification, add them together. But if they are not, combine 
only those two which are of the same classification. According as these two amount s 
to more or less than the third latitude of the opposite classification, it is subtracted 
from them, or they are subtracted from it, and the preponderant remainder will 
be the latitude which we were seeking. 

End of the Sixth and Last Book of the Revolutions 


41. Second diagram to face paragraph II D (lines 10-19). 
P. 270,27. For (of Smyrna?) read [of Smyrna?]. 


330 



NICOLAUS COPERNICUS 

THE OPINION ON JOHANNES WERNERS MOTION OF THE H n ‘ SPHERE 

T O THE REVEREND BERNARD WAPOWSKI, 
Cantor and Canon of the Church of Cracow, and Secre¬ 
tary to His Majesty the King of Poland, from Nicholas 
Copernicus. 

Some time ago, my dear Bernard, you sent me a little treatise 
on The Motion «f the Eighth Sphere written by John Werner 
of Nuremberg. Your Reverence stated that the w*rk was 
widely praised and asked me to give you my opinion of it. Had 
it been really possible for me to praise it with any degree of 
sincerity, I should have replied with a corresponding degree of 
pleasure. But I may commend the author’s zeal and effort. It 
was Aristotle’s advice that “we should be grateful not only to 
the philosophers who have spoken well, but also to those who 
have spoken incorrectly, because to men who desire to follow 
the right road, it is frequently no small advantage to know the 
blind alleys .” 1 Faultfinding is of little use and scant profit, for 
it is the mark of a shameless mind to prefer the role of the 
censorious critic to that of the creative poet. Hence I fear that 
I may arouse anger if I reprove another while I myself pro¬ 
duce nothing better. Accordingly I wished to leave these mat¬ 
ters, just as they are, to the attention of othersj and I intended 
to reply to your Reverence substantially along these lines, with 
a view to a favorable reception of my work. However, I know 
that it is one thing to snap at a man and attack him, but another 
thing to set him right and redirect him when he strays, just 
as it is one thing to praise, and another to flatter and play the 
fawner. Hence I see no reason why I should not comply with 
your request or why I should appear to hamper the pursuit and 
cultivation of these studies, in which you have a conspicuous 
place. Consequently, lest I seem to condemn the man gratui¬ 
tously, I shall attempt to show as clearly as possible in what 
respects he errs regarding the motion of the sphere of the fixed 
stars and maintains an unsound position. Perhaps my criticism 

1 Metaphysics i minor, i 993I511-i4. ; Copernicus departs considerably from 
the original and appears to be quoting from memory. 



may even contribute not a little to the formation of a better 
understanding of this subject. 

In the first place, then, he went wrong in his calculation of 
time. He thought that the second year of Antoninus Pius 
Augustus, in which Claudius Ptolemy drew up the catalogue 
of the fixed stars as observed by himself, 3 was c.e. 150, 3 when 
in fact it was c.e. 139. For in the Great Syntaxis, Book III, 
chapter i, 4 Ptolemy says that the autumnal equinox observed 
463 years after the death of Alexander the Great fell in the 
third year of Antoninus. 5 But from the death of Alexander to 
the birth of Christ there are 323 uniform Egyptian years* and 
130 days, because the interval between the beginning of the 
reign of Nabonassar and the birth of Christ is computed as 
747 uniform years and 130 days. 7 This computation, I observe, 
is not questioned, certainly not by our author, as can be seen 
in his Proposition 22.® It is true that according to the Alfonsine 

3 The view that Ptolemy copied his star catalogue iroto that of Hipparchus 
corrected for precession was critically examined by J. L. E. Dreyer and rejected 
{ Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, LXXVII [1917]) 5*8-39> 
LXXVIII [1918], 343-49) j J, K. Fotheringham took the same position 
(LXXVTII [1918], 419-22). See also Armitage, Copernicus , p. 106* 

3 In Proposition 4 (not 3 as in PII, i73n) of his De motu ociavae sfhaerae 
tractatus primus Werner dates an observation of the second year of Antoninus 
anno dominicae incarmtionis t$o incomplete, “in the 150th year of the incarna¬ 
tion of our Lord*” Copernicus does not call attention to a related error committed 
by Werner, The latter regarded February 22, 150, as the epoch of Ptolemy’s 
catalogue of the fixed slars: “Therefore it is dear that Ptolemy established the 
true places of the fixed stars in the zodiac for the 22d day of February, according 
to the Roman calendar, C.E. 150.” (Prop. 4); . . the era of Ptolemy, that is, 

149 years, 53 days from the incarnation of the Lord , . (Prop. 10). But 
Ptolemy gives his epoch as the beginning of the reign of Antoninus (HII t 36.13- 
16). 

* HI, 204.7-11. 

*Siegmund Gunther erred when he stated (MCV, II[i 88 o 3 , 5.15-19) that, 
according to Copernicus, Ptolemy equated the year 463 of Alexander with the 
second year of Antoninus. 

6 Of exactly 365 days, with 12 months of 30 days each and 5 additional days 
(cf. Th 172.29—173.12). 

1 Gfinther’s “747 years and 140 days” (MCV, II, 6.3) is evidently a misprint, 
for ten lines below ( ibid ., 6.13) he gives the correct number. 

3 Werner there states that “the interval between the years of Christ and Nebu¬ 
chadnezzar is, according to the Alfonsine Tables, 747 uniform years, 131 days.” 



Tables there is one additional day. The reason for this discrep¬ 
ancy is that Ptolemy takes noon of the first day of the first 
Egyptian month Thoth as the starting point of the years reck¬ 
oned from Nabonassar and Alexander the Great, 9 while Al¬ 
fonso starts from noon of the last day of the preceding year, 10 
just as we compute the years of Christ from noon of the last 
day of the month December. 11 Now the interval from Nabon¬ 
assar to the death of Alexander the Great is given by Ptolemy, 
Book III, chap, viii, 12 as 424 uniform years} and Censorinus, 
relying on Marcus Varro, agrees with this estimate in his De 
die natali , 13 addressed to Quintus Caerellius. 14 This interval, 
subtracted from 747 years and 130 days, leaves a remainder 
of 323 years and 130 days as the period from the death of 
Alexander to the birth of Christ. Then from the birth of Christ 
to the aforementioned observation of Ptolemy there are 139 
uniform years and 303 days. 15 Therefore it is clear that the 

In De rev. Copernicus calls attention to the error, frequently made, of identifying 
Nebuchadnezzar with Nabonassar (Th 186.20-54). 

B HI, 256.13-16. 

™ Libros del saber de astronontia , ed. Rico y Sinobas, IV, 120. 

* Cf. Werner, Prop. 16, corollary 3: “Roman years . . . that is, years com¬ 
puted from the birth of the Savior and from noon of the last day of December.** 

13 HI, 256.10-12, In H these lines are in chap. vii. Copernicus cites them from 
chap, viii, because he is using the translation of 1515, which divides Book III 
into ten chapters instead of nine. It makes a separate chapter of the penultimate 
paragraph of Heiberg’s chap, v (HI, 251,10-252.8). L, A. Birkenmajer dis¬ 
covered Copernicus’s copy of the 1515 translation (see his Mikolaj Koferniky ch. 
x, and Bulletin international de Vacademic des sciences de Cracovie y dasse des 
sciences math, et naturelles [1909*3, p. 24, n. 2), 

18 21.9; Censorinus equates the year 986 of Nabonassar with the year 562 of 
Alexander. 

14 On the form of this name Curtze wrote (MCV, I, 25) a perplexing note, 
which Prowe repeats (PII, 174) with all its blunders. Hultsch’s edition of Cen¬ 
sorious (Leipzig, 1867) reads Caerellius, not Caerellus (1.1, 15.1). The ineuna- 
bular editions (GW 6,47^-72) read Cerelius and Cerellius> not Cerillius, The 
praenomen is Quintus, not Gaius (PW s. v. Caerellius, No. 45 Ptvsopographia 
imperii Romani [2d ed.$ ed. Groag and Stein, Berlin and Leipzig, mi- 3 > n > 
30, No, 156). 

** Gunther’s “139 years and 333 days*’ (MCV, II, 6.16) is a misprint. The 
observation was made in the early morning of the 9th day of Athyr (the third 
month in the Egyptian year), and is therefore assigned to the 68th astronomical 
day of the year. Then Copernicus reckons the interval from the death of Alex- 



autumnal equinox observed by Ptolemy occurred 140 18 uniform 
years after the birth of our Lord, on the ninth day of the month 
Athyrj or 139 Roman years, September 25, the third year of 
Antoninus. 17 

Again, in the Great Syntaxis , Book V, chap, iii, Ptolemy 
counts 885 years and 203 days from Nabonassar to his observa¬ 
tion of the sun and moon in the second year of Antoninus. 18 
Therefore 138 uniform years and 73 days must have elapsed 
since the birth of Christ. 1 * Hence the fourteenth day thereafter, 
that is, the ninth of Pharmuthi, on which Ptolemy observed 

ander to the observation as 463^ 68 d j 

subtract 323 y 130^ from the death of Alexander to the birth 
j 2^7 303 d Christ 

™ Since the first day of the Roman year fell on the 130th day of the Egyptian 
year, and 130 + 303 > 365, the observation took place in the following Egyptian 
year. 

** Since H X 139 = 34%,subtract 35 days on account of leap-years; 303 — 35 — 
268. Hence the observation took place on the 268th day of the Roman year, or 
September 25, Copernicus assigns the observation to C.E. 140, although c.E. 

139 is clearly correct (see emendation No. 12 on p. 254 in E. A. Birkenmajer, 
Mikoiaj Kofemik). It was pointed out in n. 15, above, that he counted 463 
years, 68 days, from Alexander to the observation. Yet the 151$ edition of the 
Syntaxis reads . , , quod quidem fust fost mortem A lexartdri m , 46amto ♦ ♦ . 
(p, 28r), “. ♦ . which was in the 463d year after the death of Alexander . . 
making the interval 462 years, 68 days. We are reduced to choosing between two 
alternatives: either Homer nodded, or the MSS of the Letter against Werner 
should read 138 years, 303 days, instead of 139 years, 303 days. Werner makes 
a commendable effort to avoid such ambiguity by attaching to a total number 

of years the adjective “complete” or “incomplete,” so that n + 1 incomplete 

years = n complete years. He writes: “Therefore it is clear that Ptolemy estab¬ 
lished the true places of the fixed stars in the zodiac for the 2 2d day of February, 
according to the Roman calendar, while the 150th year of our Eord was still 
incomplete” (Prop. 4) \ “It is clear, however, from Proposition 4 that Claudius 
Ptolemy established the true places of the fixed stars for 149 complete Roman 
years and 53 days from the beginning of the years of Christ” (Prop. 20). 

Gunther’s statement that Copernicus assigns the observation under discussion 

to September 25, 138 (MCV, II, 6.18-19) is clearly erroneous. 

19 HI, 362.9-10, 19-215 the observation was made on the twenty-fifth of 
Phamenoth. 

19 885^ 203 d from Nabonassar to observation 
747 i3° from Nabonassar to Christ 


138* 73 d from the birth of Christ to the observation. 


Basiliscus in Leo, 20 was the 22d day of February in the 139th 
Roman year after the birth of Christ. 21 And this was the second 
year of Antoninus, which our author thinks was c.E. 150. 
Consequently his error consists of an excess of eleven years. 

If anyone is still in doubt and, not satisfied by our previous 
criticism, desires a further test of this treatise, he should re¬ 
member that time is the number or measure of the motion of 
heaven considered as “before” and “after.” From this motion 
we derive the year, month, day, and hour. But the measure 
and the measured, being related, are mutually interchange¬ 
able. 22 Now since Ptolemy based his tables on fresh observa¬ 
tions of his own, it is incredible that the tables should contain 
any sensible error or any departure from the observations that 
would make the tables inconsistent with the principles on which 
they rest. Consequently if anyone will take the positions of the 
sun and moon, which Ptolemy determined by the astrolabe in 
his examination of Basiliscus, in the second year of Antoninus, 
on the ninth day of the month Pharmuthi, 5% hours after 
noon, and if he will consult Ptolemy’s tables for these positions, 
he will find them, not 149 years after Christ, but 138 years, 
88 days, 5 >4 hours, equal to 885 years after Nabonassar, 218 
days, 5^4 hours. 23 Thus is laid bare the error which frequently 

**HII, 14.1-14$ for Basiliscus sec above, p- 76, n. 56. 

**138 years and 73 days +14. days — 34 days (on account of leap-years) — 
138 years and 53 days or February 22, 139. In De rev., where Copernicus con¬ 
siders this observation without reference to any other, he gives the day as Feb¬ 
ruary 24 (Th 114.20-22). His computation may be reconstructed as follows. 
Pharmuthi 9 is the 219th day of the Egyptian year. Subtract 34 days on account 
of leap-years, and 130 days to get the equivalent day in the Roman year: 219 —~ 
(34 H- 130) — 55th day of the Roman year, or February 24. Robert Schramms 
tables, Kolendariografhische und chronologize he Tajeln (Leipzig, 1908), give 
February 23* 

M These reflections on the nature of time are an echo of AristotIe*s views \ s«e 
Physics iv.11 2ifbi-2, iv.12 22obi4-it>, iv.14 223b2t-23, and vi.4 235310-24. 

84 7477 130 4 o 11 from Nabonassar to Christ 

+ 138 88 5% from Christ to observation 

885 J 

We established in n. 12 (p. 95 > above) that when Copernicus wrote the tetter 
against Werner he was using for his references to Ptolemy the translation of 1515. 
Consulting the tables for the sun in that work (pp. 29^ 33V), we get the fol¬ 
lowing result: 



vitiates our author’s examination of the motion of the eighth 
sphere when he mentions time. 

The hypothesis in which he expresses his belief that during 
the four hundred years before Ptolemy the fixed stars moved 
with equal motion only 24 involves a second error no less im¬ 
portant than the first. To clarify this matter and make it more 

intelligible, attention should be directed, I think, to the propo¬ 
sitions stated below. The science of the stars is one of those 
subjects which we learn in the order opposite to the natural 
order. For example, in the natural order it is first known that 


8io y 

163’ 4' 13" 

7 i J 

0 , m 

342 29 42 

3 7 

359 ° » C 14" 

210^ 

206' 59' 0" 

$<* 

7° S3' 6 ” 

5 h 

Off* 

O 12 19 


O' l' if 

1 

,o 79 ° 55' 47* 

initial position 

265* 15' 

1 

> 345 * 10' 

— 1 

,080° 


, 0 $ 

265 10 

Gemini 

j 0 $ 

5 30 

mean place of sun 

270 d 40' or Pisces 


anomaly *4-2 6 23' 

true place of sun Pisces 3* 3' 

And Ptolemy states that: the true place of the sun was Pisces 3 0 3' (HII, 14.14-16), 
There is no need to set down here the longer calculations required for the moon, 
inasmuch as Manitius giv* them ( Ptolemdus Handbuch , II, 397-98). For the 
method of using Ptolemy’s solar tables, cf. A. Rome, Coinmentaires de Pappus 
et de The*n d } Alexandria sur VA Image si e, I (Rome, 1931), xxxv-xxxvii. 

Werner, Prop. 6; “To prove that the motion of the fixed stars in the zodiac 
for approximately four hundred years before the era of Ptolemy was nearly 
uniform and equal. In many passages of his Great Syntaxes Ptolemy shows with 
reference to the motion of the stars that previous to him and to his observation 
of the fixed stars, they moved for about four hundred years only one degree in 
each century. Therefore if for four hundred years the motion of the fixed stars 
completed one degree in each century ( centenarih, not centenaries, as Curtze 
[MCV, I, i6n] and PII, 175-76 n)> the consequence is that the motion of the 
fixed stars for four hundred years previous to Ptolemy was nearly uniform and 
equal.” Prop. “Therefore it is clear that the fixed stars moved only with equal 
motion, and lacked unequal motion * or if they had any unequal motion, it was 
very small and almost imperceptible. 5 ’ 


the planets are nearer than the fi xed stars to the earth, and then 
as a consequence that the planets do not twinkle. We, on the 
contrary, first see that they do not twinkle, and then we know 
that they are nearer to the earth. 25 In like manner, first we 
learn that the apparent motions of the planets are unequal, 
and subsequently we conclude that there are epicycles, eccen¬ 
trics, or other circles by which the planets are carried unequally. 
I should therefore like to state that it was necessary for the 
ancient philosophers, first to mark with the aid of instruments 
the positions of the planets and the intervals of time, and then 
with this information as their guide, lest the inquiry into the 
motion of heaven remain interminable, to work out some defi¬ 
nite planetary theory, which they seem to have found when 
the theory agreed in some harmonious manner with all* 6 the 
observed and noted positions of the planets. The situation is 
the same with respect to the motion of the eighth sphere. How¬ 
ever, by reason of the extreme slowness of this motion, the 
ancient mathematicians were unable to pass on to us a complete 
account of it. But if we desire to examine it, 27 we must follow 
in their footsteps and hold fast to their observations, 28 be¬ 
queathed to us like an inheritance. And if anyone on the con¬ 
trary thinks that the ancients are untrustworthy in this regard, 
surely the gates of this art are closed to him. Lying before the 
entrance, he will dream the dreams of the disordered about 
the motion of the eighth sphere and will receive his deserts 
for supposing that he must support his own hallucination by 
defaming the ancients. It is well known that they observed all 

25 An echo of Aristotle's De caelo ii.8 2joai7-24 and Posterior Analytics i.13 
7^30-78114. 

20 I take it that omnibus appears twice by ditto graphy in the texts of Curtze 
(MCV, I, 27.7-8) and Prowe (PII, 176.15-16). 

27 Prowe reads incorrectly cum instead of eum (PII, 176.19). 

Curtze preferred obser<vationibu$ y the reading of the Vienna MS, to consid- 
erationibuSf the reading of the Berlin MS (MCV, I, 27 n). In his note, which 
Prowe follows (PII, 176 n), Curtze equates consideratio with “Betrachtuug” 
(contemplation), and seems unaware of the use of consideratio in the technical 
sense of “observation” (e.g., Th 192.11, 28; 259.26-27; 261.8; 276.3; 337.25; 
348.20-21, 29; 35 ^ 32 - 35 ^*) 3 5 7- 1 9 5 365.6-7; 366.2, 6; 367,17? 3 79* 1 3 > 
385.6; p. 104, n. 45, below; for an example in the 'Efitome see p. 124, n. 62, 
below). 



these phenomena with great care and expert skill, and be¬ 
queathed to us many famous and praiseworthy discoveries. 
Consequently I cannot be persuaded that in noting star-places 
they erred by %* or Vs° or even %°, as our author believes. 
But of this I shall say more below. 

Another point must not be overlooked. In every celestial 
motion that involves an inequality, what we want above all is 
the entire period in which the apparent motion passes through 
all its variations. For an apparent inequality in a motion is 
what prevents the whole revolution and the mean motion from 
being measured by their parts. As Ptolemy and before him 
Hipparchus of Rhodes, in their investigation of the moon’s 
path, divined with keen insight, in the revolution of an in¬ 
equality there must be four diametrically opposite points, the 
points of extreme swiftness and slowness, and, at each end of 
the perpendicular, the two points of mean uniform motion. 
These points divide the circle into four parts, so that in the 
first quadrant the swiftest motion diminishes, in the second 
the mean diminishes, in the third the slowest increases, and 
in the fourth the mean increases. 29 By this device they could 
infer from the observed and examined motions of the moon 
in what portion of its circle it was at any specified time; and 
hence, when a similar motion recurred, they knew that a revo¬ 
lution of the inequality had been completed. Ptolemy explained 
this procedure more fully in the fourth book 30 of the Great 
Syntaxis. 

This method should have been adopted also in studying the 
motion of the eighth sphere. But because it is extremely slow, 
as I have said, in thousands of years the unequal motion quite 
clearly has not yet returned upon itself; and we are not per¬ 
mitted to give a final statement forthwith in dealing with a 
motion that extends beyond many generations of men. Never¬ 
theless it is possible to attain our goal by a reasonable con¬ 
jecture; and we now have the assistance of some observations, 
added since Ptolemy, which agree with this explanation. For 
what has been determined cannot have innumerable explana¬ 
tions; just as, if a circumference is drawn through three given 

*Cf. p. m, n. ij, below. “Chap. ii. 



points not on a straight line, we cannot draw another circum¬ 
ference greater or smaller than the one first drawn. 31 But let 
me postpone this discussion to another occasion in order that I 
may return to the point where I digressed. 

We must now see whether during the four hundred years 
before Ptolemy the fixed stars indeed moved, as our author 
says, with equal motion only. But let us not be mistaken in the 
meaning of terms. I understand by “equal motion,” usually 
called also “mean motion,” the motion that is half way between 
the slowest and the swiftest. We must not be deceived by the 
first corollary to the seventh proposition. There he says 82 that 
the motion of the fixed stars is slower when on his hypothesis 
the equal motion occurs, while the rest of the motion is more 
rapid and hence would at no time be slower than the equal 
motion. I do not know whether he is consistent in this regard 
when later on he uses the expression “much slower.” 33 He 
derives his measure of the equal motion from the following 
uniformity: in the period from the earliest observers of the 
fixed stars, Aristarchus and Timocharis, to Ptolemy, and in 
equal periods of time, the fixed stars moved equal distances, 
namely, approximately I ° in a century. This rate is given quite 
clearly by Ptolemy, 84 and is repeated by our author in his 
seventh proposition. 36 

But being a great mathematician, he is not aware that at the 
points of equality, that is, the intersections of the ecliptic of the 

81 The foregoing passage, in a slightly altered form, was quoted by Tycho 
Brahe, as I pointed out in n. \$ on pp. $-9, above* Then Brahe added; “From 
these remarks it is clear that Copernicus, who came to the science of astronomy 
with talents certainly equal to Ptolemy’s, thought that It was not utterly useless 
to construct, from some carefully examined part of its motion, a probable con¬ 
ception of the entire motion of the eighth sphere” ( Tychonts Brahe opera omnia, 
ed. Dreyer, IV, 292*20*23). 

* . motum fixomm siderum tardiorem exhtcre . , . 

m Copernicus has placed his finger on a logical difficulty. For Werner the 
mean rate (Prop. $: “Hence it can without difficulty be inferred that the fixed 
stars in their equal motion move only one degree in each century of uniform years* 
Corollary. Hence it is clear that the fixed stars in their equal motion complete 
one revolution in 3$,000 uniform years.”) is also the slowest (Prop. 13: “There¬ 
fore the motion of the fixed stars in Ptolemy 5 s time was slower or slowest.”). 

u HII, 36.2 7,2. 

18 The reference should be to the sixth proposition. 



tenth sphere with the circles of trepidation, as he calls them, 88 
the motion of the stars cannot possibly appear more uniform 
than elsewhere. 37 The contrary is necessarily true: at those 
times the motion appears to change most, and least when the 
apparent motion is swiftest or slowest. He should have seen 
this from his own hypothesis and system and from the tables 
based on them, especially the last table which he drew up for 
the revolution of the entire equality or trepidation. 38 

In this table the apparent motion is found to be, according 
to the preceding calculation, only 49' for the century following 
200 B.C., and 57' for the next century. During the first century 

C.E. the stars must have moved about I °6', and during the 
second about I°I5'. Thus in equal periods of time the motions 
were successively greater by a little less than V6°. 39 If you add 
the motion of the two centuries in either era, the total for the 
first interval will fall short of 2° by more than V6°, while the 

total for the second will exceed 2° by about % 0 . 40 Thus again 
in equal times the later motion will exceed the earlier by about 
34', 41 whereas our author had previously reported, trusting in 
Ptolemy, that the fixed stars moved 1 0 in a century. On the 
other hand, by the same law of the circles which he assumed, 
in the swiftest motion of the eighth sphere it happens that 
during 400 years a variation of scarcely 1' is found in the ap¬ 
parent motion, as can be seen in the same table for the years 

** Prop. 11; . ♦ the apparent or unequal motion of the sphere of the fixed 

stars or of the eighth sphere is caused by the circumstance that the first pointe of 

Cancer and Capricornus of the ecliptic of the ninth sphere revolve on small 

circles. This revolution is called by Thabit and the Alfonsine Tables the forward 

and backward motion or trepidation of the eighth sphere. This trepidation 

pro-ceeds sometimes in the order of the signs, sometimes in the contrary order. 

Hence the motion of the fixed stars is sometimes slow and sometimes rapid. It is 

clear, moreover, that the motion of the fixed stars is composed of the e^ual 

motion of the eighth sphere, and the trepidation or forward and backward 

motion of the ninth sphere on the small circles.” 

In Prop. 13 Werner states: "Therefore it is clear that the first points of 

Cancer and Capricornus of the ninth sphere were, about Ptolemy’s time, near the 

aforesaid intersections of .the small circlev,with the ecliptic of the tenth sphere,” 
This table is placed at the end or Trop. 30. r r 

**The successive increases are S', 9', 9', 

40 49' + 57' “ i° 46'^ i° 6' + i° 15' = 2° 21'. 

*2* 2 z' — i* 46' ^ 35'* 



600-1000 C.E.; and similarly in the slowest motion, from 2060 
b.c. for 400 years thereafter. Now the law governing an in¬ 
equality is that, as was stated above, 42 in one semicircle of trepi¬ 
dation, the one that extends from extreme slowness to extreme 
swiftness, the apparent motion constantly increases; and in the 
other semicircle, the one that extends from extreme swiftness 
to extreme slowness, the motion, previously on the increase, 
constantly diminishes. The greatest increase and decrease occur 
at the points of equality, diametrically opposite to each other. 
Hence in the apparent motion for two continuous equal periods 
of time equal motions cannot be found, but one is greater or 
smaller than the other. An exception occurs only at the ex¬ 
tremes of swiftness and slowness, where the motions to either 
side pass through equal arcs in equal times; beginning or ceas¬ 
ing to increase or decrease, they equal each other at those times 
by undergoing opposite changes. 

Therefore it is clear that the motion during the four hundred 
years before Ptolemy was not at all mean, but rather the slow¬ 
est. I see no reason why we should suppose any slower motion, 
for which we have not been able thus far to get any evidence. 
No observation of the fixed stars made before Timocharis has 
come down to us, and Ptolemy had none. Since the swiftest 
motion has already occurred, we are now as a consequence not 
in the same semicircle with Ptolemy. In our semicircle the 
motion diminishes, and no small part of it has already occurred. 

Hence it should not be surprising that with these assump¬ 
tions our author could not more nearly approach the recorded 
observations of the ancients; and that in his opinion they erred 
by or %°, or even 14 ° and more. Yet nowhere does Ptol¬ 
emy seem to have exercised greater care than in his effort to 
hand down to us a flawless treatment of the motion of the fixed 
stars. He could be successful only in that small portion of it 
from which he had to reconstruct the entire revolution. If an 
error, however imperceptible, entered that whole vast realm, 
it might have prodigious effects on the outcome. Therefore he 
seems to have joined Aristarchus to Timocharis of Alexandria, 
his contemporary, and Agrippa of Bithynia to Menelaus of 

42 Page 10b. 



Rome; in this way he would have most certain and unquestion¬ 
able evidence when they agreed with each other, although 
separated by great distances. It is incredible that such great 
errors were made by these men or Ptolemy, who could deal 
with many other more difficult matters and, as the saying goes, 
put the finishing touches to them. 

Finally, our author is nowhere more foolish than in his 
twenty-second proposition, especially in the corollary thereto. 
Wishing to praise his own work, he censures Timocharis with 
regard to two stars, namely, Arista Virginis, 43 and the star 
which is the most northerly of the three in the brow of 
Scorpio, 44 on the ground that for the former star Timocharis’s 
calculation fell short, and for the latter was excessive. 45 But 
here our author commits a childish blunder. For both stars the 
difference in the distance, as determined by Timocharis and 
Ptolemy, is the same, namely, 4 0 20' in approximately equal 
intervals of time; and hence the result of the calculation is 
practically the same. Yet our author disregards the fact that 
the addition of to the place of the star which Timocharis 
found in 2* of Scorpio 4 * cannot possibly produce 6°2o' of 
Scorpio, the place where Ptolemy found the star. 47 Conversely 
when the same number is subtracted from 26°40', the place 
of Arista according to Ptolemy, 48 it cannot yield 22°20', as it 

48 Commonly called Spica; cf. p, 67, above, 

44 Scorpio 1 (HII, 108*185 Th 137.31), 0 Scorpii. 

“Corollary to Prop. 22 (not 27, as in Curtze, MCV, I, 31 n. and Prowe, 
PII, 181 n); “This is clear from the observations \_considerationibu$\ of Timoch¬ 
aris. In the case of the fixed star called Arista, they fall short of my calculation, 
but in the case of the star which is the most northerly of the three bright stars 
in the brow of Scorpio, they exceed my computation. However, if these observa¬ 
tions \con$tdera^one$\ made by Timocharis had both been true, they should 
equally fall short of my calculation, or equally exceed it. Therefore the trust¬ 
worthiness of my tables is not less than that of the observations and discoveries 
of the ancients.” “HII, 32,20-33.1, 

44 HH, 109.18. Werner’s remarks are: “The true motion of the fixed stars, 
in the interval between Timocharis and Ptolemy, will turn Out to be 4** j* 3* 28'”. 
If we add this difference to the true place of the fixed star which is the most 
northerly in the brow of Scorpio, to the place, that is, which Timocharis found 
in his observation, the mult will be 6 C 7' 3". But Ptolemy’s tables place this 
star in 6* 20' of Scorpio” (Prop. 22). 

“HII, 103.16. This statement enables us to correct the slip in Th 160,15 see 
n. 14 on p. 112, below. 



should, 49 but it gives 22°32'. 50 Thus our author thought that 
in the one case the computation was deficient by the amount by 
which in the other case it was excessive, as though this irregu¬ 
larity were inherent in the observations, or as though the road 
from Athens to Thebes were not the same as the road from 
Thebes to Athens. Besides, if he had either added or sub¬ 
tracted the number in both cases, as parity of reasoning re¬ 
quired, he would have found the two cases identical. 

Moreover, between Timocharis and Ptolemy there were in 
reality not 443 years, 51 but only 432, as I indicated in the be¬ 
ginning. 52 Since the interval is shorter, the difference should be 
smaller^ hence he departs from the observed motion of the 
stars not merely by 13' 53 but by V3 0 . Thus he imputed his own 
error to Timocharis, while Ptolemy barely escaped. And while 
he thinks that their reports are unreliable, 54 what else is left 
but to distrust his observations? 

So much for the motion in longitude of the eighth sphere. 
From the foregoing remarks it can easily be inferred what we 

* HII, 29.9-it. 

60 Not 22’ 33’, because Werner is subtracting 4 0 7' 57”: “The difference will 
be 4® 7' 57", the true motion of the fixed stars for the 44a complete Roman 
years and 350 days between the observations of Ptolemy and Timocharis. If, 
finally, this value of 4® 7' 57" is subtracted from the true place of Arista as 
observed or calculated by Ptolemy, the remainder is n* 32' 3 M of Virgo, the true 
place of Arista in the zodiac, near the place found by Timocharis in his obser¬ 
vation” (Prop, zz ), 

** Prop. 21: “Finally, between this observation of Timocharis and Ptolemy’s 
investigation of the fixed stars there intervened 443 Roman years and 64 days.” 

** In his treatment of Werner’s ‘^first error,” Copernicus established that Wer¬ 
ner postdated Ptolemy by eleven years} cf, pp. 94*97, above, 

“Prop. 22: “Therefore my tables would diminish the position of this star 
by 13'.” Again, “However, my computation exceeds Timocharis’s observation 
by 12 / . n 

w Prop. 22 y Corollary: “For this weakens not a little the reliability of the 
ancient observations of the fixed stars, since some of these observations exceed the 
computation based on the foregoing canons and tables, while certain of them fall 
short of this computation. Now if all the results of the ancient observations of the 
fixed stars coincided exactly with the truth, they should, with perfect propriety, 
all together fall short of the calculation based on the aforesaid tables, or they 
should all equally exceed it But it has been shown above that the ancient obser¬ 
vations partly fall short of, and partly exceed the calculation based on my tables,” 
Yet with regard to the length of the year Werner is less confident: “Fori do not 
venture to charge the ancient observers of the stars with any error” (Prop. 33). 



must think about the motion in declination, which our author 
has complicated with two trepidations, as he calls them, piling 
a second one upon the first. 50 But since the foundation has now 
been destroyed, of necessity the superstructure collapses, being 
weak and incohesive. What finally is my own opinion concern¬ 
ing the motion of the sphere of the fixed stars? Since I intend 
to set forth my views elsewhere, I have thought it unnecessary 
and improper to extend this communication further. For it is 
enough if I satisfy your desire to have my judgment of this 
work, as you requested. 56 May your Reverence be of sound 

health and good fortune. VT n 

6 Nicholas Copernicus 

To the Reverend Bernard Wapowski, Frauenburg, June 3, 1514 

Cantor and Canon of the Church of Cracow, 

Secretary to His Majesty the King of Poland, 
my highly esteemed lord and patron, etc. 

*®Prop. 18: ^The first trepidation or forward and backward motion is a prop¬ 
erty of the ninth sphere and its small circles. This trepidation of the ninth sphere 
is called the first trepidation because, by reason of the variation in the maximum 
declination of the sun, a revolution or upward and downward movement on 
small circles must be assigned to the ecliptic of the tenth sphere also. This move¬ 
ment will, then, be named the second trepidation.^ 

“We have already seen (cf. pp. 7-8, n* 14, above) how drfhcult it was for 
Tycho Brahe to obtain a copy of Werner’s treatise on The Motion of the Eighth 
Sfhere. His critical comment on it follows: C ‘I have examined it, studied it thor¬ 
oughly, and set it aside for a reason which I may briefly explain. Werner uses 
three stars as a basis for dealing with the rest, and from these three he attempts 
to construct complicated movements of the eighth sphere. He did not carefully 
observe the three stars in the heavens, as he should have, although he pretends 
to have done so (l wish, however, to say this with due respect to the memory 
of a man who was otherwise very learned, and who served the cause of mathe¬ 
matics admirably). Rather, he represented them as he pleased and adjusted them 
to fxt his purpose. This is quite clear from the fact that he retains everywhere 
the ancient values for their latitudes and nevertheless assuming his own motions 
in declination, works out changes in their longitude equal to the accepted account. 
These views cannot possibly be consistent. For the ancient determinations of the 
latitudes of these stars do not accord with what is in the heavens, except in the 
case of Spica alone, where only a single minute is lacking; and the accepted 
shifts in their longitude do not agree with the appearances. Hence it is clear 
how the rest of his argument, which he strives to erect not without keenness and 
subtlety of mind, turns out to be feeble and broken. I make no mention at present 
of the fact that neither Werner nor the great Copernicus noticed that the latitude 
of the stars changes in accordance with the shift in the obliquity of the ecliptic 
(as has been clearly established by me) ; nor did they explain the displacement 
in latitude by any hypothesis” (Tychonh Brahe of era omnsa y ed. Dreyer, VII, 
2 9 $‘* 34 - 2 y cf. II, Z23.24^22^11). 



