• 


Presented  to  the 
library  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

Robert  Eoseberry 


s*-6 


fto  - 


f^P  T)  ■ 


Fif  J. 


Ftp  4. 


London  ■  Longmans  &  Cc 


OUTLINES 


OF 


ASTBONOMY. 


BY 

SIR  JOHN  R   W.   HERSCHEL,   BART.,  K.H. 

M.A.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.L.  &  E.,  Hon.  M.R.I.A.,  F.B.A.S.,  F.G.S.,  M.C.U.P.S. 

HONORARY  FBLLOW  OP  ST.    JOHX'8  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE  ; 

MEMBER  OP  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE ; 

Correspondent  or  Honorary' Member  of  the  Imperial,   Royal,  and   National  Academies  of  Sciences  of 

Amsterdam,  Berlin,  Breslau.  Brussels,  Copenhagen,  Gouingen,  Haarlem,  Massachusetts  (U.S.), 

Modena,   Moscow,   Naples,  Pesth,   Petersburg,  Philadelphia  (U.S.),  Stockholm,  Turin,  Vienna,  and 

Washington  (U.S.); 

The    Italian    and    Helvetic    Societies; 

The  Academies,  Institutes,  <fcc.  of  Albany  (U.S.),  Bologna,  Catania,  Cherbourg,  Dijon,  Lausanne, 

Nantes,  Padua,  Palermo,  Rome,  Venice,  Utrecht,  and  Wilna; 

The  Philomathic  Society  of  Paris;  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal:  South  African  Lit.  and  Phil.  Society ; 

Literary  and  Historical  Society  of  Quebec;  Historical  Society  of  New  York  ; 

Batavian  Society  of  Experimental  Philosophy  of  Rotterdam  ; 

Royal  Med.-Chir.  Soc,  Inst,  of  Civil  Engineers,  Soc.  of  Arts,  Manufactures,  and  Commerce,  and 

Soc.  of  Engineers,  London  ; 

Leeds  and  Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical  Societies :   Geographical  Society  of  Berlin.; 

Astronomical  and  Meteorological  Society  of  British  Guiana  ; 

&c.  &c.  &c. 


NEW     EDITION. 


LONDON : 
LONGMANS,    GREEN,     AND    CO. 

AND  NEW  YORK  :  15  EAST  Itf*  STREET. 
1893. 


PREFACE 


THE    FIRST    EDITION. 


The  work  here  offered  to  the  Public  is  based  upon 
and  may  be  considered  as  an  extension,  and,  it  is 
hoped,  an  improvement  of  a  treatise  on  the  same 
subject,  forming  Part  43.  of  the  Cabinet  Cyclopaedia, 
published  in  the  year  1833.  Its  object  and  general 
character  are  sufficiently  stated  in  the  introductory 
chapter  of  that  volume,  here  reprinted  with  little 
alteration  ;  but  an  opportunity  having  been  afforded 
me  by  the  Proprietors,  preparatory  to  its  re-appear- 
ance in  a  form  of  more  pretension,  I  have  gladly 
availed  myself  of  it,  not  only  to  correct  some  errors 
which,  to  my  regret,  subsisted  in  the  former  volume, 
but  to  remodel  it  altogether  (though  in  complete 
accordance  with  its  original  design  as  a  work  of  ex- 
planation) ;  to  introduce  much  new  matter  in  the 
earlier  portions  of  it ;  to  re-write,  upon  a  far  more 
matured  and  comprehensive  plan,  the  part  relating 
to  the  lunar  and    planetary  perturbations,  and   to 


vili  PREFACE    TO 

bring  the  subjects  of  sidereal  and  nebular  astronomy 
to  the  level  of  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  in 
those  departments. 

The  chief  novelty  in  the  volume,  as  it  now  stands, 
will  be  found  in  the  manner  in  which  the  subject  of 
Perturbations  is  treated.  It  is  not — it  cannot  be 
made  elementary,  in  the  sense  in  which  that  word  is 
understood  in  these  days  of  light  reading.  The  chap- 
ters devoted  to  it  must,  therefore,  be  considered  as 
addressed  to  a  class  of  readers  in  possession  of  some- 
what more  mathematical  knowledge  than  those  who 
will  find  the  rest  of  the  work  readily  and  easily  ac- 
cessible ;  to  readers  desirous  of  preparing  themselves, 
by  the  possession  of  a  sort  of  carte  du  pays,  for  a 
campaign  in  the  most  difficult,  but  at  the  same  time 
the  most  attractive  and  the  most  remunerative  of  all 
the  applications  of  modern  geometry.  More  espe- 
cially they  may  be  considered  as  addressed  to  students 
in  that  university,  where  the  "Principia"  of  Newton 
is  not,  nor  ever  will  be,  put  aside  as  an  obsolete 
book,  behind  the  age ;  and  where  the  grand  though 
rude  outlines  of  the  lunar  theory,  as  delivered  in  the 
eleventh  section  of  that  immortal  work,  are  studied 
less  for  the  sake  of  the  theory  itself,  than  for  the 
spirit  of  far-reaching  thought,  superior  to  and  dis- 
encumbered of  technical  aids,  which  distinguishes 
that  beyond  any  other  production  of  the  human  in- 
tellect. 

In  delivering  a  rational  as  distinguished  from  a 
technical  exposition  of  this  subject,  however,  the 
course  pursued  by  Newton  in  the  section  of  the 
"Principia"  alluded  to,  has  by  no  means  been  servilely 


THE    FIRST    EDITION.  IX 

followed.  As  regards  the  perturbations  of  the  nodes 
and  inclinations,  indeed,  nothing  equally  luminous 
can  ever  be  substituted  for  his  explanation.  But  as 
respects  the  other  disturbances,  the  point  of  view 
chosen  by  Newton  has  been  abandoned  for  another, 
which  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  perceive  why  he  did 
not,  himself,  select.  By  a  different  resolution  of  the 
disturbing  forces  from  that  adopted  by  him,  and  by 
the  aid  of  a  few  obvious  conclusions  from  the  laws 
of  elliptic  motion  which  would  have  found  their 
place,  naturally  and  consecutively,  as  corollaries  of 
the  seventeenth  proposition  of  his  first  book  (a  pro- 
position which  seems  almost  to  have  been  prepared 
with  a  special  view  to  this  application),  the  moment- 
ary change  of  place  of  the  upper  focus  of  the  dis- 
turbed ellipse  is  brought  distinctly  under  inspection  ; 
and  a  clearness  of  conception  introduced  into  the 
perturbations  of  the  excentricities,  perihelia,  and 
epochs  which  the  author  does  not  think  it  presump- 
tion to  believe  can  be  obtained  by  no  other  method, 
and  which  certainly  is  not  obtained  by  that  from 
which  it  is  a  departure.  It  would  be  out  of  keeping 
with  the  rest  of  the  work  to  have  introduced  into 
this  part  of  it  any  algebraic  investigations ;  else  it 
would  have  been  easy  to  show  that  the  mode  of  pro- 
cedure here  followed  leads  direct,  and  by  steps  (for 
the  subject)  of  the  most  elementary  character,  to  the 
general  formulae  for  these  perturbations,  delivered 
by  Laplace  in  the  Mecanique  Celeste.* 

The  reader  will  find  one  class  of  the  lunar  and 
planetary  inequalities   handled   in    a  very  different 

*    Livrc  ii.  chap.  viii.  art.  67. 


P KEF ACE    TO 


manner  from  that  in  which  their  explanation  is  usu- 
ally presented.  It  comprehends  those  which  arc 
characterized  as  incident  on  the  epoch,  the  principal 
among  them  being  the  annual  and  secular  equations 
of  the  moon,  and  that  very  delicate  and  obscure  part 
of  the  perturbational  theory  (so  little  satisfactory  in 
the  manner  in  which  it  emerges  from  the  analytical 
treatment  of  the  subject),  the  constant  or  permanent 
effect  of  the  disturbing  force  in  altering  the  disturbed 
orbit.  I  will  venture  to  hope  that  what  is  here 
stated  will  tend  to  remove  some  rather  generally 
diffused  misapprehensions  as  to  the  true  bearings  of 
Newton's  explanation  of  the  annual  equation.* 

If  proof  were  wanted  of  the  inexhaustible  fertility 
of  astronomical  science  in  points  of  novelty  and  in- 
terest, it  would  suffice  to  adduce  the  addition  to  the 
list  of  members  of  our  system  of  no  less  than  eight 
new  planets  and  satellites  during  the  preparation  oi 
these  sheets  for  the  press.  Among  them  is  one 
whose  discovery  must  ever  be  regarded  as  one  of  the 
noblest  triumphs  of  theory.  In  the  account  here 
given  of  this  discovery,  I  trust  to  have  expressed 
myself  with  complete  impartiality ;  and  in  the  ex- 
position of  the  perturbative  action  on  Uranus,  by 
which  the  existence  and  situation  of  the  disturbing 
planet  became  revealed  to  us,  I  have  endeavoured, 
in  pursuance  of  the  general  plan  of  this  work,  rather 
to  exhibit  a  rational  view  of  the  dynamical  action, 
than  to  convey  the  slightest  idea  of  the  conduct  of 
those  masterpieces  of  analytical  skill  which  the  re- 
searches of  Messrs.  Leverrier  and  Adams  exhibit. 

•   Principia,  lib.  i.  prop.  66.  cor.  6. 


Till:   FLB8T   EDITION.  xi 

To  the  latter  of  these  eininent  geometers,  as  well 
as  to  my  excellent  and  esteemed  friend  the  Astro- 
nomer Royal,  I  have  to  return  my  best  thanks  for 
communications  which  would  have  effectually  re- 
lieved some  doubts  I  at  one  period  entertained  had 
I  not  succeeded  in  the  interim  in  getting  clear  of 
them  as  to  the  compatibility  of  my  views  on  the 
subject  of  the  annual  equation  already  alluded  to, 
with  the  tenor  of  Newton's  account  of  it.  To  my 
valued  friend,  Professor  De  Morgan,  I  am  indebted 
for  some  most  ingenious  suggestions  on  the  subject 
of  the  mistakes  committed  in  the  early  working  of 
the  Julian  reformation  of  the  calendar,  of  which  1 
should  have  availed  myself,  had  it  not  appeared  pre- 
ferable, on  mature  consideration,  to  present  the  sub- 
ject in  its  simplest  form,  avoiding  altogether  entering 
into  minutiae  of  chronological  discussion. 

J.  F.  W.  Herschel. 


Collingwood,  April  12.  1849. 


PREFACE 


THE    FIFTH    EDITION. 


The  rapid  progress  of  science  renders  it  necessary 
frequently  to  revise  and  bring  up  elementary  works 
to  the  existing  state  of  knowledge,  under  penalty  of 
their  becoming  obsolete.  In  former  editions  of  this 
work,  this  has  been  done,  so  far  as  it  could  be  done 
without  incurring  the  necessity  of  an  almost  total 
typographical  reconstruction.  But  Astronomy,  with- 
in the  last  few  years,  has  been  enriched  by  so  many 
and  such  considerable  additions,  that  it  has  been 
considered  preferable  (another  edition  being  called 
for),  not  indeed  to  recast  the  general  plan  of  the 
work,  but  to  incorporate  these  in  it  in  due  order  and 
sequence,  thereby  materially  enlarging  the  volume, 
and  giving  it  in  many  respects  the  air  of  a  new  work. 
The  articles  thus  introduced  are  distinguished  from 
ihose  of  the  former  editions  between  which  they  have 
been  inserted  by  the  addition  to  the  last  current 
number   of  an    italic   letter  —  thus,    between    Arts. 


XIV  PREFACE    TO 

S94.  and  395.  will  be  found  inserted  394.  a,  394.  b, 
and  394.  c.  The  enclosure  of  any  passage  in  brackets 
]  indicates  its  having  been  introduced  in  the  Fourth 
or  some  subsequent  Edition.  The  index  references  in 
this  as  in  former  editions,  being  to  the  articles  and  not 
to  the  pages,  are  thus  preserved.  Together  with  these 
recent  accessions  to  our  knowledge,  I  have  taken  the 
opportunity  of  introducing  several  things  which 
might  justly  have  been  noted  as  deficient  in  the  former 
editions,  —  as,  for  instance,  the  account  of  the  me- 
thods by  which  the  mass  of  the  Earth  has  been  de- 
termined, and  that  of  the  successful  treatment,  and 
it  is  presumed  final  subjugation,  of  those  rebellious 
ancient  Solar  Eclipses  which  have  so  much  harassed 
astronomers.  A  brief  account  of  M.  Foucault's  re- 
markable pendulum  experiments,  and  of  that  beau- 
tiful instrument,  the  gyroscope,  is  introduced:  as  are 
also  notices  of  Professor  Thomson's  speculations  on 
the  origin  of  the  Sun's  heat,  and  his  estimate  of  its 
average  expenditure,  as  well  as  of  some  curious  views 
of  M.  Jean  Reynaud,  on  the  secular  variation  oi 
our  climates,  supplementary  to  those  put  forward  in 
former  editions  of  this  work.  I  could  have  wished 
that  its  nature  and  limits  would  have  permitted  some 
account  of  Mr.  Cooper's  magnificent  contributions  to 
sidereal  astronomy,  in  his  catalogue  of  upwards  of 
60,000  previously  unregistered  ecliptic  stars;  of  Mr. 
Bishop's  ecliptic  charts  and  those  of  M.  Chacornac ; 
of  Mr.  Carrington's  elaborate  circumpolar  catalogue  ; 
and  of  Mr.  Jones's  immense  work  on  the  zodiacal 
light,  forming  the  third  volume  of  the  account  of  the 


THE    FIFTH    EDITION".  XV 

United  States'  Japan  Expedition,  which  reached  me 
too  late  to  allow  of  drawing  up  a  fitting  analysis  of 
his  results.  These  gentlemen  will  severally  please  to 
accept,  however,  this  respectful  tribute  of  my  ad- 
miration for  their  important  labours.  Some  new 
speculations  are  also  hazarded;  as,  for  instance,  on 
the  subject  of  the  Moon's  habitability,  the  cause  of 
the  acceleration  of  Encke's  comet,  &c,  and  a  few 
numerical  errors  are  corrected  which  have  hitherto 
escaped  notice  and  public  comment  as  blemishes, — as 
jrbr  example,  in  some  of  the  numbers  in  Art.  422.  in 
the  explanation  of  the  phaenomena  of  a  lunar  eclipse, 
in  the  evaluation  of  the  total  mass  of  the  atmosphere, 
Art.  242.,  and  in  the  distance  of  the  Moon,  Art.  403. 
(for  which,  however,  I  am  not  answerable). 

In  the  numerical  statement  of  special  astronomical 
elements,  it  is  unavoidable  that  slightly  different 
values  of  the  same  quantity  should  from  time  to  time 
come  to  be  substituted  for  those  before  received,  as 
its  determination  acquires  additional  exactness.  To 
have  altered  the  figures  in  such  cases  wherever  they 
occur,  throughout  the  letter-press,  would  have  en- 
tailed a  great  probability  of  error  and  confusion  ;  and, 
as  the  Synoptic  Tables  of  astronomical  elements  at 
the  end  of  the  work  have  been  carefully  revised  in 
conformity  with  the  best  current  authorities,  the. 
reader  is  requested,  whenever  he  may  observe  any 
discrepancy  of  this  nature,  to  prefer  the  tabulated 
values. 

Several  of  the  wood-cuts,  which  were  originally 
drawn  correctly,  have  been  inverted  right  hand  for 
left  by  the  engraver.     So  far  as  explanation  goes, 


XVI  PREFACE    TO    THE    FIFTH    EDITION. 

this  is  not  of  the  slightest  moment.  To  a  reader  m 
the  Southern  Hemisphere,  they  are  right  as  they 
stand  ;  and  one  in  the  Northern  has  only  to  imagine 
himself  so  situated. 

John  F.  W.  Herschel. 

Collingwood,  Feb.  17,  1858, 

Note  (added  in  1865.)  The  views  of  M.  Reynaud,  above  referred  to,  though 
no  doubt  original  on  his  part,  are  however  completely  anticipated  by  certain 
speculations  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  in  his  *  Principles  of  Geology,"  (p.  110,  Ed. 
of  1830)  expanded  and  further  reasoned  out  to  conclusions  identical  with  those 
of  M.  Reynaud,  in  a  paper  by  the  author  of  the  present  work,  "  On  the  Astro- 
nomical Causes  which  may  influence  Geological  Phenomena,"  read  before  the 
Geological  Society  on  December  15th  1830,  and  published  in  the  Transactions 
of  that  Society.  This,  however,  had  completely  escaped  his  recollection  when 
perusing  the  works  of  M.  Reynaud  referred  to  in  the  note  to  Art.  369.  c,  which 
occurring  while  the  additions  to  the  Fifth  Edition  were  in  preparation,  with  all 
the  force  of  novelty,  led  to  their  insertion  in  Art.  369.  b,  and  to  the  above  notice 
of  them  in  the  preface. 


PEEFACE 


THE     TENTH     EDITION. 


Since  the  publication  of  the  last  edition  of  this  work, 
the  progress  of  astronomical  discovery  has  been  con- 
tinuous and  rapid;  to  keep  up  with  which,  so  far 
as  consistent  with  its  general  object,  it  has  been  ne- 
cessary to  extend  some  of  the  Notes  added  in  former 
editions  and  to  annex  others.  Among  these  recent 
additions  to  astronomical  knowledge  may  be  men- 
tioned more  especially  those  which  relate  to  the 
physical  constitution  of  the  central  body  of  our  own 
system,  on  which  so  vast  and  unexpected  an  amount 
of  information  has  accumulated  from  various  quarters 
as  to  place  us  at  the  opening  out  of  a  new  vista  of 
solar  discovery.  Within  the  limits  of  our  own  sys- 
tem, too,  the  meteorites  have  at  length  acquired  a 
firm  footing  as  a  distinct  group  of  members,  while 
their  now  established  and  most  unexpected  connection 
with  periodic  comets  in  some  instances,  presents  the 
latter  class  of  bodies  under  a  new  aspect,  increasing, 


XVU1  PBEPACE   TO 

if  anything  can  increase,  the  mysterious  interest  which 
already  hangs  about  them.  The  group  of  asteroids: 
too,  has  received  an  accession  of  no  less  than  fifteen 
to  their  list  as  it  stood  at  the  end  of  1866.  The 
elements  of  these  are  given  in  the  Appendix  (from 
the  Berlin  'Ephemeris '  for  1871),  so  as  to  complete 
the  list  up  to  the  present  time.  The  correction  indi- 
cated in  a  former  edition,  as  required  in  the  distance 
of  the  sun  (and  by  necessary  implication  in  the 
dimensions  of  all  the  planetary  orbits  and  the  magni- 
tudes of  the  sun  and  planets  themselves),  has  more- 
over received  an  unexpected  confirmation  from  Mr. 
Stone's  critical  re-examination  of  the  calculations  of 
that  distance  from  the  recorded  observations  of  the 
celebrated  transit  of  Venus  in  1769,  the  result  of 
which  is  here  brought  under  the  notice  of  our  readers. 
Beyond  the  limits  of  our  own  system,  the  appli- 
cation of  spectrum  analysis  has  disclosed  the  amazing 
fact  of  the  gaseous  constitution  of  many  of  the  nebulae 
(a  constitution  long  suspected  on  general  cosmo- 
logical  grounds)  :  by  which  is  meant  their  analogy 
to  matter  not  in  that  state  of  luminosity  presented  by 
the  photosphere  of  our  sun,  but  in  that  in  which  are 
maintained  the  luminous  prominences  and  append- 
ages which  fringe  its  disc  in  total  eclipses,  a  state  to 
which  the  epithet  of  incandescent-gaseous  as  distinct 
from  flame  or  a  state  of  combustion  seems  most  appro- 
priate. Thus  a  real  line  of  demarcation  between 
nebulae  proper  and  sidereal  clusters  is  decisively 
drawn.  These  delicate  applications  of  optical  science 
to  chemistry  have  also  afforded  strong  grounds  for 
concluding  with  considerable  confidence  the  presence 


THE   TENTH   EDITION.  XVt 

of  several  of  our  terrestrial  elementary  bodies  in  the 
sun  and  fixed  stars :  while  in  one  instance  prismatic 
observation  has  afforded,  with  a  certain  approach  to 
probability,  evidence  of  the  recess  of  the  most  con- 
spicuous among  them  from  our  system,  and  even 
supplied  a  measure  of  its  rapidity. 

J.  F  W.  Heuschkl 


Coll  logwood,  Jul/  1",  1869. 


LIST  OF   PLATES. 


Plath  I.     Frontispiece. 

Fig.  1.  Faculae  of  the  Sun. 

Fig.  2.  Spots  on  ditto. 

Fig.  3.  Appearance  of  ditto  in  a  total  Eclipse,  Nhnwing  the 

red  flames. 
Fig.  4.  5.  Spots  as  seen  by  Mr.  Dawes. 

Plats  II.    Fig.  1.  Messier's  13th  Nebula  resolved  into  Stars. 
Fig.  2.  The  Comet  of  1819. 
Fig.  3.  The  Nebula  in  Andromeda. 

Plate  III.  Fig.  1.  Mars  as  seen  August  16th,  1830. 

Fig.  2.  Jupiter  as  seen  September  23rd,  1832. 
Fig.  3.  Saturn,  showing  the  interior  rings  and  belts. 

Plate  IV.  Fig.  1.  The  great  Nebula  in  Orion 
Fig.  2.  The  great  Nebula  in  Argo. 

Plate  V.    Fig.  1.  Nebula  (30  Doradus)  in  the  Nubecula  Major. 

Fig.  2.  Lunar  Volcano,  as  shown  by  a  20  feet  reflecting  T« 
lescope,  aperture  18  inches. 

Plate  VI.  Fig.  1.  Various  Appearances  of  Hallcy's  Comet  at    its  last 
Apparition. 
Fig.  2.  Double  Comet  of  Biela,  as  seen  on  its  last  return. 
Fig.  3.  Messier's    51st  Nebula  as   shown   by  Lord  Rosses 
great  Reflector. 

Plate  A.    Figures  illustrative  of  the  Perturbations  of  Uranus  by  Nep- 
tune. 

Platb  B.  Fig.  1.  The  willow-leaved  structure  of  the  sun's  photosphere 
Fig.  2.  The  same  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  spot. 

Pr.ATB  C.  A   portion  of  the    Moon's   surface,    from    a    model    by    Mr 
Nasmyth 


CONTENTS. 


PmNOI  to  the  First  Edition 

Preface  to  thk  Fifth   Edition 

Preface  to  the  Tenth   Edition 

Introduction  - 


Page  vii — xi. 

-     xiii — xvi. 

-    xvii. 

1 


PART  I. 

CHAPTER   I. 

(Jeneral  notions.  Apparent  and  real  motions.  Shape  and  size  of  the 
Earth.  The  horizon,  and  its  dip.  The  atmosphere.  Refraction.  Twi- 
light. Appearances  resulting  from  diurnal  motion.  From  change  of 
station  in  general.  Parallactic  motions.  Terrestrial  parallax.  That 
of  the  stars  insensible.  First  step  towards  forming  an  idea  of  the 
distance  of  the  stars.  Copernican  view  of  the  Earth's  motion.  Relative 
motion.  Motions  partly  real,  partly  apparent.  Geocentric  astronomy, 
or  ideal  reference  of  phaenomena  to  the  Earth's  centre  as  a  common 
conventional  station  -  -  -  -  -  -11 

CHAPTER  II. 

Terminology  and  elementary  geometrical  conceptions  and  relations.  Ter- 
minology relating  to  the  globe  of  the  Earth  —  to  the  celestial  sphere. 
Celestial  perspective         -  -  -  -  -  -58 

CHAPTER  III. 

Of  the  nature  of  astronomical  instruments  and  observations  in  general. 
Of  sidereal  and  solar  time.  Of  the  measurements  of  time.  Clocks, 
chronometers.  Of  astronomical  measurements.  Principle  of  telescopic 
sights  to  increase  the  accuracy  of  pointing.  Simplest  application  of 
this  principle.  The  transit  instrument.  Of  the  measurement  of 
Angular  intervals.  Methods  of  increasing  the  accuracy  of  reading. 
The  vernier.  The  microscope.  Of  the  mural  circle  The  Meridian 
circle.  Fixation  of  polar  and  horizontal  points.  The  level,  plumb- 
line,  artificial  horizon.  Principle  of  collimtttion.  Collimators  of 
]»ir  tonhouse,  Kater,  and  Bohnenberger.  Of  compound  instruments  with 
co-ordinate  circles.  The  equatorial,  altitude,  and  azimuth  instrument. 
Theodolite.  Of  the  sextant  and  reflecting  circle.  Principle  of  re- 
petition. Of  micrometers.  Parallel  wire  micrometer.  Principle  of  the 
duplication  of  images.  The  helioineter.  Double  refracting  eye-piece. 
Variable  prism  micrometer.  Of  the  position  micrometer.  Illumination 
of  wires.  Solar  telescope  and  eye-piece.  Helioscopy.  Collimation  of 
large  reflectors     -  •  --  -  -  -75 


XXIV  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


OF    GEOGRAPHY. 

Of  the  figure  of  the  Earth.  Its  exact  dimensions.  Its  form  that  of 
equilibrium  modified  by  centrifugal  force.  Variation  of  gravity  on  its 
surface.  Statical  and  dynamical  measures  of  gravity.  The  pendulum. 
Gravity  to  a  spheroid.  Other  effects  of  the  Earth's  rotation.  Trade 
winds.  Veering  of  the  winds.  Cyclones.  Foucault's  pendulum.  The 
gyroscope.  Determination  of  geographical  positions — of  latitudes — of 
longitudes.  Conduct  of  a  trigonometrical  survey.  Of  maps.  Pro- 
jections of  the  sphere.     Measurement  of  heights  by  the  barometer. 

Page  129 
CHAPTER  V. 

Or   URANOGRAPHY. 

Construction  of  celestial  maps  and  globes  by  observations  of  right  ascen- 
sion and  declination.     Celestial  objects  distinguished  into  fixed  and 
erratic.     Of  the  constellations.     Natural  regions  in  the  heavens.     The 
Milky  Way.     The  Zodiac.     Of  the  ecliptic.     Celestial  latitudes  and 
longitudes.     Precession   of  the   equinoxes.     Nutation.     Aberration. 
Refraction.     Parallax.     Summary   view   of  the   uranographical   cor- 
rections  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -190 

CHAPTER  VI. 

OP   THE   SCN*8   MOTION   AND  PHYSICAL   CONSTITUTION. 

Apparent  motion  of  the  Sun  not  uniform.  Its  apparent  diameter  also 
variable.  Variation  of  its  distance  concluded.  Its  apparent  orbit  an 
ellipse  about  the  focus.  Law  of  the  angular  velocity.  Equable 
description  of  areas.  Parallax  of  the  sun.  Its  distance  and  magnitude. 
Copernican  explanation  of  the  Sun's  apparent  motion.  Parallelism  of 
the  Earth's  axis.  The  seasons.  Heat  received  from  the  Sun  in 
different  parts  of  the  orbit.  Effect  of  excentricity  of  the  orbit  and 
position  of  its  axis  on  climate.  Mean  and  true  longitudes  of  the  Sun. 
Equation  of  the  center.  Sidereal,  tropical,  and  anomalistic  years. 
(fojf*~  t  Physical  constitution  of  the  Sun.  Its  spots.  Faculae.  Probable 
•  "i  6*  nature  and  cause  of  the  spots.  Recent  discoveries  of  Mr.  Dawes. 
Of  Mr.  Nasmyth.  Rotation  of  the  Sun  on  its  axis.  Its  atmosphere. 
Supposed  clouds.  Periodical  recurrence  of  a  more  and  less  spotted 
state  of  its  surface.  Temperature  of  its  surface.  Its  expenditure  of 
heat.     Probable  cause  of  solar  radiation      -  -  -  219 


CHAPTER!  VII. 
Of  the  Moon.  Its  sidereal  period.  Its  apparent  diameter.  Its  parallax, 
distance,  and  real  diameter.  First  approximation  to  its  orbit.  An 
ellipse  about  the  Earth  in  the  focus.  Its  excentricity  and  inclination. 
Motion  of  its  nodes  and  apsides.  Of  occupations  and  solar  eclipses 
generally.  Limits  within  which  they  are  possible.  They  prove  the 
Moon  to  be  an  opaque  solid.     Its  light  derived  from  the  Sun.     Its 


CONTENTS.  xxv 

phases.  Synodic  revolution  or  lunar  month.  Harvest  Moon.  Of 
eclipses  more  particularly.  Their  phaenomena.  Their  periodical  recur- 
rence. Physical  constitution  of  the  Moon.  Its  mountains  and  other 
superficial  features.  Indications  of  former  volcanic  activity.  Its  atmo- 
sphere. Climate.  Radiation  of  heat  from  its  surface.  Rotation  on 
its  own  axis.  Libration.  Appearance  of  the  Earth  from  it.  Probable 
elongation  of  the  Moon's  figure  in  the  direction  of  the  Earth.  Its 
habitability  not  impossible.  Charts,  models,  and  photographs  of  its 
surface     -  -  -  -  -  -  -      Page  26*2 

CHAPTER  VHI. 

Of  terrestrial  gravity.  Of  the  law  of  universal  gravitation.  Paths  of 
projectiles,  apparent,  real.  The  Moon  retained  in  her  orbit  by  gravity. 
Its  law  of  diminution.  Laws  of  elliptic  motion.  Orbit  of  the  Earth 
round  the  Sun  in  accordance  with  these  laws.  Masses  of  the  Earth 
and  Sun  compared.  Density  of  the  Sun.  Force  of  gravity  at  its 
surface.     Disturbing  effect  of  the  Sun  on  the  Moon's  motion      -     290 

CHAPTER   IX. 


VV'^ 


OF    THE    SOLAR    SYSTEM. 


(P- 


Apparent  motions  of  the  planets.  The  stations  and  retrogradations. 
The  Sun  their  natural  center  of  motion.  Inferior  planets.  Their 
phases,  periods,  etc.  Dimensions,  and  form  of  their  orbits.  Transits 
across  the  Sun.  Superior  planets.  Their  distances,  periods,  etc. 
Kepler's  laws  and  their  interpretation.  Elliptic  elements  of  a  planet's 
orbit.  Its  heliocentric  and  geocentric  place.  Empirical  law  of  planetary 
distances  ;  violated  in  the  case  of  Neptune.  The  asteroids.  Physical 
peculiarities  observable  in  each  of  the  planets     -  301 

CHAPTER  X. 

OF    THE    SATELLITES. 

Of  the  Moon,  as  a  satellite  of  the  Earth.  General  proximity  of  satellites 
to  their  primaries,  and  consequent  subordination  of  their  motions. 
Masses  of  the  primaries  concluded  from  the  periods  of  their  satellites. 
Maintenance  of  Kepler's  laws  in  the  secondary  systems.  Of  Jupiter's 
satellites.  Their  eclipses,  etc.  Velocity  of  light  discovered  by  their 
means.     Satellites  of  Saturn  —  of  Uranus  —  of  N  eptune  -  -  354 

i^  ,\  CHAPTER   XI. 

OF    COMETS. 

Great  number  of  recorded  comets.  The  number  of  those  unrecorded 
probably  much  greater.  General  description  of  a  comet.  Comets  with- 
out tails,  or  with  more  than  one.  Their  extreme  tenuity.  Their 
probable  structure.  Motions  conformable  to  the  law  of  gravity. 
Actual  dimensions  of  comets.  Periodical  return  of  several.  Hjdley's 
comet.     Other  ancient  comets  probably  periodic     Encke's  comet— 


XXVI  CONTENTS. 

Biela's — Faye's — Lexell's — De  Vico's — Brorsen's — Peter'a.  Great 
comet  of  1843.  Its  probable  identity  with  several  older  comets,  Great 
interest  at  present  attached  to  cometary  astronomy,  and  its  reasons. 
Remarks  on  cometary  orbits  in  general.  Great  comets  of  1858,  1861 
and  1862  ......     Page  370 

PART  II. 

OP  THB    LUNAE    AND    PLANBTAET    rEBTTJBBATIONS. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Subject  propounded.  Problem  of  three  bodies.  Superposition  of  small 
motions.  Estimation  of  the  disturbing  force.  Its  geometrical  repre- 
sentation. Numerical  estimation  in  particular  cases.  Resolution  into 
rectangular  components.  Radial,  transversal,  and  orthogonal  dis- 
turbing forces.  Normal  and  tangential.  Their  characteristic  effects. 
Effects  of  the  orthogonal  force.  Motion  of  the  nodes.  Conditions  of 
their  advance  and  recess.  Cases  of  an  exterior  planet  disturbed  by 
an  interior.  The  reverse  case.  In  every  case  the  node  of  the  dis- 
turbed orbit  recedes  on  the  plane  of  the  disturbing  on  an  average. 
Combined  effect  of  many  such  disturbances.  Motion  of  the  Moon'i 
nodes.  Change  of  inclination.  Conditions  of  its  increase  and  diminu- 
tion. Average  effect  in  a  whole  revolution.  Compensation  in  a  com- 
plete revolution  of  the  nodes.  Lagrange's  theorem  of  the  stability  of 
the  inclinations  of  the  planetary  orbits.  Change  of  obliquity  of  the 
ecliptic.  Precession  of  the  equinoxes  explained.  Nutation.  Prin- 
ciple of  forced  vibrations  -  -  -  -  -410 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

THEORY    OF    THE    AXES,    PERIHELIA,    AND    EXCENTRICITIES. 

Variation  of  elements  in  general.  Distinction  between  periodic  and 
secular  variations.  Geometrical  expression  of  tangential  and  normal 
forces.  Variation  of  the  Major  Axis  produced  only  by  the  tangential 
force.  Lagrange's  theorem  of  the  conservation  of  the  mean  distances 
and  periods.  Theory  of  the  Perihelia  and  excentricities.  Geometri- 
cal representation  of  their  momentary  variations.  Estimation  of  the 
disturbing  forces  in  nearly  circular  orbits.  Application  to  the  case 
of  the  Moon.  Theory  of  the  lunar  apsides  and  excentricity.  Ex- 
perimental illustration.  Application  of  the  foregoing  principles  to 
the  Planetary  theory.  Compensation  in  orbits  very  nearly  circular. 
Effects  of  ellipticity.  General  results.  Lagrange's  theorem  of  the 
stability  of  the  excentricities        ....  -  445 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Of  the  inequalities  independent  of  the  excentricities.  The  Moon's  va- 
riation and  parallactic  inequality.     Analogous  planetary  inequalities 


CONTENTS.  XXVll 

Three  cases  of  Planetary  perturbation  distinguished.  Of  inequalities 
dependent  on  the  excentricites.  Long  inequality  of  Jupiter  and 
Saturn.  Law  of  reciprocity  between  the  periodical  variations  of  the 
elements  of  both  planets.  Long  inequality  of  the  Earth  and  Venus. 
Variation  of  the  epoch.  Inequalities  incident  on  the  epoch  affecting 
the  mean  motion.  Interpretation  of  the  constant  part  of  these  ine- 
qualities. Annual  equation  of  the  Moon.  Her  secular  acceleration. 
Lunar  inequalities  due  to  the  action  of  Venus.  Effect  of  the  sphe- 
roidal figure  of  the  Earth  and  other  planets  on  the  motions  of  their 
satellites.  Of  the  tides.  Masses  of  disturbing  bodies  deducible  from 
the  perturbations  they  produce.  Mass  of  the  Moon,  and  of  Jupiter's 
satellites,  how  ascertained.  Perturbations  of  Uranus  resulting  in  the 
discovery  of  Neptune.  Determination  of  the  absolute  mass  and  den- 
sity of  the  Earth   ------     Page  486 


<fiA 


PART  III. 


OF    SIDEREAL    ASTEONOMT. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Of  the  fixed  stars.  Their  classification  by  magnitudes.  Photometric 
scale  of  magnitudes.  Conventional  or  vulgar  scale.  Photometric 
comparison  of  stars.  Distribution  of  stars  over  the  heavens.  Of  the 
Milky  Way  or  galaxy.  Its  supposed  form  that  of  a  flat  stratum 
partially  subdivided.  Its  visible  course  among  the  constellations.  Its 
Internal  structure.  Its  apparently  indefinite  extent  in  certain  direc- 
tions. Of  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars.  Their  annual  parallax. 
Parallactic  unit  of  sidereal  distance.  Effect  of  parallax  analogous  to 
that  of  aberration.  How  distinguished  from  it.  Detection  of  paral- 
lax by  meridional  observations.  Henderson's  application  to  a  cen- 
tauri  By  differential  observations.  Discoveries  of  Bessel  and  Struve. 
List  of  stars  in  which  parallax  has  been  detected.  Of  the  real  magni- 
tudes of  the  stars.     Comparison  of  their  lights  with  that  of  the  Sun  - 

561 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Variable  and  periodical  stars.  List  of  those  already  known.  Irre- 
gularities in  their  periods  and  lustre  when  brightest.  Irregular  and 
temporary  stars.  Ancient  Chinese  records  of  several.  Missing  stars. 
Double  stars.  Their  classification.  Specimens  of  each  class.  Binary 
systems.  Revolution  round  each  other.  Describe  elliptic  orbits 
under  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravity.  Elements  of  orbits  of  several. 
Actual  dimensions  of  their  orbits.  Coloured  double  stars.  Pheno- 
menon of  complementary  colours.  Sanguine  stars.  Proper  motion  of 
the  stars.  Partly  accounted  for  by  a  real  motion  of  the  Sun.  Situa- 
tion of  the  solar   apex.     Agreement  of  southern  and  northern  stars 


XXVlll  CONTENTS. 

in  giving  the  same  result.  Principles  on  which  the  investigation  of 
the  solar  motion  depends.  Absolute  velocity  of  the  Sun's  motion. 
Supposed  revolution  of  the  whole  sidereal  system  round  a  common 
centre.  Systematic  parallax  and  aberration.  Effect  of  the  motion  of 
light  in  altering  the  apparent  period  of  a  binary  star  •  Page  596 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

or    CLUSTERS    OF    STARS    AM)    NEBULA. 

Of  clustering  groups  of  stars.  Globular  clusters.  Their  stability  dyna- 
mically possible.  List  of  the  most  remarkable.  Classification  of 
nebulae  and  clusters.  Their  distribution  over  the  heavens.  Irregular 
clusters.  Resolvability  of  nebulas.  Theory  of  the  formation  of  clus- 
ters by  nebulous  subsidence.  Of  elliptic  nebulae.  That  of  Andro- 
meda. Annular  and  planetary  nebulae.  Double  nebulae.  Nebulous 
stars.  Connection  of  nebulae  with  double  stars.  Insulated  nebulae  of 
forms  not  wholly  irregular.  Of  amorphous  nebulae.  Their  law  of 
distribution  marks  them  as  outliers  of  the  galaxy.  Nebulae  and 
nebulous  group  of  Orion  —  of  Argo  — of  Sagittarius  —  of  Cygnus.  The 
Magellanic  clouds.  Singular  nebula  in  the  greater  of  them.  Variable 
nebulae.  The  zodiacal  light.  Shooting  stars.  Speculations  on  the 
dynamical  origin  of  the  Sun's  heat      -        .  -  -  -  638 

PART   IV. 

OF    THE    ACCOUNT    OF    TIME. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
Natural  units  of  time.  Relation  of  the  sidereal  to  the  solar  day  ailecteu 
by  precession.  Incommensurability  of  the  day  and  year.  Its  incon- 
venience. How  obviated.  The  Julian  Calendar.  Irregularities  at 
its  first  introduction.  Reformed  by  Augustus.  Gregorian  reformation 
Solar  and  lunar  cycles.  Indiction.  Julian  period.  Table  of  Chrono- 
logical eras.  Rules  for  calculating  the  days  elapsed  between  given 
Dates.  Equinoctial  time.  Fixation  of  ancient  dates  by  eclipses.  Note* 
and  additions     ---------         t>G(i 

APPENDIX. 

L.  Lists  of  Northern  and  Southern  Stars,  with  their  approximate 

Magnitudes,  on  the  Vulgar  and  Photometric  Scale         -         -  72.^ 

II.  Synoptic  Table  of  the  Elements  of  the  Planetary  System     -  727 

111    Synoptic  Table  of  the  Elements  of  the  Orbits  of  the  Satellites, 

so  far  as  they  are  known  -         -         -         -         »        -  782 

IV.  Elements  of  Periodical  Comets         -----  785 

Table  of  Numbers  in  frequent  use  among  Astronomers     -         -         780 
(jtl»u  ...  741 


OUTLINES 


OF 


ASTRONOMY, 


INTRODUCTION. 


(1.)  iLvlrt  student  who  enters  upon  a  scientific  pursuit, 
especially  if  nt  a  somewhat  advanced  period  of  life,  will  find 
not  only  that  he  has  much  to  learn,  but  much  also  to  un- 
learn. Familiar  objects  and  events  are  far  from  presenting 
themselves  to  our  senses  in  that  aspect  and  with  those  con- 
nections under  which  science  requires  them  to  be  viewed,  and 
which  constitute  their  rational  explanation.  There  is,  there- 
fore, every  reason  to  expect  that  those  objects  and  relations 
which,  taken  together,  constitute  the  subject  he  is  about  to 
enter  upon  will  have  been  previously  apprehended  by  him, 
at  least  imperfectly,  because  much  has  hitherto  escaped  his 
notice  which  is  essential  to  its  right  understanding :  and  not 
only  so,  but  too  often  also  erroneously,  owing  to  mistaken 
analogies,  and  the  general  prevalence  of  vulgar  errors.  As  a 
first  preparation,  therefore,  for  the  course  he  is  about  to 
commence,  he  must  loosen  his  hold  on  all  crude  and  hastily 
adopted  notions,  and  must  strengthen  himself,  by  something 
of  an  effort  and  a  resolve,  for  the  unprejudiced  admission  of 
«uiy  conclusion  which  shall  appear  to  be  supported  by  careful 
observation  and  logical  argument,  even  should  it  prove  of  a 
liature  adverse  to  notions  he  may  have  previously  formed  for 
himself,  or  taken  up,  without  examination,  on  the  credit  of 

B 


2  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

others.  Such  an  effort  is,  in  fact,  a  commencement  of  that 
intellectual  discipline  which  forms  one  of  the  most  important 
ends  of  all  science.  It  is  the  first  movement  of  approach 
towards  that  state  of  mental  purity  which  alone  can  fit  us  for 
a  full  and  steady  perception  of  moral  beauty  as  well  a?  physi- 
cal adaptation.  It  is  the  "  euphrasy  and  rue "  with  whicn 
we  must  "  purge  our  sight "  before  we  can  receive  and  con- 
template as  they  are  the  lineaments  of  truth  and  nature. 

(2.)  There  is  no  science  which,  more  than  astronomy, 
stands  in  need  of  such  a  preparation,  or  draws  more  largely 
on  that  intellectual  liberality  which  is  ready  to  adopt  what- 
ever is  demonstrated,  or  concede  whatever  is  rendered  highly 
probable,  however  new  and  uncommon  the  points  of  view 
may  be  in  which  objects  the  most  familiar  may  thereby  be- 
come placed.  Almost  all  its  conclusions  stand  in  open  and 
striking  contradiction  with  those  of  superficial  and  vulgar 
observation,  and  with  what  appears  to  every  one,  until  he 
has  understood  and  weighed  the  proofs  to  the  contrary,  the 
most  positive  evidence  of  his  senses.  Thus,  the  earth  on 
which  he  stands,  and  which  has  served  for  ages  as  the  un- 
shaken foundation  of  the  firmest  structures,  either  of  art  or 
nature,  is  divested  by  the  astronomer  of  its  attribute  of  fixity., 
and  conceived  by  him  as  turning  swiftly  on  its  centre,  and 
at  the  same  time  moving  onwards  through  space  with  great 
rapidity.  The  sun  and  the  moon,  which  appear  to  untaught 
eyes  round  bodies  of  no  very  considerable  size,  become  en- 
larged in  his  imagination  into  vast  globes,  —  the  one  ap- 
proaching in  magnitude  to  the  earth  itself,  the  other  im- 
mensely surpassing  it.  The  planets,  which  appear  only  ua 
stars  somewhat  brighter  than  tha  rest,  are  to  him  spacious, 
elaborate,  and  habitable  worlds;  several  of  them  much 
greater  and  far  more  curiously  furnished  than  the  earth  be 
inhabits,  as  there  are  also  others  less  so ;  and  the  stars  them- 
selves, properly  so  called,  which  to  ordinary  apprehension 
present  only  lucid  sparks  or  brilliant  atoms,  are  to  him  suns 
of  various  and  transcendent  glory  —  effulgent  centres  of  life 
and  light  to  myriads  of  unseen  worlds.  So  that  when,  after 
dilating  his  thoughts  to  comprehend  the  grandeur  of  those 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

ideas  his  calculations  have  called  up,  and  exhausting  his  ima- 
gination and  the  powers  of  his  language  to  devise  similes  and 
metaphors  illustrative  of  the  immensity  of  the  scale  on  which 
his  universe  is  constructed,  he  shrinks  back  to  his  native 
sphere,  he  finds  it,  in  comparison,  a  mere  point;  so  lost — 
even  in  the  minute  system  to  which  it  belongs  —  as  to  be  in- 
visible and  unsuspected  from  some  of  its  principal  and  remoter 
members. 

(3.)  There  is  hardly  any  thing  which  sets  in  a  stronger 
light  the  inherent  power  of  truth  over  the  mind  of  man, 
when  opposed  by  no  motives  of  interest  or  passion,  than  the 
perfect  readiness  with  which  all  these  conclusions  are  assented 
to  as  soon  as  their  evidence  is  clearly  apprehended,  and  the 
tenacious  hold  they  acquire  over  our  belief  when  once  ad- 
mitted. In  the  conduct,  therefore,  of  this  volume,  I  shall 
take  it  for  granted  that  the  reader  is  more  desirous  to  learn 
the  system  which  it  is  its  object  to  teach,  as  it  now  stands, 
than  to  raise  or  revive  objections  against  it ;  and  that,  in 
6hort,  he  comes  to  the  task  with  a  willing  mind ;  an  assump- 
tion which  will  not  only  save  the  trouble  of  piling  argument 
on  argument  to  convince  the  sceptical,  but  will  greatly 
facilitate  his  actual  progress ;  inasmuch  as  he  will  find  it  at 
once  easier  and  more  satisfactory  to  pursue  from  the  outset 
a  straight  and  definite  path,  than  to  be  constantly  stepping 
aside,  involving  himself  in  perplexities  and  circuits,  which, 
after  all,  can  only  terminate  in  finding  himself  compelled  to 
adopt  the  same  road. 

(4.)  The  method,  therefore,  we  propose  to  follow  in  this 
work  is  neither  strictly  the  analytic  nor  the  synthetic,  but 
rather  such  a  combination  of  both,  with  a  leaning  to  the 
latter,  as  may  best  suit  with  a  didactic  composition.  Its 
object  is  not  to  convince  or  refute  opponents,  nor  to  inquire, 
under  the  semblance  of  an  assumed  ignorance,  for  principles 
of  which  we  are  all  the  time  in  full  possession  —  but  simply 
to  teach  what  is  known.  The  moderate  limit  of  a  single 
volume,  to  which  it  will  be  confined,  and  the  necessity  of 
being  on  every  point,  within  that  limit,  rather  diffuse  and 
copious  in  explanation,  as  well  as  the  eminently  matured  and 


4  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ascertained  character  of  the  science  itself,  render  this  course 
both  practicable  and  eligible.  Practicable,  because  there  is 
now  no  danger  of  any  revolution  in  astronomy,  like  those 
which  are  daily  changing  the  features  of  the  less  advanced 
sciences,  supervening,  to  destroy  all  our  hypotheses,  and 
throw  our  statements  into  confusion.  Eligible,  because  the 
space  to  be  bestowed,  either  in  combating  refuted  systems,  or 
in  leading  the  reader  forward  by  slow  and  measured  steps 
from  the  known  to  the  unknown,  may  be  more  advantageously 
devoted  to  such  explanatory  illustrations  as  will  impress 
on  him  a  familiar  and,  as  it  were,  a  practical  sense  of  the 
sequence  of  phenomena,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
produced.  We  shall  not,  then,  reject  the  analytic  course 
where  it  leads  more  easily  and  directly  to  our  objects,  or  in 
any  way  fetter  ourselves  by  a  rigid  adherence  to  method. 
Writing  only  to  be  understood,  and  to  communicate  as  much 
information  in  as  little  space  as  possible,  consistently  with  its 
distinct  and  effectual  communication,  no  sacrifice  can  be 
afforded  to  system,  to  form,  or  to  affectation. 

(5.)  We  shall  take  for  granted,  from  the  outset,  the  Coper- 
nican  system  of  the  world ;  relying  on  the  easy,  obvious,  and 
natural  explanation  it  affords  of  all  the  phenomena  as  they 
come  to  be  described,  to  impress  the  student  with  a  sense  of 
its  truth,  without  either  the  formality  of  demonstration  or 
the  superfluous  tedium  of  eulogy,  calling  to  mind  that  im- 
portant remark  of  Bacon :  —  "  Theoriarum  vires,  arcta  et 
quasi  se  mutuo  sustinente  partium  adaptatione,  qua,  quasi  in 
crbem  cohaerent,  firmantur  *  ;  "  not  failing,  however,  to  point 
out  to  the  reader,  as  occasion  offers,  the  contrast  which  its 
superior  simplicity  offers  to  the  complication  of  other  hypo- 
theses. 

(6.)  The  preliminary  knowledge  which  it  is  desirable  that 
the  student  should  possess,  in  order  for  the  more  advantageous 
perusal  of  the  following  pages,  consists  in  the  familiar  prac- 


*  "  The  confirmation  of  theories  relies  on  the  compact  adaptation  of  their 
parts,  by  which,  like  those  of  an  arch  or  dome,  they  mutually  sustain  each  other, 
and  form  a  coherent  whole."  This  is  what  Dr.  Whewell  expressively  terms  the 
contiHence  of  inductions. 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

tice  of  decimal  and  sexagesimal  arithmetic ,  some  moderate 
acquaintance  with  geometry  and  trigonometry,  both  plane 
and  spherical ;  the  elementary  principles  of  mechanics ;  and 
enough  of  optics  to  understand  the  construction  and  use  ot 
the  telescope,  and  some  other  of  the  simpler  instruments. 
Of  course,  the  more  of  such  knowledge  he  brings  to  tho 
perusal,  the  easier  will  be  his  progress,  and  the  more  com- 
plete the  information  gained;  but  we  shall  endeavour  in 
svery  case,  as  far  as  it  can  be  done  without  a  sacrifice  of 
jlearness,  and  of  that  useful  brevity  which  consists  in  the 
absence  of  prolixity  and  episode,  to  render  what  we  have  tc 
say  as  independent  of  other  books  as  possible. 

(7.)  After  all,  I  must  distinctly  caution  such  of  my 
readers  as  may  commence  and  terminate  their  astronomical 
studies  with  the  present  work  (though  of  such,  —  at  least  in 
the  latter  predicament, — I  trust  the  number  will  be  few), 
that  its  utmost  pretension  is  to  place  them  on  the  threshold 
of  this  particular  wing  of  the  temple  of  Science,  or  rather  on 
an  eminence  exterior  to  it,  whence  they  may  obtain  something 
like  a  general  notion  of  its  structure ;  or,  at  most,  to  give 
those  who  may  wish  to  enter  a  ground-plan  of  its  accesses, 
and  put  them  in  possession  of  the  pass-word.  Admission  to 
its  sanctuary,  and  to  the  privileges  and  feelings  of  a  votary,  is 
only  to  be  gained  by  one  means,  —  sound  and  sufficient  know- 
ledge of  mathematics,  the  great  instrument  of  all  exact  inquiry, 
without  which  no  man  can  ever  make  such  advances  in  this  or 
any  other  of  the  higher  departments  of  science  as  can  entitle 
him  to  form  an  independent  opinion  on  any  subject  of  discussion 
within  their  range.  It  is  not  without  an  effort  that  those  who 
possess  this  knowledge  can  communicate  on  such  subjects 
with  those  who  do  not,  and  adapt  their  language  and  their 
illustrations  to  the  necessities  of  such  an  intercourse.  Pro- 
positions which  to  the  one  are  almost  identical,  are  theorems 
of  import  and  difficulty  to  the  other ;  nor  is  their  evidence 
presented  in  the  same  way  to  the  mind  of  each.  In  teaching 
such  propositions,  under  such  circumstances,  the  appeal  has 
to  be  made,  not  to  the  pure  and  abstract  reason,  but  to  the 
sense  of  analogy  —  to  practice  and  experience :  principles  and 


9  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

modes  of  action  have  to  be  established  not  by  direct  argument 
from  acknowledged  axioms,  but  by  continually  recurring  to  the 
sources  from  which  the  axioms  themselves  have  been  drawn: 
viz.  examples ;  that  is  to  say,  by  bringing  forward  and  dwelling 
on  simple  and  familiar  instances  in  which  the  same  principles 
and  the  same  or  similar  modes  of  action  take  place:  thus 
erecting,  as  it  were,  in  each  particular  case,  a  separate  induc- 
tion, and  constructing  at  each  step  a  little  body  of  science  to 
meet  its  exigencies.  The  difference  is  that  of  pioneering  a 
road  through  an  untraversed  country  and  advancing  at  ease 
along  a  broad  and  beaten  highway ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we  are 
determined  to  make  ourselves  distinctly  understood,  and  will 
appeal  to  reason  at  all.  As  for  the  method  of  assertion,  or  a 
direct  demand  on  the  faith  of  the  student  (though  in  some 
complex  cases  indispensable,  where  illustrative  explanation 
would  defeat  its  own  end  by  becoming  tedious  and  burdensome 
to  both  parties),  it  is  one  which  I  shall  neither  willingly  adopt 
nor  would  recommend  to  others. 

(8.)  On  the  other  hand,  although  it  is  something  new  to 
abandon  the  road  of  mathematical  demonstration  in  the  treat- 
ment of  subjects  susceptible  of  it,  and  to  teach  any  consider- 
able branch  of  science  entirely  or  chiefly  by  the  way  of  il- 
lustration and  familiar  parallels,  it  is  yet  not  impossible  that 
those  who  are  already  well  acquainted  with  our  subject,  and 
whose  knowledge  has  been  acquired  by  that  confessedly  higher 
practice  which  is  incompatible  with  the  avowed  objects  of  the 
present  work,  may  yet  find  their  account  in  its  perusal,  — for 
this  reason,  that  it  is  always  of  advantage  to  present  any  given 
body  of  knowledge  to  the  mind  in  as  great  a  variety  of  dif- 
ferent lights  as  possible.  It  is  a  property  of  illustrations  of 
this  kind  to  strike  no  two  minds  in  the  same  manner,  or  with 
the  same  force;  because  no  two  minds  are  stored  with  the 
same  images,  or  have  acquired  their  notions  of  them  by 
similar  habits.  Accordingly,  it  may  very  well  happen,  that,  a 
proposition,  even  to  one  best  acquainted  with  it,  may  be 
placed  not  merely  in  a  new  and  uncommon,  but  in  a  more 
impressive  and  satisfactory  light  by  such  a  course  —  some 
obscurity  may  be  dissipated,  some  inward  misgivings  cleared 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

ap,  or  even  some  links  supplied  which  may  lead  to  the  per- 
ception of  connections  and  deductions  altogether  unknown 
before.  And  the  probability  of  this  is  increased  when,  as  in 
the  present  instance,  the  illustrations  chosen  have  not  been 
studiously  selected  from  books,  but  are  such  as  have  presented 
themselves  freely  to  the  author's  mind  as  being  most  in 
harmony  with  his  own  views ;  by  which,  of  course,  he  means 
to  lay  no  claim  to  originality  in  all  or  any  of  them  bevond 
what  they  may  really  possess. 

(9.)  Besides,  there  are  cases  in  the  application  of  mecha- 
nical principles  with  which  the  mathematical  student  is  but 
too  familiar,  where,  when  the  data  are  before  him,  and  the 
numerical  and  geometrical  relations  of  his  problems  all  clear 
to  his  conception, —  when  his  forces  are  estimated  and  his 
lines  measured,  —  nay,  when  even  he  has  followed  up  the 
application  of  his  technical  processes,  and  fairly  arrived  at  his 
conclusion,  —  there  is  still  something  wanting  in  his  mind  — 
not  in  the  evidence,  for  he  has  examined  each  link,  and  finds 
the  chain  complete  —  not  in  the  principles,  for  those  he  well 
knows  are  too  firmly  established  to  be  shaken  —  but  precisely 
in  the  mode  of  action.  He  has  followed  out  a  train  of  rea- 
soning by  logical  and  technical  rules,  but  the  signs  he  has 
employed  are  not  pictures  of  nature,  or  have  lost  their  ori- 
ginal meaning  as  such  to  his  mind :  he  has  not  seen,  as  it 
were,  the  process  of  nature  passing  under  his  eye  in  an  in- 
stant of  time,  and  presented  as  a  consecutive  whole  to  his 
imagination.  A  familiar  parallel,  or  an  illustration  drawn 
from  some  artificial  Or  natural  process,  of  which  he  has  that 
direct  and  individual  impression  which  gives  it  a  reality  and 
associates  it  with  a  name,  will,  in  almost  every  such  case, 
supply  in  a  moment  this  delicieni  feature,  will  convert  all  his 
symbols  into  real  pictures,  and  infuse  an  animated  meaning 
into  what  was  before  a  lifeless  succession  of  words  and  signs. 
I  cannot,  indeed,  always  promise  myself  to  attain  this 
degree  of  vividness  of  illustration,  nor  are  the  points  to 
be  elucidated  themselves  always  capable  of  being  so  para- 
phrased (if  I  may   use  the  expression)  by  any    single  iu- 


8  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

stance  adducible  in  the  ordinary  course  of  experience ;  but 
the  object  will  at  least  be  kept  in  view ;  and,  as  I  am  very 
conscious  of  having,  in  making  such  attempts,  gained  for 
myself  much  clearer  views  of  several  of  the  more  concealed 
effects  of  planetary  perturbation  than  I  had  acquired  by 
their  mathematical  investigation  in  detail,  it  may  reasonably 
be  hoped  that  the  endeavour  will  not  always  be  unattended 
with  a  similar  success  in  others. 

(10.)  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  evident  that  our 
aim  is  not  to  offer  to  the  public  a  technical  treatise,  in  which 
the  student  of  practical  or  theoretical  astronomy  shall  find 
consigned  the  minute  description  of  methods  of  observation, 
or  the  formulae  he  requires  prepared  to  his  hand,  or  their  de- 
monstrations drawn  out  in  detail.  In  all  these  the  present 
work  will  be  found  meagre,  and  quite  inadequate  to  his  wants. 
Its  aim  is  entirely  different ;  being  to  present  to  him  in  each 
case  the  mere  ultimate  rationale  of  facts,  arguments,  and 
processes;  and,  in  all  cases  of  mathematical  application, 
avoiding  whatever  would  tend  to  encumber  its  pages  with 
algebraic  or  geometrical  symbols,  to  place  under  his  inspec- 
tion that  central  thread  of  common  sense  on  which  the  pearls 
of  analytical  research  are  invariably  strung ;  but  which,  by 
the  attention  the  latter  claim  for  themselves,  is  often  con- 
cealed from  the  eye  of  the  gazer,  and  not  always  disposed  in 
the  straightest  and  most  convenient  form  to  follow  by  those 
who  string  them.  This  is  no  fault  of  those  who  have  con- 
ducted  the  inquiries  to  which  we  allude.  The  contention  of 
mind  for  which  they  call  is  enormous  ;  and  it  may,  perhaps, 
be  owing  to  their  experience  of  hoiv  little  can  be  accomplished 
in  carrying  such  processes  on  to  their  conclusion,  by  mere 
ordinary  clearness  of  head;  and  how  necessary  it  often  is  to 
pay  more  attention  to  the  purely  mathematical  conditions 
which  ensure  success,  —  the  hooks-and-eyes  of  their  equa- 
tions and  series,  —  than  to  those  which  enchain  causes  with 
their  effects,  and  both  with  the  human  reason,  —  that  we 
must  attribute  something  of  that  indistinctness  of  view  which 
is  often  complained  of  as  a  grievance  by  the  earnest  student, 
and  still   more  commonly  ascribed  ironically  to  the   native 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

cloudiness  of  an  atmosphere  too  sublime  for  vulgar  compre- 
hension. We  think  we  shall  render  good  service  to  both 
classes  of  readers,  by  dissipating,  so  far  as  lies  in  our  power, 
that  accidental  obscurity,  and  by  showing  ordinary  untutored 
comprehension  clearly  what  it  can,  and  what  it  cannot,  hope 
to  .attain. 

(10  a.)  To  conclude:  "Rome  was  not  built  in  a  day.*' 
No  grand  practical  result  of  human  industry,  genius,  or  me- 
ditation, has  sprung  forth  entire  and  complete  from  the  master 
hand  or  mind  of  an  individual  designer  working  straight  to 
its  object,  and  foreseeing  and  providing  for  all  details.  As 
in  the  building  of  a  great  city,  so  in  every  such  product,  its 
historian  has  to  record  rude  beginnings,  circuitous  and  in- 
adequate plans ;  frequent  demolition,  renewal  and  rectifica- 
tion ;  the  perpetual  removal  of  much  cumbrous  and  unsightly 
material  and  scaffolding,  and  constant  opening  out  of  wider 
and  grander  conceptions  ;  till  at  length  a  unity  and  a  nobility 
is  attained,  little  dreamed  of  in  the  imagination  of  the  first 
projector. 

(10  b.)  The  same  is  equally  true  of  every  great  body  of 
knowledge,  and  would  be  found  signally  exemplified  in  the 
history  of  astronomy, did  the  object  of  this  work  allow  us  to 
devote  a  portion  of  it  to  its  relation.  What  concerns  us 
more  is,  that  the  same  remark  is  no  less  applicable  to  the 
process  by  which  knowledge  is  built  up  in  the  mind  of  each 
individual,  and  by  which  alone  it  can  attain  any  extensive 
development  or  any  grand  proportions.  No  man  can  rise 
from  ignorance  to  anything  deserving  to  be  called  a  complete 
grasp  of  any  considerable  branch  of  science  without  receiving 
and  discarding  in  succession  many  crude  and  incomplete 
notions,  which  so  far  from  injuring  the  truth  in  its  ulti- 
mate reception,  act  as  positive  aids  to  its  attainment  by 
acquainting  him  with  the  symptoms  of  an  insecure  footing 
in  his  progress.  To  reach  from  the  plain  the  loftiest  sum- 
mits of  an  Alpine  country,  many  inferior  eminences  have  to 
be  scaled  and  relinquished  ;  but  the  labour  is  not  lost.  The 
region  is  unfolded  in  its  closer  recesses,  and  the  grand  pano- 
rama which  opens  from  aloft  is  all  the  better  understood  and 


10  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  more  enjoyed  for  the  very  misconceptions  in  detail  which 
it  rectifies  and  explains. 

(10  c.)  Astronomy  is  very  peculiarly  in  this  predicament. 
Its  study  to  each  individual  student  is  a  continual  process  of 
rectification  and  correction  —  of  abandoning  one  point  of 
view  for  another  higher  and  better — of  temporary  and  occa- 
tuonnl  reception  of  even  positive  and  admitted  errors  for  the 
convenience  they  afford  towards  giving  clear  notions  of  im- 
portant truths  whose  essence  they  do  not  affect,  by  sparing 
him  that  contention  of  mind  which  fatigues  and  distresses. 
We  know,  for  example,  that  the  earth's  diurnal  motion  is 
real,  and  that  of  the  heavens  only  apparent ;  yet  there  are 
many  problems  in  astronomy  which  are  not  only  easier  con- 
ceived, but  more  simply  resolved  by  adopting  the  idea  of  a 
diurnal  rotation  of  the  heavens,  it  being  understood  once  for 
all  that  appearances  are  alike  in  both  suppositions 


GENERAL    NOTIONS.  1  1 


CHAPTER  I. 


9KKKRAL   NOTIONS. APPARENT    AND  REAL  MOTIONS. SUAPE  AND 

SIZE  OF  THE  EARTH.  —  THE  HORIZON  AND  ITS  DIP.  THE  AT- 
MOSPHERE. —  REFRACTION.  TWILIGHT.  —  APPEARANCES  RE- 
SULTING   FROM     DIURNAL    MOTION FROM    CHANGE     OF     STATION 

IX  GENERAL.  —  PARALLACTIC  MOTIONS. TERRESTRIAL  PARAL- 
LAX.    THAT  OF  THE  STARS  INSENSIBLE. FIRST  STEP  TO- 
WARDS   FORMING   AN    IDEA   OF    THE    DISTANCE    OF    THE    STARS. 

COPERNICAN       VIEW      OF       THE       EARTH'S     MOTION. RELATIVE 

MOTION.  MOTIONS  PARTLY  REAL,  PARTLY  APPARENT. GEO- 
CENTRIC ASTRONOMY,  OR  IDEAL  REFERENCE  OF  PH^ENOMENA 
TO  THE  EARTH'S  CENTRE  AS  A  COMMON  CONVENTIONAL 
STATION. 

(11.)  The  magnitudes,  distances,  arrangement,  and  motions 
of  the  great  bodies  which  make  up  the  visible  universe,  their 
constitution  and  physical  condition,  so  far  as  they  can  be 
known  to  us,  with  their  mutual  influences  and  actions  on  each 
other,  so  far  as  they  can  be  traced  by  the  effects  produced, 
and  established  by  legitimate  reasoning,  form  the  assemblage 
of  objects  to  which  the  attention  of  the  astronomer  is  directed. 
The  term  astronomy  *  itself,  which  denotes  the  law  or  rule  of 
the  astra  (by  which  the  ancients  understood  not  only  the 
stars  properly  so  called,  but  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  all  the 
visible  constituents  of  the  heavens),  sufficiently  indicates  this ; 
and,  although  the  term  astrology,  which  denotes  the  reason, 
theory,  or  interpretation  of  the  stars f,  has  become  degraded  in 
its  application,  and  confined  to  superstitious  and  delusive  at- 
tempts to  divine  future  events  by  their  dependence  on  prc- 


*  Aitttjp,  a  star  ;  vofios,  a  law  ;  or  *«ju«ir,  to  tend,  as  a  shepherd  his  flock  ;  so 
(hat  aoTpuvonos  means  "  shepherd  of  the  stars."  The  two  etymologies  are,  how- 
ever, coincident. 

f   Aoyov,  teuton,  or  a  word,  the  vehicle  of  reason  ;   the  interpreter  of  thought. 


12  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

tended   planetary    influences,   the   same    meaning  originally 
attached  itself  to  that  epithet. 

(12.)  But,  besides  the  stars  and  other  celestial  bodies,  the 
earth  itself,  regarded  as  an  individual  body,  is  one  principal 
object  of  the  astronomer's  consideration,  and,  indeed,  the 
chief  of  all.  It  derives  its  importance,  in  a  practical  as  well 
as  theoretical  sense,  not  only  from  its  proximity,  and  its  re- 
lation to  us  as  animated  beings,  who  draw  from  it  the  supply 
of  all  our  wants,  but  as  the  station  from  which  we  see  all  the 
rest,  and  as  the  only  one  among  them  to  which  we  can,  in  the 
first  instance,  refer  for  any  determinate  marks  and  measures 
by  which  to  recognize  their  changes  of  situation,  or  with 
which  to  compare  their  distances. 

(13.)  To  the  reader  who  now  for  the  first  time  takes  up  a 
Look  on  astronomy,  it  will  no  doubt  seem  strange  to  class  the 
earth  with  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  to  assume  any  community 
of  nature  among  things  apparently  so  different.  For  what,  in 
fact,  can  be  more  apparently  different  than  the  vast  and 
seemingly  immeasurable  extent  of  the  earth,  and  the  stars, 
which  appear  but  as  points,  and  seem  to  have  no  size  at  all  ? 
The  earth  is  dark  and  opaque,  while  the  celestial  bodies  are 
brilliant.  We  perceive  in  it  no  motion,  while  in  them  we 
observe  a  continual  change  of  place,  as  we  view  them  at  dif- 
ferent hours  of  the  day  or  night,  or  at  different  seasons  of  the 
year.  The  ancients,  accordingly,  one  or  two  of  the  more  en- 
lightened of  them  only  excepted,  admitted  no  such  commu- 
nity of  nature  ;  and,  by  thus  placing  the  heavenly  bodies  and 
their  movements  without  the  pale  of  analogy  and  experience, 
effectually  intercepted  the  progress  of  all  reasoning  from  what 
passes  here  below,  to  what  is  going  on  in  the  regions  where 
they  exist  and  move.  Under  such  conventions,  astronomy, 
as  a  science  of  cause  and  effect,  could  not  exist,  but  must  be 
limited  to  a  mere  registry  of  appearances,  unconnected  with 
any  attempt  to  account  for  them  on  reasonable  principle?, 
however  successful  to  a  certain  extent  might  be  the  attempt 
to  follow  out  their  order  of  sequence,  and  to  establish  empirical 
laws  expressive  of  this  order.  To  get  rid  of  this  prejudice, 
therefore,  is  the  first  step  towards  acquiring  a  knowledge  of 


APPARENT   AND   REAL    MOTIONS.  13 

what  is  really  the  case ;  and  the  student  has  made  his  first 
effort  towards  the  acquisition  of  sound  knowledge,  when  he 
has  learnt  to  familiarize  himself  with  the  idea  that  the  earth, 
after  all,  may  be  nothing  but  a  great  star.  How  correct  such 
an  idea  may  be,  and  with  what  limitations  and  modifications 
it  is  to  be  admitted,  we  shall  see  presently. 

(14.)  It  is  evident,  that,  to  form  any  just  notions  of  the 
arrangement,  in  space,  of  a  number  of  objects  which  we  can- 
not approach  and  examine,  but  of  which  all  the  information 
we  can  gain  is  by  sitting  still  and  watching  their  evolutions, 
it  must  be  very  important  for  us  to  know,  in  the  first 
instance,  whether  what  we  call  sitting  still  is  really  such : 
whether  the  station  from  which  we  view  them,  with  ourselves, 
and  all  objects  which  immediately  surround  us,  be  not  itself 
in  motion,  unperceived  by  us ;  and  if  so,  of  what  nature  that 
motion  is.  The  apparent  places  of  a  number  of  objects,  and 
their  apparent  arrangement  with  respect  to  each  other,  will 
of  course  be  materially  dependent  on  the  situation  of  the 
spectator  among  them  ;  and  if  this  situation  be  liable  to 
change,  unknown  to  the  spectator  himself,  an  appearance  of 
change  in  the  respective  situations  of  the  objects  will  arise, 
without  the  reality.  If,  then,  such  be  actually  the  case,  it 
will  follow  that  all  the  movements  we  think  we  perceive 
among  the  stars  will  not  be  real  movements,  but  that  some 
part,  at  least,  of  whatever  changes  of  relative  place  we  per- 
ceive among  them  must  be  merely  apparent,  the  results  of 
the  shifting  of  our  own  point  of  view  ;  and  that,  if  we  would 
ever  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  their  real  motions,  it  can  only 
be  by  first  investigating  our  own,  and  making  due  allowance 
for  its  effects.  Thus,  the  question  whether  the  earth  is  in 
motion  or  at  rest,  and  if  in  motion,  what  that  motion  is,  is  no 
idle  inquiry,  but  one  on  which  depends  our  only  chance  of 
arriving  at  true  conclusions  respecting  the  constitution  of  the 
universe. 

(15.)  Nor  let  it  be  thought  strange  that  we  should  speak 
of  a  motion  existing  in  the  earth,  unperceived  by  its  in- 
habitants :  we  must  remember  that  it  is  of  the  earth  as  a 
whole  with  all  that  it  holds  within  its  substance,  or  sustains 


14  OUTLINE?    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

on  its  surface,  that  we  are  speaking;  of  a  motion  common  to 
the  solid  mass  beneath,  to  the  ocean  which  flows  around  it, 
the  air  that  rests  upon  it,  and  the  clouds  which  float  above  it 
in  the  air.  Such  a  motion,  which  should  displace  no  tcrres- 
trial  object  from  its  relative  situation  among  others,  interfere 
with  no  natural  processes,  and  produce  no  sensations  of 
shocks  or  jerks,  might,  it  is  very  evident,  subsist  undetected 
by  us.  There  is  no  peculiar  sensation  which  advertises  us 
that  we  are  in  motion.  We  perceive  jerks,  or  shocks,  it  is 
true,  because  these  are  sudden  changes  of  motion,  produced, 
as  the  laws  of  mechanics  teach  us,  by  sudden  and  powerful 
forces  acting  during  short  times  ;  and  these  forces,  applied  to 
our  bodies,  are  what  we  feel.  When,  for  example,  we  are 
carried  along  in  a  carriage  with  the  blinds  down,  or  with  our 
eyes  closed  (to  keep  us  from  seeing  external  objects),  we  per- 
ceive a  tremor  arising  from  inequalities  in  the  road,  over 
which  the  carriage  is  successively  lifted  and  let  fall,  but  we 
have  no  sense  of  progress.  As  the  road  is  smoother,  our 
sense  of  motion  is  diminished,  though  our  rate  of  travelling  is 
accelerated.  Railway  travelling,  especially  by  night  or  in  a 
tunnel,  has  familiarized  every  one  with  this  remark.  Those 
who  have  made  aeronautic  voyages  testify  that  with  closed 
eyes,  and  under  the  influence  of  a  steady  breeze  communi- 
cating no  oscillatory  or  revolving  motion  to  the  car,  the 
sensation  is  that  of  perfect  rest,  however  rapid  the  transfer 
from  place  to  place. 

(16.)  But  it  is  on  shipboard,  where  a  great  system  is  main- 
tained in  motion,  and  where  we  are  surrounded  with  a  mul- 
titude of  objects  which  participate  with  ourselves  and  each 
other  in  the  common  progress  of  the  whole  mass,  that  we  feel 
most  satisfactorily  the  identity  of  sensation  between  a  state 
of  motion  and  one  of  rest.  In  the  cabin  of  a  large  and  heavy 
vessel,  going  smoothly  before  the  wind  in  still  water,  or 
drawn  along  a  canal,  not  the  smallest  indication  acquaints  us 
with  the  way  it  is  making.  We  read,  sit,  walk,  and  perform 
every  customary  action  as  if  we  were  on  land.  If  we  throw 
a  ball  into  the  air,  it  falls  back  into  our  hand  ;  or  if  we  drop 
it,  it  alights  at  our  feet.     Insects  buzz  around   us  as  in  the 


SITATE    OF    THE    EARTFT.  M 

Free  air  ;  and  smoke  ascends  in  the  same  manner  as  it  would 
do  in  an  apartment  on  shore.  If,  indeed,  we  come  on  deck, 
the  case  is,  in  some  respects,  different ;  the  air,  not  being 
carried  along  with  us,  drifts  away  smoke  and  other  light 
bodies  —  such  as  feathers  abandoned  to  it  —  apparently,  in 
the  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  ship's  progress ;  but,  in 
reality,  they  remain  at  rest,  and  we  leave  them  behind  in  the 
air.  Still,  the  illusion,  so  far  as  massive  objects  and  our  own 
movements  are  concerned,  remains  complete ;  and  when  we 
look  at  the  shore,  we  then  perceive  the  effect  of  our  own 
motion  transferred,  in  a  contrary  direction,  to  external  objects 
—  external,  that  is,  to  the  system  of  which  we  form  a  part, 

"  Provebimur  portu,  terraeque  urbesque  recedunt." 

^17.)  In  order,  however,  to  conceive  the  earth  as  in  mo- 
tion, we  must  form  to  ourselves  a  conception  of  its  shape  and 
size.  Now,  an  object  cannot  have  shape  and  size  unless  it 
is  limited  on  all  sides  by  some  definite  outline,  so  as  to  admit 
of  our  imagining  it,  at  least,  disconnected  from  other  bodies, 
and  existing  insulated  in  space.  The  first  rude  notion  we 
form  of  the  earth  is  that  of  a  flat  surface,  of  indefinite  extent 
in  all  directions  from  the  spot  where  we  stand,  above  which 
are  the  air  and  sky  ;  below,  to  an  indefinite  profundity,  solid 
matter.  This  is  a  prejudice  to  be  got  rid  of,  like  that  of  the 
earth's  immobility ;  —  but  it  is  one  much  easier  to  rid  our- 
selves of,  inasmuch  as  it  originates  only  in  our  own  mental 
inactivity,  in  not  questioning  ourselves  where  we  will  place 
a  limit  to  a  thing  we  have  been  accustomed  from  infancy 
to  regard  as  immensely  large ;  and  does  not,  like  that,  ori- 
ginate in  the  testimony  of  our  senses  unduly  interpreted. 
On  the  contrary,  the  direct  testimony  of  our  senses  lies  the 
other  way.  When  we  see  the  sun  set  in  the  evening  in  the 
west,  and  rise  again  in  the  east,  as  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  is 
the  same  sun  we  see  after  a  temporary  absence,  we  must  do 
violence  to  all  our  notions  of  solid  matter,  to  suppose  it  to 
have  made  its  way  through  the  sul>stance  of  the  earth.  It 
must,  therefore,  have  gone  under  it,  and  that  not  by  a  mere 
subterraneous  channel ;  for  if  we  notice  the  points  where  it 


16  OrTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

sets  and  rises  for  many  successive  days,  or  for  a  whole  year, 
we  shall  find  them  constantly  shifting,  round  a  very  large 
extent  of  the  horizon ;  and,  besides,  the  moon  and  stars  also 
set  and  rise  again  in  all  points  of  the  visible  horizon.  The 
conclusion  is  plain :  the  earth  cannot  extend  indefinitely  in 
depth  downwards,  nor  indefinitely  in  surface  laterally ;  it 
must  have  not  only  bounds  in  a  horizontal  direction,  but  also 
an  under  side  round  which  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  can  pass ; 
and  that  side  must,  at  least,  be  so  far  like  what  we  see,  that 
it  must  have  a  sky  and  sunshine,  and  a  day  when  it  is  night 
to  us,  and  vice  versa ;  where,  in  short, 

—  '*  redit  a  nobis  Aurora,  diemque  reducit. 
Nosque  ubi  primus  equis  oriens  afflavit  anhelis, 
Illic  sera  rubens  accendit  lumina  Vesper."  Giorg. 

(18.)  As  soon  as  we  have  familiarized  ourselves  with  the 
conception  of  an  earth  without  foundations  or  fixed  supports  — 
existing  insulated  in  space  from  contact  of  every  thing  ex- 
ternal, it  becomes  easy  to  imagine  it  in  motion  —  or,  rather, 
difficult  to  imagine  it  otherwise ;  for,  since  there  is  nothing  to 
retain  it  in  one  place,  should  any  causes  of  motion  exist,  or 
any  forces  act  upon  it,  it  must  obey  their  impulse.  Let  us 
next  see  what  obvious  circumstances  there  are  to  help  us  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  shape  of  the  earth. 

(19.)  Let  us  first  examine  what  we  can  actually  see  of  its 
shape.  Now,  it  is  not  on  land  (unless,  indeed,  on  un- 
commonly level  and  extensive  plains),  that  we  can  see  any 
thing  of  the  general  figure  of  the  earth ;  —  the  hills,  trees,  and 
other  objects  which  roughen  its  surface,  and  break  and  elevate 
the  line  of  the  horizon,  though  obviously  bearing  a  most 
minute  proportion  to  the  whole  earth,  are  yet  too  considerable 
with  respect  to  ourselves  and  to  that  small  portion  of  it  which 
we  can  see  at  a  single  view,  to  allow  of  our  forming  any 
judgment  of  the  form  of  the  whole,  from  that  of  a  part  so  dis- 
figured. But  with  the  surface  of  the  sea  or  any  vastly  ex 
tended  level  plain,  the  case  is  otherwise.  If  we  sail  out  of 
sight  of  land,  whether  we  stand  on  the  deck  of  the  ship  or 
climb  the  mast,  we  see  the  surface  of  the  sea — not  loshig 


THE    IIOUIZON    AND    ITS    DIP.  17 

itself  in  distance  and  mist,  but  terminated  by  a  sharp,  clear, 
well-defined  line  or  offing  as  it  is  called,  which  runs  all  round 
us  in  a  circle,  having  our  station  for  its  centre.  That  this 
line  is  really  a  circle,  we  conclude,  first,  from  the  perfect 
apparent  similarity  of  all  its  parts ;  and,  secondly,  from  the 
fact  of  all  its  parts  appearing  at  the  same  distance  from  us, 
and  that,  evidently,  a  moderate  one ;  and  thirdly,  from  this, 
that  its  apparent  diameter,  measured  with  an  instrument 
called  the  dip  sector,  is  the  same  (except  under  some  singular 
atmospheric  circumstances,  which  produce  a  temporary  dis- 
tortion of  the  outline),  in  whatever  direction  the  measure  is 
taken, — properties  which  belong  only  to  the  circle  among 
geometrical  figures.  If  we  ascend  a  high  eminence  on  a  plain 
(for  instance,  one  of  the  Egyptian  pyramids),  the  same  holds 
good. 

(20.)  Masts  of  ships,  however,  and  the  edifices  erected  by 
man,  are  trifling  eminences  compared  to  what  nature  itself 
affords;  JEtna,  TenerifFe,  Mowna  Roa,  are  eminences  from 
which  no  contemptible  aliquot  part  of  the  whole  earth's  surface 
can  be  seen;  but  from  these  again  —  in  those  few  and  rare 
occasions  when  the  transparency  of  the  air  will  permit  the 
real  boundary  of  the  horizon,  the  true  sea-line,  to  be  seen — 
the  very  same  appearances  are  witnessed,  but  with  this  re- . 
markable  addition,  viz.  that  the  angular  diameter  of  the  visible 
area,  as  measured  by  the  dip  sector,  is  materially  less  than  at 
a  lower  level ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  apparent  size  of 
the  earth  has  sensibly  diminished  as  we  have  receded  from  ita 
surface,  while  yet  the  absolute  quantity  of  it  seen  at  once  hat* 
been  increased. 

(21.)  The  same  appearances  are  observed  universally,  in 
every  part  of  the  earth's  surface  visited  by  man.  Now,  the 
figure  of  a  body  which,  however  seen,  appears  always  circular, 
can  be  no  other  than  a  sphere  or  globe. 

(22.)  A  diagram  will  elucidate  this.  Suppose  the  earth  to 
be  represented  by  the  sphere  LHNQ,  whose  centre  is  C,  and 
let  A,  G,  M  be  stations  at  different  elevations  above  various 
points  of  its  surface,  represented  by  a,  g,  m  respectively. 
From  each  of  them  (as  from  M)  let  a  line  be  drawn,  as  MN» 

c 


16 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


a  tangent  to  the  surface  at  N,  then  will  this  line  represent 
the  visual  ray  along  which  the  spectator  at  M  will  see  the 
visible  horizon ;  and  as  this  tangent  sweeps  round  M,  and 
comes  successively  into  the  positions  MOo,  MPj9,  MQy, 
the  point  of  contact  N  will  mark  out  on  the  surface  the 
circle  NOPQ.     The  area  of  the  spherical  surface  compre- 


hended within  this  circle  is  the  portion  of  the  earth's  surface 
visible  to  a  spectator  at  M,  and  the  angle  NMQ  included 
between  the  two  extreme  visual  rays  is  the  measure  of  its 
apparent  angular  diameter.  Leaving,  at  present,  out  of  con- 
sideration the  effect  of  refraction  in  the  air  below  M,  of  which 
more  hereafter,  and  which  always  tends,  in  some  degree,  to 
increase  that  angle,  or  render  it  more  obtuse,  this  is  the  angle 
measured  by  the  dip  sector.  Now,  it  is  evident,  1st,  that  as 
the  point  M  is  more  elevated  above  m,  the  point  immediately 
below  it  on  the  sphere,  the  visible  area,  i.  e.  the  spherical 
segment  or  slice  NOPQ,  increases ;  2dly,  that  the  distance 
of  the  visible  horizon  *  or  boundary  of  our  view  from  the  eye, 

•   *Opi£u,  to  terminate. 


THE    IIOttlZON    AND    ITS    DIP.  14J 

viz.  the  line  M  N,  increases ;  and,  3dly,  that  the  angle  N  M  Q 
becomes  less  obtuse,  or,  in  other  words,  tho  apparent  angular 
diameter  of  the  earth  diminishes,  being  nowhere  so  great  as 
180°,  or  two  right  angles,  but  falling  short  of  it  by  some  sen- 
sible quantity,  and  that  more  and  more  the  higher  we  ascend. 
The  figure  exhibits  three  states  or  stages  of  elevation,  with 
the  horizon,  &c.  corresponding  to  each,  a  glance  at  which  will 
explain  our  meaning ;  or,  limiting  ourselves  to  the  larger  and 
more  distinct,  M N O  P Q,  let  the  reader  imagine  »NM, 
M  Q  q  to  be  the  two  legs  of  a  ruler  jointed  at  M,  and  kept 
extended  by  the  globe  NmQ  between  them.  It  is  clear,  that 
as  the  joint  M  is  urged  home  towards  the  surface,  the  lega 
will  open,  and  the  ruler  will  become  more  nearly  straiyht, 
but  will  not  attain  perfect  straightness  till  M  is  brought 
fairly  up  to  contact  with  the  surface  at  m,  in  which  case 
its  whole  length  will  become  a  tangent  to  the  sphere  at  m,  as 
is  the  line  xy. 

(23.)  This  explains  what  is  meant  by  the  dip  of  the  horizon. 
M  m,  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  general  surface  of  the 
sphere  at  m,  is  also  the  direction  in  which  a  plumb-line*  would 
hang ;  for  it  is  an  observed  fact,  that  in  all  situations,  in  every 
part  of  the  earth,  the  direction  of  a  plumb-line  is  exactly 
perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  still  water;  and,  moreover, 
that  it  is  also  exactly  perpendicular  to  a  line  or  surface  truly 
adjusted  by  a  spirit-level*  Suppose,  then,  that  at  our  station 
M  we  were  to  adjust  a  line  (a  wooden  ruler  for  instance)  by 
a  spirit-level,  with  perfect  exactness ;  then,  if  we  suppose  the 
direction  of  this  line  indefinitely  prolonged  both  ways,  as 
XM  Y,  the  line  so  drawn  will  be  at  right  angles  to  Mm, 
and  therefore  parallel  to  xmy,  the  tangent  to  the  sphere  at 
m.  A  spectator  placed  at  M  will  therefore  see  not  only  all 
the  vault  of  the  sky  above  this  line,  as  X  Z  Y,  but  also  that 
portion  or  zone  of  it  which  lies  between  X N  and  YQ;  in 
other  words,  his  sky  will  be  more  than  a  hemisphere  by  the 
zone  YQXN.  It  is  the  angular  breadth  of  this  redundant  < 
zone  —  the  angle  YMQ,  by  which  the  visible  horizon  appears 
depressed  below  the  direction  of  a  spirit-level  —  that  is  called 

•   Set  these  instruments  described  in  Chap.  III. 
C  2 


20  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  dip  of  the  horizon.  It  is  a  correction  of  constant  use  in 
nautical  astronomy. 

(24.)  From  the  foregoing  explanations  it  appears,  1st,  That 
the  general  figure  of  the  earth  (so  far  as  it  can  be  gathered 
from  this  kind  of  observation)  is  that  of  a  sphere  or  globe. 
In  this  we  also  include  that  of  the  sea,  which,  wherever  it 
extends,  covers  and  fills  in  those  inequalities  and  local  irregu- 
larities which  exist  on  land,  but  which  can  of  course  only  be 
regarded  as  trifling  deviations  from  the  general  outline  of  the 
whole  mass,  as  we  consider  an  orange  not  the  less  round  for 
the  roughness  on  its  rind.  2dly,  That  the  appearance  of  a 
visible  horizon,  or  sea-offing,  is  a  consequence  of  the  curvature 
cf  the  surface,  and  does  not  arise  from  the  inability  of  the 
eye  to  follow  objects  to  a  greater  distance,  or  from  at- 
mospheric indistinctness.  It  will  be  worth  while  to  pursue 
tt  3  general  notion  thus  acquired  into  some  of  its  consequences, 
by  which  its  consistency  with  observations  of  a  different 
kind,  and  on  a  larger  scale,  will  be  put  to  the  test,  and  a 
clear  conception  be  formed  of  the  manner  in  which  the  parts 
of  the  earth  are  related  to  each  other,  and  held  together  as  a 
whole. 

(25.)  In  the  first  place,  then,  every  one  who  has  passed  a 
little  while  at  the  sea  side  is  aware  that  objects  may  be  seen 
perfectly  well  beyond  the  offing  or  visible  horizon  —  but  not 
the  whole  of  them.  We  only  see  their  upper  parts.  Their 
bases  where  they  rest  on,  or  rise  out  of  the  water,  are  hid 
from  view  by  the  spherical  surface  of  the  sea,  which  protrudes 
between  them  and  ourselves.  Suppose  a  ship,  for  instance, 
to  sail  directly  away  from  our  station ;  —  at  first,  when  the 
distance  of  the  ship  is  small,  a  spectator,  S,  situated  at  some 
certain  height  above  the  sea,  sees  the  whole  of  the  ship,  even 
to  the  water  line  where  it  rests  on  the  sea,  as  at  A.  As  it 
recedes  it  diminishes,  it  is  true,  in  apparent  size,  but  still  the 
whole  is  seen  down  to  the  water  line,  till  it  reaches  the  visible 
horizon  at  B.  But  as  soon  as  it  has  passed  this  distance,  not 
only  does  the  visible  portion  still  continue  to  diminish  in 
apparent  size,  but  the  hull  begins  to  disappear  bodily,  as  if 
sunk   below   the   surface.     When   it  has  reached  a  certain 


SIZE    OP    THE    EARTH.  21 

distance,  as  at  C,  its  hull  lias  entirely  vanished,  but  the  masts 
and  sails  remain,  presenting  the  appearance  c.  But  if,  in 
this  state  of  things,  the 
spectator  quickly  as- 
cends to  a  higher  sta- 
tion,  T,  whose  visible 
horizon  is  at  D,  the 
hull  comes  again  in 
sight  ;  and,  when  he 
descends  again,  he  loses 
it.  The  ship  still  receding,  the  lower  sails  seem  to  sink  below 
the  water,  as  at  d,  and  at  length  the  whole  disappears :  while  yet 
the  distinctness  with  which  the  last  portion  of  the  sail  d  is 
seen  is  such  as  to  satisfy  us  that  were  it  not  for  the  interposed 
segment  of  the  sea,  A  B  C  D  E,  the  distance  T  E  is  not  so 
great  as  to  have  prevented  an  equally  perfect  view  of  the 
whole. 

(26.)  The  history  of  aeronautic  adventure  affords  a  curious 
illustration  of  the  same  principle.  The  late  Mr.  Sadler,  the 
celebrated  aeronaut,  ascended  on  one  occasion  in  a  balloon 
from  Dublin,  and  was  wafted  across  the  Irish  Channel,  when, 
on  his  approach  to  the  Welsh  coast,  the  balloon  descended 
nearly  to  the  surface  of  the  sea.  By  this  time  the  sun  was 
set,  and  the  shades  of  evening  began  to  close  in.  He  threw 
out  nearly  all  his  ballast,  and  suddenly  sprang  upwards  to  a 
great  height,  and  by  so  doing  brought  his  horizon  to  dip 
below  the  sun,  producing  the  whole  phenomenon  of  a 
western  sunrise.  M.  Charles  in  his  memorable  ascent  from 
Paris  in  1783  witnessed  the  same  phenomenon. 

(27.)  If  we  could  measure  the  heights  and  exact  distance 

of  two  stations  which  could  barely  be  discerned  from  each 

other  over  the   edge   of  the   horizon,   we   could    ascertain 

the  actual   size  of  the  earth  itself:    and,   in  fact,  were  it 

not  for  the  effect  of  refraction,   by  which  we  are  enabled 

to  see  in  some  small  degree  round  the  interposed  segment  (as 

will  be  hereafter  explained),  this  would  be  a  tolerably  good 

method  of  ascertaining  it.     Suppose   A  and  B  to  be    two 

eminences,  whose  perpendicular  heights  A  a  and  B  b  (which 

c  3 


22 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTUONOMV. 


for  simplicity,  we  will  suppose  to  be  exactly  equal)  are 
known,  as  well  as  their  exact  horizontal  interval  aT)b,  by 
measurement  ;  then  it  is  clear 
that  D,  the  visible  horizon  of 
both,  will  lie  just  half-way 
between  them,  and  if  we  sup- 
pose aDb  to  be  the  sphere  of 
the  earth,  and  C  its  centre  in 
the  figure  C  D  b  B,  we  know 
D  b,    the    length    of   the    arch 

of  the  circle  between  D  and  b,  —  viz.  half  the  measured 
interval,  and  b  B,  the  excess  of  its  secant  above  its  radius  — 
which  is  the  height  of  B,  —  data  which,  by  the  solution 
of  an  easy  geometrical  problem,  enable  us  to  find  the  length 
of  the  radius  D  C.  If,  as  is  really  the  case,  we  suppose  both 
the  heights  and  distance  of  the  stations  inconsiderable  in 
comparison  with  the  size  of  the  earth,  the  solution  alluded  to 
is  contained  in  the  following  proposition  :  — 

The  earth's  diameter  bears  the  same  proportion  to  the  distance 
of  the  visible  horizon  from  the  eye  as  that  distance  does  to  the 
height  of  the  eye  above  the  sea  level. 

When  the  stations  are  unequal  in  height,  the  problem  ia  a 
little  more  complicated. 

(28.)  Although,  as  we  have  observed,  the  effect  of  refrac- 
tion prevents  this  from  being  an  exact  method  of  ascertaining 
the  dimensions  of  the  earth,  yet  it  will  suffice  to  afford  such 
an  approximation  to  it  as  shall  be  of  use  in  the  present  stage 
of  the  reader's  knowledge,  and  help  him  to  many  just  con- 
ceptions, on  which  account  we  shall  exemplify  its  application 
in  numbers.  Now,  it  appears  by  observation,  that  two 
points,  each  ten  feet  above  the  surface,  cease  to  be  visible 
from  each  other  over  still  water,  and  in  average  atmospheric 
circumstances,  at  a  distance  of  about  8  miles.  But  10  feet 
is  the  528th  part  of  a  mile,  so  that  half  that  distance,  or 
4  miles,  is  to  the  height  of  each  as  4  x  528  or  2112 :  1,  and 
therefore  in  the  same  proportion  to  4  miles  is  the  length 
of  the  earth's   diameter.     It   must,  therefore,  be  equal  to 


SIZE    OF    THE    EARTH.  23 

4x2112  =  8448,  or,  in  round  numbers,  about  8000  miles, 
winch  is  not  very  far  from  the  truth. 

(29.)  Such  is  the  first  rough  result  of  an  attempt  to 
ascertain  the  earth's  magnitude;  and  it  will  not  be  amiss, 
if  we  take  advantage  of  it  to  compare  it  with  objects  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  consider  as  of  vast  size,  so  as  to  interpose 
a  few  steps  between  it  and  our  ordinary  ideas  of  dimension. 
We  have  before  likened  the  inequalities  on  the  earth's 
surface,  arising  from  mountains,  valleys,  buildings,  &c  to 
the  roughnesses  on  the  rind  of  an  orange,  compared  with 
its  general  mass.  The  comparison  is  quite  free  from  exag- 
geration. The  highest  mountain  known  hardly  exceeds  five 
miles  in  perpendicular  elevation :  this  is  only  one  1600th  part 
of  the  earth's  diameter ;  consequently,  on  a  globe  of  sixteen 
inches  in  diameter,  such  a  mountain  would  be  represented 
by  a  protuberance  of  no  more  than  one  hundredth  part  of  an 
inch,  which  is  about  the  thickness  of  ordinary  drawing-paper. 
Now,  as  there  is  no  entire  continent,  or  even  any  very 
extensive  tract  of  land,  known,  whose  general  elevation 
above  the  sea  is  any  thing  like  half  this  quantity,  it  follows, 
that  if  we  would  construct  a  correct  model  of  our  earth,  with 
its  seas,  continents,  and  mountains,  on  a  globe  sixteen  inches 
in  diameter,  the  whole  of  the  land,  with  the  exception  of 
a  few  prominent  points  and  ridges,  must  be  comprised  on  it 
within  the  thickness  of  thin  writing-paper ;  and  the  highest 
hills  would  be  represented  by  the  smallest  visible  grains 
of  sand. 

(30.)  The  deepest  mine  existing  does  not  penetrate  half  a 
mile  below  the  surface  :  a  scratch,  or  pin-hole,  duly  re- 
presenting  it,  on  the  surface  of  such  a  globe  as  our  model, 
would  be  imperceptible  without  a  magnifier. 

(31.)  The  greatest  depth  of  sea,  probably,  does  not  ver- 
much  exceed  the  greatest  elevation  of  the  continents;  and 
would,  of  course,  be  represented  by  an  excavation,  in  about 
the  same  proportion,  into  the  substance  of  the  globe  :  so  that 
the  ocean  comes  to  be  conceived  as  a  mere  film  of  liquid, 
such  as,  on  our  model,  would  be  left  by  a  brush  dipped 
in  colour,  and  drawn  over  those  parts  intended  to  represent 


424  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY 

the  sea ;  only,  in  so  conceiving  it,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that 
the  resemblance  extends  no  farther  than  to  proportion  in 
point  of  quantity.  The  mechanical  laws  which  would  regu- 
late the  distribution  and  movements  of  such  a  film,  and  its 
adhesion  to  the  surface,  are  altogether  different  from  those 
which  govern  the  phenomena  of  the  sea. 

(32.)  Lastly,  the  greatest  extent  of  the  earth's  surface 
which  has  ever  been  brought  at  once  within  the  range  of 
human  vision  was  that  which,  but  for  clouds,  would  have 
been  exposed  to  the  view  of  Messrs.  Glaisher  and  Coxwell, 
in  their  balloon  ascent  of  Sep.  6,  1863,  to  the  enormous 
height  of  seven  miles.  To  estimate  the  proportion  of  the 
area  visible  from  this  elevation  to  the  whole  earth's  surface* 
we  must  have  recourse  to  the  geometry  of  the  sphere,  which 
informs  us  that  the  convex  surface  of  a  spherical  segment  is 
to  the  whole  surface  to  which  it  belongs  as  the  thickness  of  the 
segment  is  to  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  ;  and  further,  that 
this  thickness,  in  the  case  we  are  considering,  is  almost  ex- 
actly  equal  to  the  perpendicular  elevation  of  the  point  of  sight 
above  the  surface.  The  proportion,  therefore,  of  the  visible 
area,  in  this  case,  to  the  whole  earth's  surface,  is  that  of  seven 
miles  to  8000,  or  1  to  1140.  The  portion  visible  from  JEtna, 
the  Peak  of  Teneriffe,  or  Mowna  Roa,  is  about  one  4000th. 
s.  (33.)  When  we  ascend  to  any  very  considerable  elevation 
above  the  surface  of  the  earth,  either  in  a  balloon,  or  on 
mountains,  we  are  made  aware,  by  many  uneasy  sensations, 
of  an  insufficient  supply  of  air.  The  barometer,  an  instrument 
which  informs  us  of  the  weight  of  air  incumbent  on  a  given 
horizontal  surface,  confirms  this  impression,  and  affords  a 
direct  measure  of  the  rate  of  diminution  of  the  quantity  of 
air  which  a  given  space  includes  as  we  recede  from  the 
surface.  From  its  indications  we  learn,  that  when  we  have 
ascended  to  the  height  of  1000  feet,  we  have  left  below  us 
about  one-thirtieth  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  atmosphere :  — 
that  at  10,600  feet  of  perpendicular  elevation  (which  is  rather 
less  than  that  of  the  summit  of  JEtna*)  we  have  ascended 

•  The  height  of  JEtna  above  the  Mediterranean  (as  it  results  from  a  baiome- 


THE   ATMOSPHERE.  25 

through  about  one-third;  and  at  18,000  feet  (which  is  nearly 
.that  of  Cotopaxi)  through  one-half  the  material,  or,  at  least, 
the  ponderable  body  of  air  incumbent  on  the  earth's  surface. 
From  the  progression  of  these  numbers,  as  well  as,  a  priori, 
from  the  nature  of  the  air  itself,  which  is  compressible,  i.  e.  ca- 
pable of  being  condensed  or  crowded  into  a  smaller  space  in 
proportion  to  the  incumbent  pressure,  it  is  easy  to  see  that, 
although  by  rising  still  higher  we  should  continually  get 
above  more  and  more  of  the  air,  and  so  relieve  ourselves  more 
and  more  from  the  pressure  with  which  it  weighs  upon  us, 
yet  the  amount  of  this  additional  relief,  or  the  ponderable 
quantity  of  air  surmounted,  would  be  by  no  means  in  pro- 
portion to  the  additional  height  ascended,  but  in  a  constantly 
decreasing  ratio.  An  easy  calculation,  however,  founded  on 
our  experimental  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  air,  and  the 
mechanical  laws  which  regulate  its  dilatation  and  compression, 
is  sufficient  to  show  that,  at  an  altitude  above  the  surface  of 
the  earth  not  exceeding  the  hundredth  part  of  its  diameter, 
the  tenuity,  or  rarefaction,  of  the  air  must  be  so  excessive,  that 
not  only  animal  life  could  not  subsist,  or  combustion  be  main- 
tained in  it,  but  that  the  most  delicate  means  we  possess  of 
ascertaining  the  existence  of  any  air  at  all  would  fail  to  afford 
the  slightest  perceptible  indications  of  its  presence. 

(34.)  Laying  out  of  consideration,  therefore,  at  present,  all 
nice  questions  as  to  the  probable  existence  of  a  definite  limit 
to  the  atmosphere,  beyond  which  there  is,  absolutely  and 
rigorously  speaking,  no  air,  it  is  clear,  that,  for  all  practical 
purposes,  we  may  speak  of  those  regions  which  are  more 
distant  above  the  earth's  surface  than  the  hundredth  part  of 
its  diameter  as  void  of  air,  and  of  course  of  clouds  (which  are 
nothing  but  visible  vapours,  diffused  and  Jloatiny  in  the  air, 
sustained  by  it,  and  rendering  it  turbid  as  mud  does  water). 
It  seems  probable,  from  many  indications,  that  the  greatest 
height  at  which  visible  clouds  ever  exist  does  not  exceed  ten 
miles;  at  which  height  the  density  of  the  air  is  about  an 
eighth  part  of  what  it  is  at  the  level  of  the  sea. 

trical  measurement  of  my  own,  made  in  July,  1824,  under  very  favourab'e  cir- 
cumstances) is>  10,872  English  feet—  Author. 


26  OUTLINES    OF   ASTIIONOMY. 

(35.)  We  are  thus  led  to  regard  the  atmosphere  of  air, 
with  the  clouds  it  supports,  as  constituting  a  coating  of  equa- 
ble or  nearly  equable  thickness,  enveloping  our  globe  on  all 
sides ;  or  rather  as  an  aerial  ocean,  of  which  the  surface  of 
the  sea  and  land  constitutes  the  bed,  and  whose  inferior 
portions  or  strata,  within  a  few  miles  of  the  earth,  contain  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  the  whole  mass,  the  density  diminish- 
ing with  extreme  rapidity  as  we  recede  upwards,  till,  within 
a  very  moderate  distance  (such  as  would  be  represented  by 
the  sixth  of  an  inch  on  the  model  we  have  before  spoken  of, 
and  which  is  not  more  in  proportion  to  the  globe  on  which  it 
rests,  than  the  downy  skin  of  a  peach  in  comparison  with  the 
fruit  within  it),  all  sensible  trace  of  the  existence  of  air  dis- 
appears. 

(36.)  Arguments,  however,  are  not  wanting  to  render  it, 
if  not  absolutely  certain,  at  least  in  the  highest  degree  pro- 
bable, that  the  surface  of  the  aerial,  like  that  of  the  aqueous 
ocean,  has  a  real  and  definite  limit,  as  above  hinted  at ;  be- 
yond which  there  is  positively  no  air,  and  above  which  a  fresh 
quantity  of  air,  could  it  be  added  from  without,  or  carried 
aloft  from  below,  instead  of  dilating  itself  indefinitely  up- 
wards, would,  after  a  certain  very  enormous  but  still  finite 
enlargement  of  volume,  sink  and  merge,  as  water  poured 
into  the  sea,  and  distribute  itself  among  the  mass  beneat]'. 
With  the  truth  of  this  conclusion,  however,  astronomy  has 
little  concern;  all  the  effects  of  the  atmosphere  in  modifying 
astronomical  phenomena  being  the  same,  whether  it  be  sup- 
posed of  definite  extent  or  not. 

(37.)  Moreover,  whichever  idea  we  adopt,  within  those 
limits  in  which  it  possesses  any  appretiable  density  its  con- 
stitution is  the  same  over  all  points  of  the  earth's  surface ; 
that  is  to  say,  on  the  great  scale,  and  leaving  out  of  con- 
sideration temporary  and  local  causes  of  derangement,  such  as 
winds,  and  great  fluctuations,  of  the  nature  of  waves,  which 
prevail  in  it  to  an  immense  extent.  In  other  words,  the 
law  of  diminution  of  the  air's  density  as  we  recede  upwards 
from  the  level  of  the  sea  is  the  same  in  every  column  into 
which  we  may  conceive  it  divided,  or  from  whatever  point  of 


REFRACTION.  27 

the  surface  we  may  set  out.  It  may  therefore  be  considered 
as  consisting  of  successively  superposed  strata  or  layers,,  each 
of  the  form  of  a  spherical  shell,  concentric  with  the  general 
surface  of  the  sea  and  land,  and  each  of  which  is  rarer,  or  spe- 
cifically lighter,  than  that  immediately  beneath  it ;  and  denser, 
or  specifically  heavier,  than  that  immediately  above  it.  This, 
at  least,  is  the  kind  of  distribution  which  alone  would  be  con- 
sistent with  the  laws  of  the  equilibrium  of  fluids.  Inasmuch, 
however,  as  the  atmosphere  is  not  in  perfect  equilibrium, 
being  always  kept  in  a  state  of  circulation,  owing  to  the  ex- 
cess of  heat  in  its  equatorial  regions  over  that  at  the  poles, 
some  slight  deviation  from  the  rigorous  expression  of  this  law 
takes  place,  and  in  peculiar  localities  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  even  considerable  permanent  depressions  of  the  contours 
of  these  strata,  below  their  general  or  spherical  level,  subsist. 
But  these  are  points  of  consideration  rather  for  the  meteoro- 
logist than  the  astronomer.  It  must  be  observed,  moreover, 
that  with  this  distribution  of  its  strata  the  inequalities  of 
mountains  and  valleys  have  little  concern.  These  exercise 
hardly  more  influence  in  modifying  their  general  spherical 
figure  than  the  inequalities  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  interfere 
with  the  general  sphericity  of  its  surface.  They  would  exer- 
cise absolutely  none  were  it  not  for  their  effect  in  giving 
another  than  horizontal  direction  to  the  currents  of  air  on- 
stituting  winds,  as  shoals  in  the  ocean  throw  up  the  cur- 
rents which  sweep  over  them  towards  the  surface,  and  so 
in  some  small  degree  tend  to  disturb  the  perfect  level  of  that 
surface. 

(38.)  It  is  the  power  which  air  possesses,  in  common  with 
all  transparent  media,  of  refracting  the  rays  of  light,  or  bend- 
ing them  out  of  their  straight  course,  which  renders  a  know- 
ledge of  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  important  to  the 
astronomer.  Owing  to  this  property,  objects  seen  obliquely 
through  it  appear  otherwise  situated  than  they  would  to  the 
game  spectator,  had  the  atmosphere  no  existence.  It  thus 
produces  a  false  impression  respecting  their  places,  which 
must  be  rectified  by  ascertaining  the  amount  and  direction  of 
the  displacement  so  apparently  produced  on  each,  before  wo 


28 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


can  come  :it  a  knowledge  of  the  true  directions  in  which  they 
are  situated  from  us  at  any  assigned  moment. 

^T9.)  Suppose  a  spectator  placed  at  A,  any  point  of  the 
earth's  surface  K  A  k  ;  and  let  L  I,  M  m,  X  n,  represent  the 
successive  strata  or  layers,  of  decreasing  density,  into  which 
we  may  conceive  the  atmosphere  to  be  divided,  and  which 
are  spherical  surfaces  concentric  with  K  k,  the  earth's  sur- 
face. Let  S  represent  a  star,  or  other  heavenly  body,  be- 
yond the  utmost  limit  of  the  atmosphere.  Then,  if  the  air 
were  away,  the  spectator  would  see  it  in  the  direction  of  the 
straight  line  A  S.  But,  in  reality,  when  the  ray  of  light  S  A 
reaches  the  atmosphere,  suppose  at  d,  it  will,  by  the  laws  of 
optics,  begin  to  bend  downwards,  and  take  a  more  inclined 
direction,  as  d  c.     This  bending  will  at  first  be  imperceptible. 


owing  to  the  extreme  tenuity  of  the  uppermost  strata ;  but 
as  it  advances  downwards,  the  strata  continually  increasing 
in  density,  it  will  continually  undergo  greater  and  greater 
refraction  in  the  same  direction ;  and  thus,  instead  of  pur- 
suing the  straight  line  S  d  A,  it  will  describe  a  curve  Sdcba, 
continually  more  and  more  concave  downwards,  and  will 
reach  the  earth,  not  at  A,  but  at  a  certain  point  a,  nearer  to 


BEFRA.CTION.  29 

S.  This  ray,  consequently,  will  not  reach  the  spectators 
eye.  The  ray  by  which  he  will  see  the  star  is,  therefore,  not 
S  d  A,  but  another  ray  which,  had  there  been  no  atmosphere, 
would  have  struck  the  earth  at  K,  a  point  behind  the  spec- 
tator; but  which,  being  bent  by  the  air  into  the  curve 
S  D  C  B  A,  actually  strikes  on  A.  Now,  it  is  a  law  of  op- 
tics, that  an  object  is  seen  in  the  direction  which  the  visual 
ray  has  at  the  instant  of  arriving  at  the  eye,  without  regard  to 
what  may  have  been  otherwise  its  course  between  the  object 
and  the  eye.  Hence  the  star  S  will  be  seen,  not  in  the  di- 
rection A  S,  but  in  that  of  A  s,  a  tangent  to  the  curve 
S  D  C  B  A,  at  A.  But  because  the  curve  described  by  the 
refracted  ray  is  concave  downwards,  the  tangent  A  s  will  lie 
above  A  S,  the  unrefracted  ray :  consequently  the  object  S 
will  appear  more  elevated  above  the  horizon  A  H,  when  seen 
through  the  refracting  atmosphere,  than  it  would  appear 
were  there  no  such  atmosphere.  Since,  however,  the  dis- 
position of  the  strata  is  the  same  in  all  directions  around  A, 
the  visual  ray  will  not  be  made  to  deviate  laterally,  but  will 
remain  constantly  in  the  same  vertical  plane,  S  A  C,  passing 
through  the  eye,  the  object,  and  the  earth's  centre. 

(40.)  The  effect  of  the  air's  refraction,  then,  is  to  raise  all 
the  heavenly  bodies  higher  above  the  horizon  in  appearance 
than  they  are  in  reality.  Any  such  body,  situated  actually  in 
the  true  horizon,  will  appear  above  it,  or  will  have  some  certain 
apparent  altitude  (as  it  is  called).  Nay,  even  some  of  those 
actually  below  the  horizon,  and  which  would  therefore  be  in- 
visible but  for  the  effect  of  refraction,  are,  by  that  effect, 
raised  above  it  and  brought  into  sight.  Thus,  the  sun,  when 
situated  at  P  below  the  true  horizon,  A  H,  of  the  spectator, 
becomes  visible  to  him,  as  if  it  stood  at  p,  by  the  refracted 
ray  P  q  r  t  A,  to  which  A  p  is  a  tangent. 

(41.)  The  exact  estimation  of  the  amount  of  atmospheric 
refraction,  or  the  strict  determination  of  the  angle  S  A  *,  by 
which  a  celestial  object  at  any  assigned  altitude,  H  A  S,  is 
raised  in  appearance  above  its  true  place,  is,  unfortunately,  a 
very  difficult  subject  of  physical  inquiry,  and  one  on  which 
geometers  (from  whom  alone  we  can  look  for  any  information 


80  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

on  the  subject)  are  not  yet  entirely  agreed.  The  difficulty 
arises  from  this,  that  the  density  of  any  stratum  of  air  (on 
which  its  refracting  power  depends)  is  affected  not  merely  by 
the  superincumbent  pressure,  but  also  by  its  temperature  or 
degree  of  heat.  Now,  although  we  know  that  as  we  recede 
from  the  earth's  surface  the  temperature  of  the  air  is  constantly 
diminishing,  yet  the  law,  or  amount  of  this  diminution  at 
different  heights,  is  not  yet  fully  ascertained.  Moreover,  the 
refracting  power  of  air  is  perceptibly  affected  by  its  moisture ; 
and  this,  too,  is  not  the  same  in  every  part  of  an  aerial 
column ;  neither  are  we  acquainted  with  the  laws  of  its  distri- 
bution. The  consequence  of  our  ignorance  on  these  points  is 
to  introduce  a  corresponding  degree  of  uncertainty  into  the 
determination  of  the  amount  of  refraction,  which  affects,  to  a 
certain  appretiable  extent,  our  knowledge  of  several  of  the 
most  important  data  of  astronomy.  The  uncertainty  thus 
induced  is,  however,  confined  within  such  very  narrow  limits 
as  to  be  no  cause  of  embarrassment,  except  in  the  most 
delicate  inquiries,  and  to  call  for  no  further  allusion  in  a 
treatise  like  the  present. 

(42.)  A  "  Table  of  Refractions,"  as  it  is  called,  or  a  state- 
ment of  the  amount  of  apparent  displacement  arising  from 
this  cause,  at  all  altitudes,  or  in  every  situation  of  a  heavenly 
body,  from  the  horizon  to  the  zenith  *,  (or  point  of  the  sky 
vertically  above  the  spectator),  and  under  all  the  circumstances 
in  which  astronomical  observations  are  usually  performed 
which  may  influence  the  result,  is  one  of  the  most  important 
and  indispensable  of  all  astronomical  tables,  since  it  is  only 
by  the  use  of  such  a  table  we  are  enabled  to  get  rid  of  an 
illusion  which  must  otherwise  pervert  all  our  notions  re- 
specting the  celestial  motions.  Such  have  been,  accordingly, 
constructed  with  great  care,  and  are  to  be  found  in  every 
collection  of  astronomical  tables.  Our  design,  in  the  present 
treatise,  will  not  admit  of  the  introduction  of  tables ;  and  we 
must,  therefore,  content  ourselves  here,  and  in  similar  cases, 
with   referring  the  reader  to  works   especially  destined   to 

*  From  an  Arabic  word  of  this  signification.  Sets  this  term  technically  defined 
in  Chap.  II. 


REFRACTION.  31 

furnish  these  useful  aids  to  calculation.  It  is,  however,  de- 
airable  that  he  should  bear  in  mind  the  following  general 
notions  of  its  amount,  and  law  of  variations. 

(43.)  1st.  In  the  zenith  there  is  no  refraction.  A  celestial 
object,  situated  vertically  over  head,  is  seen  in  its  true  direction, 
as  if  there  were  no  atmosphere,  at  least  if  the  air  be  tranquil. 

2dly.  In  descending  from  the  zenith  to  the  horizon,  the 
refraction  continually  increases.  Objects  near  the  horizon 
appear  more  elevated  by  it  above  their  true  directions  than 
those  at  a  high  altitude. 

3dly.  The  rate  of  its  increase  is  nearly  in  proportion  to  the 
tangent  of  the  apparent  angular  distance  of  the  object  from 
the  zenith.  But  this  rule,  which  is  not  far  from  the  truth,  at 
moderate  zenith  distances,  ceases  to  give  correct  results  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  horizon,  where  the  law  becomes  much  more 
complicated  in  its  expression. 

4thly.  The  average  amount  of  refraction,  for  an  object  half- 
way between  the  zenith  and  horizon,  or  at  an  apparent  alti- 
tude of  45°,  is  about  V  (more  exactly  57"),  a  quantity  hardly 
sensible  to  the  naked  eye ;  but  at  the  visible  horizon  it 
amounts  to  no  less  a  quantity  than  33',  which  is  rather  more 
than  the  greatest  apparent  diameter  of  either  the  sun  or  the 
moon.  Hence  it  follows,  that  when  we  see  the  lower  edge  of 
the  sun  or  moon  just  apparently  resting  on  the  horizon,  its 
whole  disk  is  in  reality  below  it,  and  would  be  entirely  out  of 
sight  and  concealed  by  the  convexity  of  the  earth,  but  for  the 
bending  round  it,  which  the  rays  of  light  have  undergone  in 
their  passage  through  the  air,  as  alluded  to  in  art.  40. 

5thly.  That  when  the  barometer  is  higher  than  its  average 
or  mean  state,  the  amount  of  refraction  is  greater  than  its 
mean  amount ;  when  lower,  less  :  and, 

6thly.  That  for  one  and  the  same  reading  of  the  barometer 
the  refraction  is  greater,  the  colder  the  air.  The  variations, 
owing  to  these  two  causes,  from  its  mean  amount  (at  temp. 
55°,  pressure  30  inches),  are  about  one  420th  part  of  that 
amount  for  each  degree  of  the  thermometer  of  Fahrenheit, 
and  one  300th  for  each  tenth  of  an  inch  in  the  height  of  the 
barometer. 


32  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(44.)  It  follows  from  this,  that  one  obvious  effect  of  re- 
fraction must  be  to  shorten  the  duration  of  night  and  dark- 
ness, by  actually  prolonging  the  stay  of  the  sun  and  moon 
above  the  horizon.  But  even  after  they  are  set,  the  influence 
of  the  atmosphere  still  continues  to  send  us  a  portion  of  their 
light;  not,  indeed,  by  direct  transmission,  but  by  reflection 
upon  the  vapours  and  minute  solid  particles  which  float  in  it, 
and,  perhaps,  also  on  the  actual  material  atoms  of  the  air 
itself.  To  understand  how  this  takes  place,  we  must  recollect, 
that  it  is  not  only  by  the  direct  light  of  a  luminous  object 
that  we  see,  but  that  whatever  portion  of  its  light  which 
would  not  otherwise  reach  our  eyes  is  intercepted  in  its 
course,  and  thrown  back,  or  laterally,  upon  us,  becomes  to 
us  a  means  of  illumination.  Such  reflective  obstacles  alwavs 
exist  floating  in  the  air.  The  whole  course  of  a  sun-beam 
penetrating  through  the  chink  of  a  window-shutter  into  a 
dark  room  is  visible  as  a  bright  line  in  the  air:  and  even  if  it 
be  stifled,  or  let  out  through  an  opposite  crevice,  the  light 
scattered  through  the  apartment  from  this  source  is  sufficient 
to  prevent  entire  darkness  in  the  room.  The  luminous  lines 
occasionally  seen  in  the  air,  in  a  sky  full  of  partially  broken 
clouds,  which  the  vulgar  term  "  the  sun  drawing  water,"  are 
similarly  caused.  They  are  sunbeams,  through  apertures  in 
clouds,  partially  intercepted  and  reflected  on  the  dust  and 
vapours  of  the  air  below.  Thus  it  is  with  those  solar  rays 
which,  after  the  sun  is  itself  concealed  by  the  convexity  of 
the  earth,  continue  to  traverse  the  higher  regions  of  the 
atmosphere  above  our  heads,  and  pass  through  and  out  of  it, 
without  directly  striking  on  the  earth  at  all.  Some  portion 
of  them  is  intercepted  and  reflected  by  the  floating  particles 
above  mentioned,  and  thrown  back,  or  laterally,  so  as  to  reach 
us,  and  afford  us  that  secondary  illumination,  which  is  twi- 
light. The  course  of  such  rays  will  be  immediately  under- 
stood from  the  annexed  figure,  in  which  A  B  C  D  is  the 
earth  ;  A  a  point  on  its  surface,  where  the  sun  S  is  in  the 
act  of  petting :  its  last  lower  ray  SAM  just  grazing  the 
surface  at  A,  while  its  superior  rays  S  N,  SO,  traverse  the 
atmosphere   above  A  without   striking   the  earth,  leaving  it 


TWILIOnT. 


33 


finally  at  the  points  P  Q  K,  after  being  more  or  less  bent  in 
passing  through  it,  the  lower  most,  the  higher  less,  and  that 
which,  like  S  E,  O,  merely  grazes  the  exterior  limit  of  the 
atmosphere,  not  at  all.  Let  us  consider  several  points, 
A,  B,  C,  D,  each  more  remote  than  the  last  from  A,  and  each 
more  deeply  involved  in  the  earth's  shadow,  which  occupies 
the  whole  space  from  A  beneath  the  line  A  M.  Now,  A  just 
receives  the  sun's  last  direct  ray,   and,  besides,  is  illuminated 


by  the  whoie  reflective  atmosphere  PQET.  It  therefore 
receives  twilight  from  the  whole  sky.  The  point  B,  to  which 
the  sun  has  set,  receives  no  direct  solar  light,  nor  any,  direct 
or  reflected,  from  all  that  part  of  its  visible  atmosphere  which 
is  below  A  P  M ;  but  from  the  lenticular  portion  PRi, 
which  is  traversed  by  the  sun's  rays,  and  which  lies  above 
the  visible  horizon  B  E,  of  B,  it  receives  a  twilight,  which  is 
strongest  at  It,  the  point  immediately  below  which  the  sun 
is,  and  fades  away  gradually  towards  P,  as  the  luminous 
part  of  the  atmosphere  thins  off.  At  C,  only  the  last  or 
thinnest  portion,  P  Q  z  of  the  lenticular  segment,  thus  illu- 
minated, lies  above  the  horizon,  C  Q,  of  that  place ;  here, 
then,  the  twilight  is  feeble,  and  confined  to  a  small  space  in 
and  near  the  horizon,  which  the  sun  has  quitted,  while  at  D 
the  twilight  has  ceased  altogether. 

(45.)  When  the  sun  is  above  the  horizon,  it  illuminates  the 
atmosphere  and  clouds,  and  these  again  disperse  and  scatter  a 
portion  of  its  light  in  all  directions,  so  as  to  send  some  of  itd 


34  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

rays  to  every  exposed  point,  from  every  point  of  the  sky. 
The  generally  diffused  light,  therefore,  which  we  enjoy  in 
the  daytime,  is  a  phenomenon  originating  in  the  very  same 
causes  as  the  twilight.  Were  it  not  for  the  reflective  and 
scattering  power  of  the  atmosphere,  no  objects  would  be 
visible  to  us  out  of  direct  sunshine  ;  every  shadow  of  a  passing 
cloud  would  be  pitchy  darkness  ;  the  stars  would  be  visible 
all  day,  and  every  apartment,  into  which  the  sun  had  not 
direct  admission,  would  be  involved  in  nocturnal  obscurity. 
This  scattering  action  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  solar  light,  it 
should  be  observed,  is  increased  by  the  irregularity  of  tem- 
perature caused  by  the  same  luminary  in  its  different  parts, 
which,  during  the  daytime,  throws  it  into  a  constant  state  of 
undulation,  and,  by  thus  bringing  together  masses  of  air  of 
very  unequal  temperatures,  produces  partial  reflections  and 
refractions  at  their  common  boundaries,  by  which  some  por- 
tion of  the  light  is  turned  aside  from  the  direct  course,  and 
diverted  to  the  purposes  of  general  illumination.  A  secon- 
dary twilight,  however,  may  be  traced  even  beyond  the  point 
D,  consequent  on  a  re-reflection  of  the  rays  dispersed  through 
the  atmosphere  in  the  primary  one.  The  phenomenon  seen 
in  the  clear  atmosphere  of  the  Nubian  desert,  described  by 
travellers  under  the  name  of  the  "  After- glow,"  would  seem 
to  arise  from  this  cause. 

(46.)  From  the  explanation  we  have  given,  in  arts.  39  and 
40,  of  the  nature  of  atmospheric  refraction,  and  the  mode  in 
which  it  is  produced  in  the  progress  of  a  ray  of  light  through 
successive  strata,  or  layers,  of  the  atmosphere,  it  will  be 
evident,  that  whenever  a  ray  passes  obliquely  from  a  higher 
level  to  a  lower  one,  or  vice  versa,  its  course  is  not  rectilinear, 
but  concave  downwards ;  and  of  course  any  object  seen  by 
means  of  such  a  ray,  must  appear  deviated  from  its  true  place, 
whether  that  object  be,  like  the  celestial  bodies,  entirely  be- 
yond the  atmosphere,  or,  like  the  summits  of  mountains  seen 
from  the  plains,  or  other  terrestrial  stations  at  different 
levels  seen  from  each  other,  immersed  in  it.  Every  difference 
of  level,  accompanied,  as  it  must  be,  with  a  difference  of  den- 
sity in  the  aerial  strata,  must  also  have,  corresponding  to  it, 
a  certain  amount  of  refraction  ;  less,  indeed,  than  what  would 


REFRACTION.  35 

be  produced  by  the  whole  atmosphere,  but  still  often  of  very 
appretiable,  and  even  considerable,  amount.  This  refraction 
between  terrestrial  stations  is  termed  terrestrial  refraction,  to 
distinguish  it  from  that  total  effect  which  is  only  produced  on 
celestial  objects,  or  such  as  are  beyond  the  atmosphere,  and 
which  is  called  celestial  or  astronomical  refraction. 

(47.)  Another  effect  of  refraction  is  to  distort  the  visible 
forms  and  proportions  of  objects  seen  near  the  horizon.  The 
sun,  for  instance,  which  at  a  considerable  altitude  always  ap- 
pears round,  assumes,  as  it  approaches  the  horizon,  a  flattened 
or  oval  outline ;  its  horizontal  diameter  being  visibly  greater 
than  that  in  a  vertical  direction.  When  very  near  the  hori- 
zon, this  flattening  is  evidently  more  considerable  on  the 
lower  side  than  on  the  upper;  so  that  the  apparent  form  is 
neither  circular  nor  elliptic,  but  a  species  of  oval,  which  de- 
viates more  from  a  circle  below  than  above.  This  singular 
effect,  which  any  one  may  notice  in  a  fine  sunset,  arises  from 
the  rapid  rate  at  which  the  refraction  increases  in  approach- 
ing the  horizon.  Were  every  visible  point  in  the  sun's  cir- 
cumference equally  raised  by  refraction,  it  would  still  appear 
circular,  though  displaced  ;  but  the  lower  portions  being  more 
raised  than  the  upper,  the  vertical  diameter  is  thereby  short- 
ened, while  the  two  extremities  of  its  horizontal  diameter  are 
equally  raised,  and  in  parallel  directions,  so  that  its  apparent 
length  remains  the  same.  The  dilated  size  ( generally)  of  the 
sun  or  moon,  when  seen  near  the  horizon,  beyond  what  they 
appear  to  have  when  high  up  in  the  sky,  has  nothing  to  do 
with  refraction.  It  is  an  illusion  of  the  judgment,  arising 
from  the  terrestrial  objects  interposed,  or  placed  in  close  com- 
parison with  them.  In  that  situation  we  view  and  judge  of 
them  as  we  do  of  terrestrial  objects  —  in  detail,  and  with  an 
acquired  habit  of  attention  to  parts.  Aloft  we  have  no  asso- 
ciations to  guide  us,  and  their  insulation  in  the  expanse  of 
sky  leads  us  rather  to  undervalue  than  to  over-rate  their  ap- 
parent magnitudes.  Actual  measurement  with  Jr  proper  in- 
strument corrects  our  error,  without,  however,  dispeljing  our 
illusion.  By  this  we  learn,  that  the  sun,  when  just  on  the 
horizon,  subtends  at  our  eyes  almost  exactly  the  same,  and  the 
moon  a  materially  less  angle,  than  when  seen  at  a  great  alti- 

i>  2 


36  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

tude  in  the  sky,  owing  to  its  greater  distance  from  us  in  the 
former  situation  as  compared  with  the  latter,  as  will  be  ex- 
plained farther  on. 

(48.)  After  what  has  been  said  of  the  small  extent  of  tho 
atmosphere  in  comparison  with  the  mass  of  the  earth,  we  shall 
have  little  hesitation  in  admitting  those  luminaries  which 
people  and  adorn  the  sky,  and  which,  while  they  obviously 
form  no  part  of  the  earth,  and  receive  no  support  from  it,  are 
yet  not  borne  along  at  random  like  clouds  upon  the  air,  nor 
drifted  by  the  winds,  to  be  external  to  our  atmosphere.  As 
such  we  have  considered  them  while  speaking  of  their  refrac- 
tions —  as  existing  in  the  immensity  of  space  beyond,  and 
situated,  perhaps,  for  any  thing  we  can  perceive  to  the  con- 
trary, at  enormous  distances  from  us  and  from  each  other. 

(49.)  Could  a  spectator  exist  unsustained  by  the  earth,  or 
any  solid  support,  he  would  see  around  him  at  one  view  the 
whole  contents  of  space  —  the  visible  constituents  of  the 
universe  :  and,  in  the  absence  of  any  means  of  judging 
of  their  distances  from  him,  would  refer  them,  in  the  direc- 
tions in  which  they  were  seen  from  his  station,  to  the  con- 
cave surface  of  an  imaginary  sphere,  having  his  eye  for 
a  centre,  and  its  surface  at  some  vast  indeterminate  distance. 
Perhaps  he  might  judge  those  which  appear  to  him  large  and 
bright,  to  be  nearer  to  him  than  the  smaller  and  less  brilliant ; 
but,  independent  of  other  means  of  judging,  he  would  have 
no  warrant  for  this  opinion,  any  more  than  for  the  idea  that 
all  were  equidistant  from  him,  and  really  arranged  on  such  a 
spherical  surface.  Nevertheless,  there  would  be  no  impro- 
priety in  his  referring  their  places,  geometrically  speaking,  to 
those  points  of  such  a  purely  imaginary  sphere,  which  their 
respective  visual  rays  intersect;  and  there  would  be  much 
advantage  in  so  doing,  as  by  that  means  their  appearance  and 
relative  situation  could  be  accurately  measured,  recorded,  and 
mapped  down.  The  objects  in  a  landscape  are  at  every 
variety  of  distance  from  the  eye,  yet  we  lay  them  all  down 
in  a  picture  on  one  plane,  and  at  one  distance,  in  their  actual 
apparent  proportions,  and  the  likeness  is  not  taxed  with  in- 
correctness, though  a  man  in  the  foreground  should  be  re- 
presented larger  than  a  mountain  in  the  distance.     So  it  is 


CITAXGE    OF    HORIZON    IN    TRAVELLING.  37 

to  a  spectator  of  the  heavenly  bodies  pictured,  projected,  or 
mapped  down  on  that  imaginary  sphere  we  call  the  sky  or 
heaven.  Thus,  we  may  easily  conceive  that  the  moon,  which 
appears  to  us  as  large  as  the  sun,  though  less  bright,  mav 
owe  that  apparent  equality  to  its  greater  proximity,  and 
may  be  really  much  less ;  while  both  the  moon  and  sun  may 
only  appear  larger  and  brighter  than  the  stars,  on  account  of 
the  remoteness  of  the  latter. 

(50.)  A  spectator  on  the  earth's  surface  is  prevented,  by 
the  great  mass  on  which  he  stands,  from  seeing  into  all  that 
portion  of  space  which  is  below  him,  or  to  see  which  he  must 
look  in  any  degree  downwards.  It  is  true  that,  if  his  place 
of  observation  be  at  a  great  elevation,  the  dip  of  the  horizon 
will  bring  within  the  scope  of  vision  a  little  more  than  a 
hemisphere,  and  refraction,  wherever  he  may  be  situated, 
will  enable  him  to  look,  as  it  were,  a  little  round  the  corner ; 
but  the  zone  thus  added  to  his  visual  range  can  hardly  ever, 
unless  in  very  extraordinary  circumstances,  exceed  a  couple 
of  degrees  in  breadth,  and  is  always  ill  seen  on  account  of  the 
vapours  near  the  horizon.  Unless,  then,  by  a  change  of  his 
geographical  situation,  he  should  shift  his  horizon  (which  is 
always  a  plane  passing  through  his  eye,  and  touching  the 
spherical  convexity  of  the  earth) ;  or  unless,  by  some  move- 
ments proper  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  they  should  of  them- 
selves come  above  his  horizon ;  or,  lastly,  unless,  by  some 
rotation  of  the  earth  itself  on  its  centre,  the  point  of  its  sur- 
face which  he  occupies  should  be  carried  round,  and  pre- 
sented towards  a  different  region  of  space ;  he  would  never 
obtain  a  sight  of  almost  one  half  the  objects  external  to  our 
atmosphere.  But  if  any  of  these  cases  be  supposed,  more, 
or  all,  may  come  into  view  according  to  the  circumstances. 

(51.)  A  traveller,  for  example,  shifting  his  locality  on  our 
globe,  will  obtain  a  view  of  celestial  objects  invisible  from 
his  original  station,  in  a  way  which  may  be  not  inaptly  illus- 
strated  by  comparing  him  to  a  person  standing  in  a  park 
close  to  a  large  tree.  The  massive  obstacle  presented  by  it» 
trunk  cuts  off  his  view  of  all  those  parts  of  the  landscape 
which  it  occupies  as  an  object;  but  by  walking  round  it  a 


38  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

complete  successive  view  of  the  whole  panorama  may  be 
obtained.  Just  in  the  same  uay,  if  we  set  off  from  any 
station,  as  London,  and  travel  southwards,  we  shall  not  fail 
to  notice  that  many  celestial  objects  which  are  never  seen 
from  London  come  successively  into  view,  as  if  rising  up 
above  the  horizon,  night  after  night,  from  the  south,  although 
it  is  in  reality  our  horizon,  which,  travelling  with  us  south- 
wards round  the  sphere,  sinks  in  succession  beneath  them. 
The  novelty  and   splendour  of  fresh  constellations  thus  gra 


* 
* 


dually  brought  into  view  in  the  clear  calm  nights  of  tropical 
climates,  in  long  voyages  to  the  south,  is  dwelt  upon  by  all 
Avho  have  enjoyed  this  spectacle,  and  never  fails  to  impress 
itself  on  the  recollection  among  the  most  delightful  and  in- 
teresting of  the  associations  connected  with  extensive  travel. 
A  glance  at  the  accompanying  figure,  exhibiting  three  suc- 
cessive stations  of  a  traveller,  A,  B,  C,  with  the  horizon  cor- 
responding to  each,  will  place  this  process  in  clearer  evidence 
than  any  description. 

(52.)  Again:  suppose  the  earth  itself  to  have  a  motion  of 
rotation  on  its  centre.  It  is  evident  that  a  spectator  at  rest 
(as  it  appears  to  him)  on  any  part  of  it  will,  unperceived  by 
himself,  be  carried  round  with  it :  unperceived,  we  say, 
because  his  horizon  will  constantly  contain,  and  be  limited 
by,  the  same  terrestrial  objects.  He  will  have  the  same 
landscape  constantly  before  his  eyes,  in  which  all  the  familiar 


DIURNAL    ROTATION    OF    THE    EARTH.  39 

objects  in  it,  which  serve  him  for  landmarks  and  directions, 
retain,  with  respect  to  himself  or  to  each  other,  the  same 
invariable  situations.  The  perfect  smoothness  and  equality 
of  the  motion  of  so  vast  a  mass,  in  which  every  object  he  sees 
around  him  participates  alike,  will  (art.  15.)  prevent  his  enter- 
taining any  suspicion  of  his  actual  change  of  place.  Yet, 
with  respect  to  external  objects,  —  that  is  to  say,  all  celestial 
ones  which  do  not  participate  in  the  supposed  rotation  of  the 
earth,  —  his  horizon  will  have  been  all  the  while  shifting  in 
its  relation  to  them,  precisely  as  in  the  case  of  our  traveller 
in  the  foregoing  article.  Recurring  to  the  figure  of  that 
article,  it  is  evidently  the  same  thing,  so  far  as  their  visibility 
is  concerned,  whether  he  has  been  carried  by  the  earth's 
rotation  successively  into  the  situations  A,  B,  C ;  or  whether, 
the  earth  remaining  at  rest,  he  has  transferred  himself  per- 
sonally along  its  surface  to  those  stations.  Our  spectator  in 
the  park  will  obtain  precisely  the  same  view  of  the  landscape, 
whether  he  walk  round  the  tree,  or  whether  we  suppose  it 
sawed  off,  and  made  to  turn  on  an  upright  pivot,  while  he 
stands  on  a  projecting  step  attached  to  it,  and  allows  himself 
to  be  carried  round  by  its  motion.  The  only  difference  will 
be  in  his  view  of  the  tree  itself,  of  which,  in  the  former  case, 
he  will  see  every  part,  but,  in  the  latter,  only  that  portion  of 
it  which  remains  constantly  opposite  to  him,  and  immediately 
under  his  eye. 

(53.)  By  such  a  rotation  of  the  earth,  then,  as  we  have 
supposed,  the  horizon  of  a  stationary  spectator  will  be  con- 
stantly depressing  itself  below  those  objects  which  lie  in  that 
region  of  space  towards  which  the  rotation  is  carrying  him, 
And  elevating  itself  above  those  in  the  opposite  quarter,  ad- 
mitting into  view  the  former,  and  successively  hiding  the 
latter.  As  the  horizon  of  every  such  spectator,  however, 
appears  to  him  motionless,  all  such  changes  will  be  referred 
by  him  to  a  motion  in  the  objects  themselves  so  successively 
disclosed  and  concealed.  In  place  of  his  horizon  approaching 
the  stars,  therefore,  he  will  judge  the  stars  to  approach  his 
horizon ;  and  when  it  passes  over  and  hides  any  of  them,  he 
will  consider  them  as  having  sunk  below  it,  or  set;  while 


•iO  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

those  it  has  just  disclosed,  and  from  which  it  is  receding,  will 
eeem  to  be  rising  above  it 

(54.)  If  we  suppose  this  rotation  of  the  earth  to  continue 
in  one  and  the  same  direction,  —  that  is  to  say,  to  be  per- 
formed round  one  and  the  same  axis,  till  it  has  completed  an 
entire  revolution,  and  come  back  to  the  position  from  which 
it  set  out  when  the  spectator  began  his  observations,  —  it  is 
manifest  that  every  thing  will  then  be  in  precisely  the  same 
relative  position  as  at  the  outset:  all  the  heavenly  bodies  will 
appear  to  occupy  the  same  places  in  the  concave  of  the  sky 
which  they  did  at  that  instant,  except  such  as  may  have 
actually  moved  in  the  interim ;  and  if  the  rotation  still  con- 
tinue, the  same  phenomena  of  their  successive  rising  and 
setting,  and  return  to  the  same  places,  will  continue  to  be 
repeated  in  the  same  order,  and  (if  the  velocity  of  rotation  be 
uniform)  in  equal  intervals  of  time,  ad  infinitum. 

(55.)  Now,  in  this  we  have  a  lively  picture  of  that  grand 
phenomenon,  the  most  important  beyond  all  comparison  which 
nature  presents,  the  daily  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  and 
stars,  their  progress  through  the  vault  of  the  heavens,  and 
their  return  to  the  same  apparent  places  at  the  same  hours  of 
the  day  and  night.  The  accomplishment  of  this  restoration 
in  the  regular  interval  of  twenty-four  hours  is  the  first  in- 
stance we  encounter  of  that  great  law  of  periodicity*,  which, 
as  we  shall  see,  pervades  all  astronomy ;  by  which  expression 
we  understand  the  continual  reproduction  of  the  same  pheno- 
mena, in  the  same  order,  at  equal  intervals  of  time. 

{56.)  A  free  rotation  of  the  earth  round  its  centre,  if  it 
exist  and  be  performed  in  consonance  with  the  same  mecha- 
nical laws  which  obtain  in  the  motions  of  masses  of  matter 
under  our  immediate  control,  and  within  our  ordinary  ex- 
perience, must  be  such  as  to  satisfy  two  essential  conditions. 
It  must  be  invariable  in  its  direction  with  respect  to  the  sphere 
itself,  and  uniform  in  its  velocity.  The  rotation  must  be 
performed  round  an  axis  or  diameter  of  the  sphere,  whose 
poles  or  extremities,  where  it  meets  the  surface,  correspond 

*  Tltpiotios,  a  going  round,  a  circulation  or  revolution. 


APPARENT  DIURNAL  MOTION.  4  1 

si  ways  to  the  same  points  on  the  sphere.  Modes  of  rotation 
of  a  solid  body  under  the  influence  of  external  agency  are 
conceivable,  in  which  the  poles  of  the  imaginary  line  or  axis 
about  which  it  is  at  any  moment  revolving  shall  hold  no  fixed 
places  on  the  surface,  but  shift  upon  it  every  moment.  Such 
changes,  however,  are  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  a  rotation 
of  a  body  of  regular  figure  about  its  axis  of  symmetry,  per- 
formed in  free  space,  and  without  resistance  or  obstruction 
from  any  surrounding  medium,  or  disturbing  influences.  The 
complete  absence  of  such  obstructions  draws  with  it,  of  ne- 
cessity, the  strict  fulfilment  of  the  two  conditions  above 
mentioned. 

(57.)  Now,  these  conditions  are  in  perfect  accordance  with 
what  we  observe,  and  what  recorded  observation  teaches  us, 
in  respect  of  the  diurnal  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  We 
have  no  reason  to  believe,  from  history,  that  any  sensible 
change  has  taken  place  since  the  earliest  ages  in  the  interval 
of  time  elapsing  between  two  successive  returns  of  the  same 
star  to  the  same  point  of  the  sky ;  or,  rather,  it  is  demon- 
strable from  astronomical  records  that  no  such  change  has 
taken  place.  And  with  respect  to  the  other  condition,  — 
the  permanence  of  the  axis  of  rotation,  —  the  appearances 
which  any  alteration  in  that  respect  must  produce,  would  be 
marked,  as  we  shall  presently  show,  by  a  corresponding 
change  of  a  very  obvious  kind  in  the  apparent  motions  of  the 
stars;  which,  again,  history  decidedly  declares  them  not  to 
have  undergone. 

(58.)  But,  before  we  proceed  to  examine  more  in  detail 
how  the  hypothesis  of  the  rotation  of  the  earth  about  an  axis 
accords  with  the  phenomena  which  the  diurnal  motion  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  offers  to  our  notice,  i*  will  be  proper  to  de- 
scribe, with  precision,  in  what  that  diurnal  motion  consists, 
and  how  far  it  is  participated  in  by  them  all ;  or  whether  any 
of  them  form  exceptions,  wholly  or  partially,  to  the  common 
analogy  of  the  rest.  We  will,  therefore,  suppose  the  reader 
to  station  himself,  on  a  clear  evening,  just  after  sunset,  when 
the  first  stars  begin  to  appear,  in  some  open  situation  whence 
a  good  general  view  of  the  heavens  can  be  obtained.     He 


42  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

will  then  perceive,  above  and  around  him,  as  it  were,  a  vast 
concave  hemispherical  vault,  beset  with  stars  of  various  mag- 
nitudes, of  which  the  brightest  only  will  first  catch  his  atten- 
tion in  the  twilight ;  and  more  and  more  will  appear  as  the 
darkness  increases,  till  the  whole  sky  is  over- spangled  with 
them.  When  he  has  awhile  admired  the  calm  magnificence 
of  this  glorious  spectacle,  the  theme  of  so  much  song,  and 
of  so  much  thought,  —  a  spectacle  which  no  one  can  view 
without  emotion,  and  without  a  longing  desire  to  know  some- 
thing of  its  nature  and  purport,  —  let  him  fix  his  attention 
more  particularly  on  a  few  of  the  most  brilliant  stars,  such 
as  he  cannot  fail  to  recognize  again  without  mistake  after 
looking  away  from  them  for  some  time,  and  let  him  refer 
their  apparent  situations  to  some  surrounding  objects,  as 
buildings,  trees,  &c,  selecting  purposely  such  as  are  in  dif- 
ferent quarters  of  his  horizon.  On  comparing  them  again 
with  their  respective  points  of  reference,  after  a  moderate 
interval,  as  the  night  advances,  he  will  not  fail  to  perceive 
that  they  have  changed  their  places,  and  advanced,  as  by  a 
general  movement,  in  a  westward  direction ;  those  towards 
the  eastern  quarter  appearing  to  rise  or  recede  from  the 
horizon,  while  those  which  lie  towards  the  west  will  be  seen 
to  approach  it ;  and,  if  watched  long  enough,  will,  for  the 
most  part,  finally  sink  beneath  it,  and  disappear ;  while  others, 
in  the  eastern  quarter,  will  be  seen  to  rise  as  if  out  of  the 
earth,  and,  joining  in  the  general  procession,  will  take  their 
course  with  the  rest  towards  the  opposite  quarter. 

(59.)  If  he  persist  for  a  considerable  time  in  watching 
their  motions,  on  the  same  or  on  several  successive  nights,  he 
will  perceive  that  each  star  appears  to  describe,  as  far  as  its 
course  lies  above  the  horizon,  a  circle  in  the  sky ;  that  the 
circles  so  described  are  not  of  the  same  magnitude  for  all  the 
stars  ;  and  that  those  described  by  different  stars  differ  greatly 
in  respect  of  the  parts  of  them  which  lie  above  the  horizon. 
Some,  which  lie  towards  the  quarter  of  the  horizon  which  ia 
denominated  the  South  *,  only  remain  for  a  short  time  above 

*  We  suppose  our  observer  to  be  stationed  in  some  northern  latitude ;  some 
where  in  Europe,  for  example. 


APPARENT    DIURNAL   MOTION.  43 

It,  and  disappear,  after  describing  in  sight  only  the  small 
upper  segment  of  their  diurnal  circle  ;  others,  which  rise 
between  the  south  and  east,  describe  larger  segments  of  their 
circles  above  the  horizon,  remain  proportionally  longer  in 
sight,  and  set  precisely  as  far  to  the  westward  of  south  as 
they  rose  to  the  eastward ;  while  such  as  rise  exactly  in  the 
east  remain  just  twelve  hours  visible,  describe  a  semicircle, 
and  set  exactly  in  the  west.  With  those,  again,  which  rise 
between  the  east  and  north,  the  same  law  obtains ;  at  least, 
as  far  as  regards  the  time  of  their  remaining  above  the  horizon, 
and  the  proportion  of  the  visible  segment  of  their  diurnal 
circles  to  their  whole  circumferences.  Both  go  on  increasing ; 
they  remain  in  view  more  than  twelve  hours,  and  their  visible 
diurnal  arcs  are  more  than  semicircles.  But  the  magnitudes 
of  the  circles  themselves  diminish,  as  we  go  from  the  east, 
northward  ;  the  greatest  of  all  the  circles  being  described  by 
those  which  rise  exactly  in  the  east  point.  Carrying  his  eye 
farther  northwards,  he  will  notice,  at  length,  stars  which,  in 
their  diurnal  motion,  just  graze  the  horizon  at  its  north  point, 
or  only  dip  below  it  for  a  moment ;  while  others  never  reach 
it  at  all,  but  continue  always  above  it,  revolving  in  entire 
circles  round  one  point  called  the  pole,  which  appears  to 
be~the  common  centre  of  all  their  motions,  and  which  alone, 
in  the  whole  heavens,  may  be  considered  immoveable.  Not 
that  this  point  is  marked  by  any  star.  It  is  a  purely  imagi- 
nary centre;  but  there  is  near  it  one  considerably  bright 
star,  called  the  Pole  Star,  which  is  easily  recognized  by  the 
very  small  circle  it  describes ;  so  small,  indeed,  that,  without 
paying  particular  attention,  and  referring  its  position  very 
nicely  to  some  fixed  mark,  it  may  easily  be  supposed  at  rest, 
and  be,  itself,  mistaken  for  the  common  centre  about  which 
all  the  others  in  that  region  describe  their  circles ;  or  it  may 
be  known  by  its  configuration  with  a  very  splendid  and  re- 
markable constellation  or  group  of  stars,  called  by  astronomers 
the  Great  Bear. 

(60.)  He  will  further  observe,  that  the  apparent  relative 
situations  of  all  the  stars  among  one  another,  is  not  changed 
by  their  diurnal  motion.     In  whatever  parts  of  their  circles 


44  OUTLINES    OJf    aSTUONOMY. 

they  are  observed,  or  at  whatever  hour  of  the  night,  they 
form  with  each  other  the  same  identical  groups  or  configura- 
tions, to  which  the  name  of  constellations  has  been  given. 
It  is  true,  that,  in  different  parts  of  their  course,  these  groups 
stand  differently  with  respect  to  the  horizon ;  and  those 
towards  the  north,  when  in  the  course  of  their  diurnal  move- 
ment they  pass  alternately  above  and  below  that  common 
centre  of  motion  described  in  the  last  article,  become  actually 
inverted  with  respect  to  the  horizon,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  always  turn  the  same  points  towards  the  pole.  In 
short,  he  will  perceive  that  the  whole  assemblage  of  stars 
visible  at  once,  or  in  succession,  in  the  heavens,  may  be 
regarded  as  one  great  constellation,  which  seems  to  revolve 
with  a  uniform  motion,  as  if  it  formed  one  coherent  mass ;  or 
as  if  it  were  attached  to  the  internal  surface  of  a  vast  hollow 
sphere,  having  the  earth,  or  rather  the  spectator,  in  its  centre, 
and  turning  round  an  axis  inclined  to  his  horizon,  so  as  to  pass 
through  that  fixed  point  ox  pole  already  mentioned. 

(61.)  Lastly,  he  will  notice,  if  he  have  patience  to  out- 
watch  a  long  winter's  night,  commencing  at  the  earliest 
moment  when  the  stars  appear,  and  continuing  till  morning 
twilight,  that  those  stars  which  he  observed  setting  in  the 
west  have  again  risen  in  the  east,  while  those  which  were 
rising  when  he  first  began  to  notice  them  have  completed 
their  course,  and  are  now  set ;  and  that  thus  the  hemisphere, 
or  a  great  part  of  it,  which  was  then  above,  is  now  beneath 
him,  and  its  place  supplied  by  that  which  was  at  first  under 
his  feet,  which  he  will  thus  discover  to  be  no  less  copiously 
furnished  with  stars  than  the  other,  and  bespangled  with 
groups  no  less  permanent  and  distinctly  recognizable.  Thus 
he  will  learn  that  the  great  constellation  we  have  above 
spoken  of  as  revolving  round  the  pole  is  co-extensive  with  the 
whole  surface  of  the  sphere,  being  in  reality  nothing  less  than 
a  universe  of  luminaries  surrounding  the  earth  on  all  sides, 
and  brought  in  succession  before  his  view,  and  referred 
(each  luminary  according  to  its  own  visual  ray  or  direction 
from  his  eye)  to  the  imaginary  spherical  surface,  of  which 
he  himself  occupies  the  centre.     (See  art.  49.)     There  is 


APPEARANCES  RESULTING  FROM  CHANGE  OF  STATION.    45 

always,  therefore  (he  would  justly  argue),  a  star-bespangled 
canopy  over  his  head,  by  day  as  well  as  by  night,  only  that 
the  glare  of  daylight  (which  he  perceives  gradually  to  efface 
the  stars  as  the  morning  twilight  comes  on)  prevents  them 
from  being  seen.  And  such  is  really  the  case.  The  stars 
actually  continue  visible  through  telescopes  in  the  day 
time  ;  and,  in  proportion  to  the  power  of  the  instrument,  not 
only  the  largest  and  brightest  of  them,  but  even  those  of 
inferior  lustre,  such  as  scarcely  strike  the  eye  at  night  as  at 
all  conspicuous,  are  readily  found  and  followed  even  at  noon- 
day,— unless  in  that  part  of  the  sky  which  is  very  near  the 
sun, — by  those  who  possess  the  means  of  pointing  a  telescope 
accurately  to  the  proper  places.  Indeed,  from  the  bottoms 
of  deep  narrow  pits,  such  as  a  well,  or  the  shaft  of  a  mine, 
such  bright  stars  as  pass  the  zenith  may  even  be  discerned  by 
the  naked  eye ;  and  we  have  ourselves  heard  it  stated  by  a 
celebrated  optician,  that  the  earliest  circumstance  which  drew 
his  attention  to  astronomy  was  the  regular  appearance,  at  a 
certain  hour,  for  several  successive  days,  of  a  considerable 
star,  through  the  shaft  of  a  chimney.  Venus  in  our  climate, 
and  even  Jupiter  in  the  clearer  skies  of  tropical  countries, 
are  often  visible,  without  any  artificial  aid,  to  the  naked  eye 
of  one  who  knows  nearly  where  to  look  for  them.  During 
total  eclipses  of  the  sun,  the  larger  stars  also  appear  in  their 
proper  situations. 

(62.)  But  to  return  to  our  incipient  astronomer,  whom  we 
left  contemplating  the  sphere  of  the  heavens,  as  completed  in 
imagination  beneath  his  feet,  and  as  rising  up  from  thence  in 
its  diurnal  course.  Tnere  is  one  portion  or  segment  of  this 
sphere  of  which  he  will  not  thus  obtain  a  view.  As  there  is 
a  segment  towards  the  north,  adjacent  to  the  pole  above  his 
horizon,  in  which  the  stars  never  set,  so  there  is  a  corresponding 
segment,  about  which  the  smaller  circles  of  the  more  southern 
stars  are  described,  in  which  they  never  rise.  The  stars  which 
border  upon  the  extreme  circumference  of  this  segment  just 
graze  the  southern  point  of  his  horizon,  and  show  themselves 
tor  a  few  moments  above  it,  precisely  as  those  near  the  cir- 
cumference of   the   northern    segment   graze   his    northern 


i6  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

horizon,  and  dip  for  a  moment  below  it,  to  re-appcar  im- 
mediately. Every  point  in  a  spherical  surface  has,  of  course, 
another  diametrically  opposite  to  it;  and  as  the  spectator's 
horizon  divides  his  sphere  into  two  hemispheres  —  a  superior 
and  inferior  —  there  must  of  necessity  exist  a  depressed  pole 
to  the  south,  corresponding  to  the  elevated  one  to  the  north, 
and  a  portion  surrounding  it,  perpetually  beneath,  as  there  is 
another  surrounding  the  north  pole,  perpetually  above  it. 

"  Hie  vertex  nobis  semper  sublimis  ;  at  ilium 
Sub  pedibus  nox  atra  videt,  manesque  profundi." — Vikgi- 

One  pole  rides  high,  one.  plunged  beneatb  the  main, 
Seeks  the  deep  night,  and  Pluto's  dusky  reign. 

(63.)  To  get  sight  of  this  segment,  he  must  travel  south- 
wards. In  so  doing,  a  new  set  of  phenomena  come  forward. 
In  proportion  as  he  advances  to  the  south,  some  of  those  con- 
stellations which,  at  his  original  station,  barely  grazed  the 
northern  horizon,  will  be  observed  to  sink  below  it  and  set , 
at  first  remaining  hid  only  for  a  very  short  time,  but  gra- 
dually for  a  longer  part  of  the  twenty -four  hours.  They 
will  continue,  however,  to  circulate  about  the  same  point  — 
that  is,  holding  the  same  invariable  position  with  respect  to 
them  in  the  concave  of  the  heavens  among  the  stars ;  but  this 
point  itself  will  become  gradually  depressed  with  respect  to 
the  spectator's  horizon.  The  axis,  in  short,  about  which  the 
diurnal  motion  is  performed,  will  appear  to  hare  become  con- 
tinually less  and  less  inclined  to  the  horizon;  and  by  the 
same  degrees  as  the  northern  pole  is  depressed  the  southern 
will  rise,  and  constellations  surrounding  it  will  come  into 
view ;  at  first  momentarily,  but  by  degrees  for  longer  and 
longer  times  in  each  diurnal  revolution  —  realizing,  in  short, 
what,  we  have  already  stated  in  art.  51. 

(64.)  If  he  travel  continually  southwards,  he  will  at  length 
reach  a  line  on  the  earth's  surface,  called  the  equator,  at  any 
point  of  which,  indifferently,  if  he  take  up  his  station  and 
recommence  his  observations,  he  will  find  that  he  has  both 
the  centres  of  diurnal  motion  in  his  horizon,  occupying  op- 
posite points,  the  northern  Pole  having  been  depressed,  and 
the  southern  raised  ,  so  that,  in  this  geographical  position, 


APPEARANCES  RESULTING  PROM  CHANGE  OF  STATION.  47 

the  diurnal  rotation  of  the  heavens  will  appear  to  him  to  be 
performed  about  a  horizontal  axis,  every  star  describing  half 
its  diurnal  circle  above  and  half  beneath  his  horizon,  re- 
maining alternately  visible  for  twelve  hours,  and  concealed 
during  the  same  interval.  In  this  situation,  no  part  of  the 
heavens  is  concealed  from  his  successive  view.  In  a  night  of 
twelve  hours  (supposing  such  a  continuance  of  darkness  pos- 
sible at  the  equator)  the  whole  sphere  will  have  passed  in 
review  over  him  —  the  whole  hemisphere  with  which  he  began 
his  night's  observation  will  have  been  carried  down  beneath 
him,  and  the  entire  opposite  one  brought  up  from  below. 

(65.)  If  he  pass  the  equator,  and  travel  still  farther  south- 
wards, the  southern  pole  of  the  heavens  will  become  elevated 
above  his  horizon,  and  the  northern  will  sink  below  it ;  and 
the  more,  the  farther  he  advances  southwards;  and  when 
arrived  at  a  station  as  far  to  the  south  of  the  equator  as  that 
from  which  he  started  was  to  the  north,  he  will  find  the 
whole  phenomena  of  the  heavens  reversed.  The  stars  which 
at  his  original  station  described  their  whole  diurnal  circles 
above  his  horizon,  and  never  set,  now  describe  them  entirely 
below  it,  and  never  rise,  but  remain  constantly  invisible  to 
him ;  and  vice  versa,  those  stars  which  at  his  former  station 
he,  never  saw,  he  will  now  never  cease  to  see. 

(66.)  Finally,  if,  instead  of  advancing  southwards  from 
his  first  station,  he  travel  northwards,  he  will  observe  the 
northern  pole  of  the  heavens  to  become  more  elevated  above 
his  horizon,  and  the  southern  more  depressed  below  it.  In 
consequence,  his  hemisphere  will  present  a  less  variety  of 
stars,  because  a  greater  proportion  of  the  whole  surface  of 
the  heavens  remains  constantly  visible  or  constantly  in- 
visible :  the  circle  described  by  each  star,  too,  becomes  more 
nearly  parallel  to  the  horizon  ;  and,  in  short,  every  appearance 
leads  to  suppose  that  could  he  travel  far  enough  to  the  north, 
he  would  at  length  attain  a  point  vertically  under  the  north- 
ern pole  of  the  heavens,  at  which  none  of  the  stars  would 
either  rise  or  set,  but  each  would  circulate  round  the  horizon 
in  circles  parallel  to  it.  Many  endeavours  have  been  made 
to  reach  this  point,  which  is  called  the  north  pole  of  tee 


48  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

earth,  but  hitheito  without  success;  a  barrier  of  almost  in- 
surmountable difficulty  being  presented  by  the  increasing 
rigour  of  the  climate :  but  a  very  near  approach  to  it  has 
been  made ;  and  the  phenomena  of  those  regions,  though  not 
precisely  such  as  we  have  described  as  what  must  subsist  at 
the  pole  itself,  have  proved  to  be  in  exact  correspondence 
with  its  near  proximity.  A  similar  remark  applies  to  the 
south  pole  of  the  earth,  which,  however,  is  more  unap- 
proachable, or,  at  least,  has  been  less  nearly  approached,  than 
the  north. 

(67.)  The  above  is  an  account  of  the  phenomena  of  the 
diurnal  motion  of  the  stars,  as  modified  by  different  geogra- 
phical situations,  not  grounded  on  any  speculation,  but 
actually  observed  and  recorded  by  travellers  and  voyagers. 
It  is,  however,  in  complete  accordance  with  the  hypothesis 
of  a  rotation  of  the  earth  round  a  fixed  axis.  In  order  to 
show  this,  however,  it  will  be  necessary  to  premise  a  few  ob- 
servations on  parallactic  motion  in  general,  and  on  the  appear- 
ances presented  by  an  assemblage  of  remote  objects,  when 
viewed  from  different  parts  of  a  small  and  circumscribed 
station. 

—  (68.)  It  has  been  shown  (art.  16.)  that  a  spectator  in 
smooth  motion,  and  surrounded  by,  and  forming  part  of,  a 
great  system  partaking  of  the  same  motion,  is  unconscious  of 
his  own  movement,  and  transfers  it  in  idea  to  objects  external 
and  unconnected,  in  a  contrary  direction;  those  which  he 
leaves  behind  appearing  to  recede  from,  and  those  which  he 
advances  towards  to  approach,  him.  Not  only,  however, 
do  external  objects  at  rest  appear  in  motion  generally,  with 
respect  to  ourselves  when  we  are  in  motion  among  them, 
but  they  appear  to  move  one  among  the  other  —  they  shift 
their  relative  apparent  places.  Let  any  one  travelling 
rapidly  along  a  high  road  fix  his  eye  steadily  on  any  ob- 
ject, but  at  the  same  time  not  entirely  withdraw  his  atten- 
tion from  the  general  landscape,  —  he  will  see,  or  think  he 
sees,  the  whole  landscape  thrown  into  rotation,  and  moving 
round  that  object  as  a  centre ;  all  objects  between  it  and 
himself  appearing  to  move  backwards,  or  the  contrary  wtw 


PARALLACTIC    MOTION. 


49 


to  his  own  motion ;  and  all  beyond  it,  forwards,  or  in  the 
direction  in  which  he  moves :  but  let  him  withdraw  his  eye 
from  that  object,  and  fix  it  on  another,  —  a  nearer  one,  for 
instance,  —  immediately  the  appearance  of  rotation  shifts 
also,  and  the  apparent  centre  about  which  this  illusive 
circulation  is  performed  is  transferred  to  the  new  object, 
which,  for  the  moment,  appears  to  rest.  This  apparent 
change  of  situation  of  objects  with  respect  to  one  another, 
arising  from  a  motion  of  the  spectator,  is  called  a  parallactic 
motion.  To  see  the  reason  of  it  we  must  consider  that  the 
position  of  every  object  is  referred  by  us  to  the  surface  of  an 
imaginary  sphere  of  an  indefinite  radius,  having  our  eye  for 
its  centre ;  and,  as  we  advance  in  any  direction,  A  B,  carry- 


ing this  imaginary  sphere  along  with  us,  the  visual  rays  A  P, 
AQ,  by  which  objects  are  referred  to  its  surface  (at  c,  for 
instance),  shift  their  positions  with  respect  to  the  line  in  which 
we  move,  A  B,  which  serves  as  an  axis  or  line  of  reference, 
and  assume  new  positions,  B  P  p,  B  Q  q,  revolving  round 
their  respective  objects  as  centres.  Their  intersections,  there- 
fore, p,  q,  with  our  visual  sphere,  will  appear  to  recede  on  its 
surface,  but  with  different  degrees  of  angular  velocity  in  pro- 
portion to  their  proximity;  the  same  distance  of  advance 
A  B  subtending  a  greater  angle,  A  P  B  =  c  P  p,  at  the  near 
object  P  than  at  the  remote  one  Q. 

(69.)  A  consequence  of  the  familiar  appearance  we  have 
adduced  in  illustration  of  these  principles  is  worth  noticing, 
as  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  it  hereafter.  We  ob- 
serve that  every  object  nearer  to  us  than  that  on  which  our 
eye  is  fixed  appears  to  recede,  and  those  farther  from  us  to 
advance  in  relation  to  one  another.  If  then  we  did  not  know, 
or  could  not  judge  by  any  other  appearances,  which  of  two 
objects  were  nearer  to  us,  this  apparent  advance  or  recess  of 


50  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

one  of  diem,  when  the  eye  is  kept  steadily  fixed  on  the  other, 
would  furnish  a  criterion.  In  a  dark  night,  for  instance, 
when  all  intermediate  objects  are  unseen,  the  apparent  rela- 
tive movement  of  two  lights  which  we  are  assured  are  them- 
selves fixed,  will  decide  as  to  their  relative  proximities.  That 
which  seems  to  advance  with  us  and  gain  upon  the  other,  or 
leave  it  behind  it,  is  the  farthest  from  us. 

(70.)  The  apparent  angular  motion  of  an  object,  arising 
from  a  change  of  our  point  of  view,  is  called  in  general  paral- 
lax, and  it  is  always  expressed  by  the  angle  A  P  B  subtended 
at  the  object  P  (see  fig.  of  art.  68.)  by  a  line  joining  the  two 
points  of  view  A  B  under  consideration.  For  it  is  evident 
that  the  difference  of  angular  position  of  P,  with  respect  to 
the  invariable  direction  A  B  D,  when  viewed  from  A  and 
from  B,  is  the  difference  of  the  two  angles  D  B  P  and  DAP; 
now,  D  B  P  being  the  exterior  angle  of  the  triangle  A  B  P, 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  interior  and  opposite,  DBP  = 
DAP  +  APB,  whence  DBP- DAP  =  A  P  B. 

(71.)  It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  amount 
of  parallactic  motion  arising  from  any  given  change  of  our 
point  of  view  is,  cateris  paribus,  less,  as  the  distance  of  an 
object  viewed  is  greater ;  and  when  that  distance  is  extremely 
great  in  comparison  with  the  change  in  our  point  of  view,  the 
parallax  becomes  insensible;  or,  in  other  words,  objects  do 
not  appear  to  vary  in  situation  at  all.  It  is  on  this  principle, 
that  in  alpine  regions  visited  for  the  first  time  we  are  sur- 
prised and  confounded  at  the  little  progress  we  appear  to 
make  by  a  considerable  change  of  place.  An  hour's  walk,  for 
instance,  produces  but  a  small  parallactic  change  in  the  re- 
lative situations  of  the  vast  and  distant  masses  which  surround 
us.  Whether  we  walk  round  a  circle  of  a  hundred  yards  in 
diameter,  or  merely  turn  ourselves  round  in  its  centre,  the 
distant  panorama  presents  almost  exactly  the  same  aspect, — 
we  hardly  seem  to  have  changed  our  point  of  view. 

(72.)  Whatever  notion,  in  other  respects,  we  may  form  of 
the  stars,  it  is  quite  clear  they  must  be  immensely  distant. 
Were  it  not  so,  the  apparent  angular  interval  between  any 
two  of  them  seen  over  head   would  be  much  greater  than 


DISTANCE    OF    TI1E    STARS    IMMENSE. 


61 


when  seen  near  the  horizon,  and  the  constellations,  instead  of 
preserving  the  same  appearances  and  dimensions  during  their 
whole  diurnal  course,  would  appear  to  enlarge  as  they  rise 
higher  in  the  sky,  as  we  see  a  small  cloud  in  the  horizon 
swell  into  a  great  overshadowing  canopy  when  drifted  by  the 
wind  across  our  zenith,  or  as  may  be  see_i  in  the  annexed 
figure,  where  a  b,  A  B,  a  b,  are  three  different  positions  of 
the  same  stars,  as  they  would,  if  near  the  earth,  be  seen  from 


a  spectator  S,  under  the  visual  angles  a  S  b,  A  S  B.  No  such 
change  of  apparent  dimension,  however,  is  observed.  The 
nicest  measurements  of  the  apparent  angular  distance  of  any 
two  stars  inter  se,  taken  in  any  parts  of  their  diurnal  course, 
(after  allowing  for  the  unequal  effects  of  refraction,  or  when 
taken  at  such  times  that  this  cause  of  distortion  shall  act 
equally  on  both,)  manifest  not  the  slightest  perceptible  va- 
riation. Not  only  this,  but  at  whatever  point  of  the  earth's 
surface  the  measurement  is  performed,  the  results  are  abso- 
lutely identical.  No  instruments  ever  yet  invented  by  man 
are  delicate  enough  to  indicate,  by  an  increase  or  diminution 
of  the  angle  subtended,  that  one  point  of  the  earth  is  nearer 
to  or  further  from  the  stars  than  another. 

(73.)  The  necessary  conclusion  from  this  is,  that  the 
dimensions  of  the  earth,  large  as  it  is,  are  comparatively 
nothing,  absolutely  imperceptible,  when  compared  with  the 
interval  which  separates  the  stars  from  the  earth.  If  an 
observer  walk  round  a  circle  not  more  than  a  few  yards  in 
diameter,  and  from  different  points  in  its  circumference 
measure  with  a  sextant  or  other  more  exact  instrument 
adapted  for  the  purpose,  the  angles  P  AQ,  PBQ,  PCQ,sub- 

t.  2 


&2  OUTLINES   OP   ASTRONOMY. 

tended  at  those  stations  by  two  well-defined  points  in  his 
visible  horizon,  PQ,  he  will  at  once  be  advertised,  by  the 
difference  of  the  results,  of  his  change  of  distance  from  them 
arising  from  his  change  of  place,  although  that  difference  may 
be  so  small  as  to  produce  no  change  in  their  general  aspect  to 
his  unassisted  sight.  This  is  one  of  the  innumerable  instances 
where  accurate  measurement  obtained  by  instrumental  means 
places  us  in  a  totally  different  situation  in  respect  to  matters 
of  fact,  and  conclusions  thence  deducible,  from  what  we  should 


hold,  were  we  to  rely  in  all  cases  on  the  mere  judgment  ot 
the  eye.  To  so  great  a  nicety  have  such  observations  been 
carried  by  the  aid  of  an  instrument  called  a  theodolite,  that  a 
circle  even  a  few  inches  in  diameter  may  thus  be  rendered 
sensible,  may  thus  be  detected  to  have  a  size,  and  an  as- 
certainable place,  by  reference  to  objects  distant  by  fully 
100,000  times  its  own  dimensions.  Observations,  differing, 
it  is  true,  somewhat  in  method,  but  identical  in  principle,  and 
executed  with  quite  as  much  exactness,  have  been  applied  to 
the  stars,  and  with  a  result  such  as  has  been  already  stated. 
Hence  it  follows,  incontrovertibly,  that  the  distance  of  the 
stars  from  the  earth  cannot  be  so  small  as  100,000  of  the 
earth's  diameters.  It  is,  indeed,  incomparably  greater ;  for 
we  shall  hereafter  find  it  fully  demonstrated  that  the  distance 
just  named,  immense  as  it  may  appear,  is  yet  much  under- 
rated. 

(74.)  From  such  a  distance,  to  a  spectator  with  our  fa- 
culties, and  furnished  with  our  instruments,  the  earth  would 


SENSIBLE    AND   RATIONAL    HORIZON.  53 

be  imperceptible;  and,  reciprocally,  an  object  of  the  earth's 
size,  placed  at  the  distance  of  the  stars,  would  be  equally  un- 
discernible.  If,  therefore,  at  the  point  on  which  a  spectator 
stands,  we  draw  a  plane  touching  the  globe,  and  prolong  it  in 
imagination  till  it  attain  the  region  of  the  stars,  and  through 
the  centre  of  the  earth  conceive  another  plane  parallel  to  the 
former,  and  co-extensive  with  it,  to  pass;  these,  although 
separated  throughout  their  whole  extent  by  the  same  interval, 
viz.  a  semidiameter  of  the  earth,  will  yet,  on  account  of  the 
vast  distance  at  which  that  interval  is  seen,  be  confounded 
together,  and  undistinguishable  from  each  other  in  the  region 
of  the  stars,  when  viewed  by  a  spectator  on  the  earth.  The 
zone  they  there  include  will  be  of  evanescent  breadth  to  his 
eye,  and  will  only  mark  out  a  great  circle  in  the  heavens,  one 
and  the  same  for  both  the  stations.  This  great  circle,  when 
spoken  of  as  a  circle  of  the  sphere,  is  called  the  celestial 
horizon  or  simply  the  horizon,  and  the  two  planes  just  de- 
scribed are  also  spoken  of  as  the  sensible  and  the  rational 
horizon  of  the  observer's  station. 

(75.)  From  what  has  been  said  (art.  73.)  of  the  distance  of 
the  stars,  it  follows,  that  if  we  suppose  a  spectator  at  the 
centre  of  the  earth  to  have  his  view  bounded  by  the  rational 
horizon,  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  that  of  a  corresponding 
spectator  on  the  surface  is  by  his  sensible  horizon,  the  two 
observers  will  see  the  same  stars  in  the  same  relative  si- 
tuations, each  beholding  that  entire  hemisphere  of  the  heavens 
which  is  above  the  celestial  horizon,  corresponding  to  their 
common  zenith.  Now,  so  far  as  appearances  go,  it  is  clearly 
the  same  thing  whether  the  heavens,  that  is,  all  space  with 
its  contents,  revolve  round  a  spectator  at  rest  in  the  earth's 
centre,  or  whether  that  spectator  simply  turn  round  in  the 
opposite  direction  in  b,is  place,  and  view  them  in  succession. 
The  aspect  of  the  heavens,  at  every  instant,  as  referred  to  his 
horizon  (which  must  be  supposed  to  turn  with  him),  will  be 
the  same  in  both  suppositions.  And  since,  as  has  been  shown, 
appearances  are  also,  so  far  as  the  stars  are  concerned,  the 
same  to  a  spectator  on  the  surface  as  to  one  at  the  centre,  it 
follows  that,  whether  we  suppose  the   heavens  to  revolve 


54  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

without  the  earth,  or  the  earth  within  the  heavens,  in  the 
opposite  direction,  the  diurnal  phenomena,  to  all  its  inhabitants, 
will  be  no  way  different. 

(76.)  The  Copernican  astronomy  adopts  the  latter  as  the 
true  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  avoiding  thereby  the 
necessity  of  otherwise  resorting  to  the  cumbrous  mechanism 
of  a  solid  but  invisible  sphere,  to  which  the  stars  must  be 
supposed  attached,  in  order  that  they  may  be  carried  round 
the  earth  without  derangement  of  their  relative  situations  inter 
se.  Such  a  contrivance  would,  indeed,  suffice  to  explain  the 
diurnal  revolution  of  the  stars,  so  as  to  "  save  appearances ; '" 
but  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  moon,  as  well  as  those  of 
the  planets,  are  incompatible  with  such  a  supposition,  as  will 
appear  when  we  come  to  treat  of  these  bodies.  On  the 
other  hand,  that  a  spherical  mass  of  moderate  dimensions  (or, 
rather,  when  compared  with  the  surrounding  and  visible  uni- 
verse, of  evanescent  magnitude),  held  by  no  tie,  and  free  to 
move  and  to  revolve,  should  do  so,  in  conformity  with  those 
general  laws  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  regulate  the  motions 
of  all  material  bodies,  is  so  far  from  being  a  postulate  difficult 
to  be  conceded,  that  the  wonder  would  rather  be  should  the 
fact  prove  otherwise.  As  a  postulate,  therefore,  we  shall 
henceforth  regard  it ;  and  as,  in  the  progress  of  our  work, 
analogies  offer  themselves  in  its  support  from  what  we  ob- 
serve of  other  celestial  bodies,  we  shall  not  fail  to  point  them 
out  to  the  reader's  notice. 

(77.)  The  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis  so  admitted,  explain- 
ing, as  it  evidently  does,  the  apparent  motion  of  the  stars  in 
a  completely  satisfactory  manner,  prepares  us  for  the  further 
admission  of  its  motion,  bodily,  in  space,  should  such  a 
motion  enable  us  to  explain,  in  a  manner  equally  so,  the 
apparently  complex  and  enigmatical  motions  of  the  sun, 
moon,  and  planets.  The  Copernican  astronomy  adopts  this 
idea  in  its  full  extent,  ascribing  to  the  earth,  in  addition  to  its 
motion  of  rotation  about  an  axis,  also  one  of  translation  or 
transference  through  space,  in  such  a  course  or  orbit,  and  so 
regulated  in  direction  and  celerity,  as,  taken  in  conjunction 
with  the  mutions  of  the  other  bodies  of  the  universe,  shall 


RELATIVE    MOTION.  55 

render  a  rational  account  of  the  appearances  they  successively 
present,  —  that  is  to  say,  an  account  of  which  the  several  parts, 
postulates,  propositions,  deductions,  intelligibly  cohere,  with- 
out contradicting  each  other  or  the  nature  of  things  as 
concluded  from  experience.  In  this  view  of  the  Copernican 
doctrine  it  is  rather  a  geometrical  conception  than  a  physical 
theory,  inasmuch  it  simply  assumes  the  requisite  motions, 
without  attempting  to  explain  their  mechanical  origin,  or 
assign  them  any  dependence  on  physical  causes.  The  New- 
tonian theory  of  gravitation  supplies  this  deficiency,  and,  by 
showing  that  all  the  motions  required  by  the  Copernican  con- 
ception must,  and  that  no  others  can,  result  from  a  single, 
intelligible,  and  very  simple  dynamical  law,  has  given  a 
degree  of  certainty  to  this  conception,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
which  attaches  to  no  other  creation  of  the  human  mind. 

(78.)  To  understand  this  conception  in  its  further  develop- 
ments, the  reader  must  bear  steadily  in  mind  the  distinction 
between  relative  and  absolute  motion.  Nothing  is  easier  to  per- 
ceive than  that,  if  a  spectator  at  rest  view  a  certain  number 
of  moving  objects,  they  will  group  and  arrange  themselves 
to  his  eye,  at  each  successive  moment,  in  a  very  different 
way  from  what  they  would  do  were  he  in  active  motion 
among  them,  —  if  he  formed  one  of  them,  for  instance,  and 
joined  in  their  d&nce.  This  is  evident  from  what  has  been 
said  before  of  parallactic  motion ;  but  it  will  be  asked,  How 
is  such  a  spectator  to  disentangle  from  each  other  the  two 
parts  of  the  apparent  motions  of  these  external  objects, —  that 
which  arises  from  the  effect  of  his  own  change  of  place,  and 
which  is  therefore  only  apparent  (or,  as  a  German  meta- 
physician would  say,  subjective  —  having  reference  only  to 
him  as  perceiving  it), — and  that  which  is  real  (or  objective — 
having  a  positive  existence,  whether  perceived  by  him  or 
not)  ?  By  what  rule  is  he  to  ascertain,  from  the  appearances 
presented  to  him  while  himself  in  motion,  what  would  be  the 
appearances  were  he  at  rest  ?  It  by  no  means  follows,  indeed, 
that  he  would  even  then  at  once  obtain  a  clear  conception 
of  all  the  mouions  of  all  the  objects.  The  appearances  so  pre- 
sented to  him  would  have  still  something  subjective  about  them. 


56  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

They  would  be  still  appearances,  not  geometrical  realities. 
They  would  still  have  a  reference  to  the  point  of  view,  which 
might  be  very  unfavourably  situated  (as,  indeed,  is  the  case 
in  our  system)  for  affording  a  clear  notion  of  the  real  move- 
ment of  each  object.  No  geometrical  figure,  or  curve,  is  seen 
by  the  eye  as  it  is  conceived  by  the  mind  to  exist  in  reality. 
The  laws  of  perspective  interfere  and  alter  the  apparent  di- 
rections and  foreshorten  the  dimensions  of  its  several  parts. 
If  the  spectator  be  unfavourably  situated,  as,  for  instance, 
nearly  in  the  plane  of  the  figure  (which  is  the  case  we  have  to 
deal  with),  they  may  do  so  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  make  a 
considerable  effort  of  imagination  necessary  to  pass  from  the 
sensible  to  the  real  form. 

(79.)  Still,  preparatory  to  this  ultimate  step,  it  is  first  ne- 
cessary that  the  spectator  should  free  or  clear  the  appearances 
from  the  disturbing  influence  of  his  own  change  of  place. 
And  this  he  can  always  do  by  the  following  general  rule  or 
proposition  :  — 

The  relative  motion  of  two  bodies  is  the  same  as  if  either 
of  them  were  at  rest,  and  all  its  motion  communicated  to  the 
other  in  an  opposite  direction.  * 

Hence,  if  two  bodies  move  alike,  they  will,  when  seen 
from  each  other  (without  reference  to  other  near  bodies,  but 
only  to  the  starry  sphere),  appear  at  rest.  Hence,  also,  if  the 
absolute  motions  of  two  bodies  be  uniform  and  rectilinear, 
their  relative  motion  is  so  also. 

(80.)  The  stars  are  so  distant,  that  as  we  have  seen  it  is 
absolutely  indifferent  from  what  point  of  the  earth's  surface  we 
view  them.  Their  configurations  inter  se  are  identically  the 
same.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets,  which 
are  near  enough  (especially  the  moon)  to  be  parallactically 
displaced  by  change  of  station  from  place  to  place  on  our 
globe.     In  order  that  astronomers  residing  on  different  points 

*  This  proposition  is  equivalent  to  the  following,  which  precisely  meets  the 
case  proposed,  but  requires  somewhat  more  thought  for  its  clear  apprehension 
than  can  perhaps  be  expected  from  a  beginner :  — 

Prop.  —  If  two  bodies,  A  and  B,  be  in  motion  independently  of  each  other,  tht 
motion  which  B  seen  from  A  would  appear  to  have  if  A  were  at  rest  is  the  same 
with  that  which  it  would  appear  to  have,  A  being  in  motion,  if,  in  addition  to  its  own 
motion,  a  motion  equal  to  A's  and  in  the  same  direction  were  communicated  to  it. 


TDEAL    REFERENCE    TO    THE    EARTH'S    CENTER.  57 

of  the  earth's  surface  should  be  able  to  compare  their  ob« 
nervations  with  effect,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  clearly 
understand  and  take  account  of  this  effect  of  the  difference 
of  their  stations  on  the  appearance  of  the  outward  universe 
as  seen  from  each.  As  an  exterior  object  seen  from  one 
would  appear  to  have  shifted  its  place  were  the  spectator 
suddenly  transported  to  the  other,  so  two  spectators,  viewing 
it  from  the  two  stations  at  the  same  instant,  do  not  see  it  in 
the  same  direction.  Hence  arises  a  necessity  for  the  adoption 
of  a  conventional  centre  of  reference,  or  imaginary  station 
of  observation  common  to  all  the  world,  to  which  each  ob- 
server, wherever  situated,  may  refer  (or,  as  it  is  called, 
reduce)  his  observations,  by  calculating  and  allowing  for  the 
effect  of  his  local  position  with  respect  to  that  common  centre 
(supposing  him  to  possess  the  necessary  data).  If  there  were 
only  two  observers,  in  fixed  stations,  one  might  agree  to  refer 
his  observations  to  the  other  station;  but,  as  every  locality 
on  the  globe  may  be  a  station  of  observation,  it  is  far  more 
convenient  and  natural  to  fix  upon  a  point  equally  related  to 
all,  as  the  common  point  of  reference;  and  this  can  be  no 
other  than  the  centre  of  the  globe  itself.  The  parallactic 
change  of  apparent  place  which  would  arise  in  an  object, 
could  any  observer  suddenly  transport  himself  to  the  centre 
of  the  earth,  is  evidently  the  angle  C  S  P,  subtended  at  the 
object  S  by  that  radius  C  P  of  the  earth  which  joins  its 
centre  and  the  place  P  of  observation. 


58  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


CHAPTER  II. 

TERMINOLOGY    AND  ELEMENTARY   GEOMETRICAL    CONCEPTIONS   ANu 

RELATIONS TERMINOLOGY  RELATING    TO    THE    GLOBE    OF    THK 

EARTH TO     THE     CELESTIAL    SPHERE. — CELESTIAL     PERSPEC- 
TIVE. 

(81.)  Several  of  the  terms  in  use  among  astronomers  have 
been  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and  others  used  anti- 
cipatively.  But  the  technical  language  of  every  subject 
requires  to  be  formally  stated,  both  for  consistency  of  usage 
and  definiteness  of  conception.  We  shall  therefore  proceed, 
in  the  first  place,  to  define  a  number  of  terms  in  perpetual 
use,  having  relation  to  the  globe  of  the  earth  and  the  celestial 
sphere. 

(82.)  Definition  1.  The  axis  of  the  earth  is  that  dia- 
meter about  which  it  revolves,  with  a  uniform  motion,  from 
toest  to  east ;  performing  one  revolution  in  the  interval  which 
elapses  between  any  star  leaving  a  certain  point  in  the 
heavens,  and  returning  to  the  same  point  again. 

(83.)  Def.  2.  The  poles  of  the  earth  are  the  points  where 
its  axis  meets  its  surface.  The  North  Pole  is  that  nearest  to 
Europe ;  the  South  Pole  that  most  remote  from  it. 

(84.)  Def.  3.  The  earth's  equator  is  a  great  circle  on  its 
surface,  equidistant  from  its  poles,  dividing  it  into  two  hemi- 
spheres— a  northern  and  a  southern;  in  the  midst  of  which 
are  situated  the  respective  poles  of  the  earth  of  those  names. 
The  plane  of  the  equator  is,  therefore,  a  plane  perpendicular 
to  the  earth's  axis,  and  passing  through  its  centre. 

(85.)  Def.  4.  The  terrestrial  meridian  of  a  station  on  the 
earth's  surface,  is  a  great  circle  of  the  globe  passing  through 
both  poles  and  through  the  place.  The  plane  of  the  meridian 
is  the  plane  in  which  that  circle  lies. 


TERMINOLOGY.  59 

(86.)  Def.  5.  The  sensible  and  the  rational  horizon  of  any 
station  have  been  already  defined  in  art.  74. 

(87.)  Def.  6.  A  meridian  line  is  the  line  of  intersection  of 
the  plane  of  the  meridian  of  any  station  with  the  plane  of  the 
sensible  horizon,  and  therefore  marks  the  north  and  south 
points  of  the  horizon,  or  the  directions  in  which  a  spectator 
must  set  out  if  he  would  travel  directly  towards  the  north  or 
south  pole. 

(88.)  Def.  7.  The  latitude  of  a  place  on  the  earth's  surface 
is  its  angular  distance  from  the  equator,  measured  on  its  own 
terrestrial  meridian :  it  is  reckoned  in  degrees,  minutes,  and 
seconds,  from  0  up  to  90°,  and  northwards  or  southwards  ac- 
cording to  the  hemisphere  the  place  lies  in.  Thus,  the  obser- 
vatory at  Greenwich  is  situated  in  51°  28'  40"  north  latitude. 
This  definition  of  latitude,  it  will  be  observed,  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  only  temporary.  A  more  exact  knowledge  of  the 
physical  structure  and  figure  of  the  earth,  and  a  better  ac- 
quaintance with  the  niceties  of  astronomy,  will  render  some 
modification  of  its  terms,  or  a  different  manner  of  considering 
it,  necessary. 

(89.)  Def.  8.  Parallels  of  latitude  are  small  circles  on  the 
earth's  surface  parallel  to  the  equator.  Every  point  in  such 
a  circle  has  the  same  latitude.  Thus,  Greenwich  is  said  to 
be  situated  in  the  parallel  of  51°  28'  40". 

(90.)  Def.  9.  The  longitude  of  a  place  on  the  earth's 
surface  is  the  inclination  of  its  meridian  to  that  of  some  fixed 
station  referred  to  as  a  point  to  reckon  from.  English  astro- 
nomers and  geographers  use  the  observatory  at  Greenwich  for 
this  station;  foreigners,  the  principal  observatories  of  their 
respective  nations.  Some  geographers  have  adopted  the  island 
of  Ferro.  Hereafter,  when  we  speak  of  longitude,  we  reckon 
from  Greenwich.  The  longitude  of  a  place  is,  therefore, 
measured  by  the  arc  of  the  equator  intercepted  between  the 
meridian  of  the  place  and  that  of  Greenwich ;  or,  which  is  the 
same  thing,  by  the  spherical  angle  at  the  pole  included 
between  these  meridians. 

(91.)  As  latitude  is  reckoned  north  or  south,  so  longitude  is 
usually  said  to  be  reckoned  west  or  east.      It  would  add 


60  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

greatly,  however,  to  systematic  regularity,  and  tend  much  to 
avoid  confusion  and  ambiguity  in  computations,  were  this 
mode  of  expression  abandoned,  and  longitudes  reckoned  inva- 
riably westward  from  their  origin  round  the  whole  circle  from 
0  to  360°.  Thus,  the  longitude  of  Paris  is,  in  common 
parlance,  either  2°  20'  22"  east,  or  357°  39'  38"  west  of 
Greenwich.  But,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  shall  henceforth 
use  and  recommend  others  to  use  the  term,  the  latter  is  its 
proper  designation.  Longitude  is  also  reckoned  in  time  at 
the  rate  of  24  h.  for  360°,  or  15°  per  hour.  In  this  system 
the  longitude  of  Paris  is  23  h.  50  m.  39£s.* 

(92.)  Knowing  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  a  place,  it 
may  be  laid  down  on  an  artificial  globe ;  and  thus  a  map  of 
the  earth  may  be  constructed.  Maps  of  particular  countries 
are  detached  portions  of  this  general  map,  extended  into 
planes ;  or,  rather,  they  are  representations  on  planes  of  such 
portions,  executed  according  to  certain  conventional  systems 
of  rules,  called  projections,  the  object  of  which  is  either  to 
distort  as  little  as  possible  the  outlines  of  countries  from  what 
they  are  on  the  globe — or  to  establish  easy  means  of  ascer- 
taining, by  inspection  or  graphical  measurement,  the  latitudes 
and  longitudes  of  places  which  occur  in  them,  without  re- 
ferring to  the  globe  or  to  books — or  for  other  peculiar  uses. 
See  Chap.  IV. 

(93.)  Def.  10.  The  Tropics  are  two  parallels  of  latitude, 
one  on  the  north  and  the  other  on  the  south  side  of  the 
equator,  over  every  point  of  which  respectively,  the  sun  in 
its  diurnal  course  passes  vertically  on  the  21st  of  June  and 
the  21st  of  December  in  every  year.  Their  latitudes  are 
about  23°  28'  respectively,  north  and  south. 

(94.)  Def.  11.  The  Arctic  and  Antarctic  circles  are  two 
small  circles  or  parallels  of  latitude  as  distant  from  the  north 
and  south  poles  as  the  tropics  are  from  the  equator,  that  is 
to  say,  about  23°  28';    their  latitudes,  therefore,  are  about 

*  To  distinguish  minutes  and  seconds  of  time  from  those  of  angular  measure 
we  shall  in  variably  adhere  to  the  distinct  system  of  notation  here  adopted 
(°  '  ",  and  h.  m.  s.).  Great  confusion  sometimes  arises  from  the  practice  ot 
using  the  same  marks  for  both. 


TERMINOLOGY. 


61 


66°  32'.  We  say  about,  for  the  places  of  these  circles  and  of 
the  tropics  are  continually  shifting  on  the  earth's  surface, 
though  with  extreme  slowness,  as  will  be  explained  in  its 
proper  place. 

(95.)  Def.  12.  The  sphere  of  the  heavens  or  of  the  stars 
is  an  imaginary  spherical  surface  of  infinite  radius,  having  the 
eye  of  any  spectator  for  its  centre,  and  which  may  be  con- 
ceived as  a  ground  on  which  the  stars,  planets,  &c,  the  visible 
contents  of  the  universe,  are  seen  projected  as  in  a  vast 
picture.  * 

(96.)  Def.  13.  The  poles  of  the  celestial  sphere  are  the 
points  of  that  imaginary  sphere  towards  which  the  earth's 
axis  is  directed. 

(97.)  Def.  14.  The  celestial  equator,  or,  as  it  is  often  called 
by  astronomers,  the  equinoctial,  is  a  great  circle  of  the  celestial 
sphere,  marked  out  by  the  indefinite  extension  of  the  plane 
of  the  terrestrial  equator. 

(98.)  Def.  15.  The  celestial  horizon  of  any  place  is  a  great 
circle  of  the  sphere  marked  out  by  the  indefinite  extension  of 
the  plane  of  any  spectator's  sensible  or  (which  comes  to  the 
same  thing  as  will  presently  be  shown),  his  rational  horizon, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  equator. 

(99.)  Def.  16.  The  zenith  and  nadir]  of  a  spectator  are 
the  two  points  of  the  sphere  of  the  heavens,  vertically  over 
his   head,   and   vertically   under   his   feet,  or  the   poles   of 


*  The  ideal  sphere  without  us,  to  which  we  refer  the  places  of  objects,  and 
which  we  carry  along  with  us  wherever  we  go,  is  no  doubt  intimately  connected 
by  association  with,  if  not  entirely  dependent  on  that  obscure  perception  of 
sensation  in  the  retinae  of  our  eyes,  ot  which,  even  when  closed  and  unexcited, 
we  cannot  entirely  divest  them.  We  have  a  real  spherical  surface  within  our 
eyes,  the  seat  of  sensation  and  vision,  corresponding,  point  for  point,  to  the  ex- 
ternal sphere.  On  this  the  stars,  &c.  are  really  mapped  down,  as  we  have  sup- 
posed them  in  the  text  to  be,  on  the  imaginary  concave  of  the  heavens.  When 
the  whole  surface  of  the  retina  is  excited  by  light,  habit  leads  us  to  associate  it 
with  the  idea  of  a  real  surface  existing  without  us.  Thus  we  become  impressed 
with  the  notion  of  a  sky  and  a  heaven,  but  the  concave  surface  of  the  retina  itself 
is  tne  tiue  seat  of  all  visible  angular  dimension  and  angular  motion.  The  sub- 
stitution of  the  retina  for  the  heavens  would  be  awkward  and  inconvenient  in 
language,  but  it  may  always  be  mentally  made.  (See  Schiller's  pretty  enigma 
on  the  eye  in  his  Turandot. ) 

f  From  Arabic  words  semt,  vertex,  and  alnatihir,  corresponding  or  opposite  to 
Nailir  corresponds  evidently  to  the  German  nieder  (down),  whence  our  nelhir. 


(>2  OUTLINES    OF    ASTliOXOMY. 

the  celestial  horizon ;  that  is  to  say,  points  90°  distant  from 
every  point  in  it. 

(100.)  DeF.  17.  Vertical  circles  of  the  sphere  are  great 
circles  passing  through  the  zenith  and  nadir,  or  great  circles 
perpendicular  to  the  horizon.  On  these  are  measured  the 
altitudes  of  objects  above  the  horizon  —  the  complements  to 
which  are  their  zenitlt  distances. 

(101.)  Def.  18.  The  celestial  meridian  of  a  spectator  is  the 
great  circle  marked  out  on  the  sphere  by  the  prolongation  of 
the  plane  of  his  terrestrial  meridian.  If  the  earth  be  sup- 
posed at  rest,  this  is  a  fixed  circle,  and  all  the  stars  are  carried 
across  it  in  their  diurnal  courses  from  east  to  west.  If  the 
stars  rest  and  the  earth  rotate,  the  spectator's  meridian,  like 
his  horizon  (art.  52.),  sweeps  daily  across  the  stars  from 
west  to  east.  Whenever  in  future  we  speak  of  the  meridian 
of  a  spectator  or  observer,  we  intend  the  celestial  meridian, 
which  being  a  circle  passing  through  the  poles  of  the  heavens 
and  the  zenith  of  the  observer,  is  necessarily  a  vertical  circle, 
and  passes  through  the  north  and  south  points  of  the 
horizon. 

(102.)  Def.  19.  The  prime  vertical  is  a  vertical  circle  per- 
pendicular to  the  meridian,  and  which  therefore  passes  through 
the  east  and  west  points  of  the  horizon. 

(103.)  Def.  20.  Azimuth  is  the  angular  distance  of  a  ce- 
lestial object  from  the  north  or  south  point  of  the  horizon 
(according  as  it  is  the  north  or  south  pole  which  is  elevated), 
when  the  object  is  referred  to  the  horizon  by  a  vertical  circle; 
or  it  is  the  angle  comprised  between  two  vertical  planes  —  one 
passing  through  the  elevated  pole,  the  other  through  the 
object.  Azimuth  may  be  reckoned  eastwards  or  westwards, 
from  the  north  or  south  point,  and  is  usually  so  reckoned 
only  to  180°  either  way.  But  to  avoid  confusion,  and  to 
preserve  continuity  of  interpretation  when  algebraic  symbols 
are  used  (a  point  of  essential  importance,  hitherto  too  little 
insisted  on),  we  shall  always  reckon  azimuth  from  the  point 
of  the  horizon  most  remote  from  the  elevated  pole,  westward  (so 
as  to  agree  in  general  directions  with  the  apparent  diurnal 
motion  of  the  stars),  and  carry  its  reckoning  from  0°  to  360°  if 


TERMINOLOGY.  03 

always  reckoned  positive,  considering  the  eastward  reckoning 
as  negative. 

(104.)  Def.  21.  The  altitude  of  a  heavenly  body  is  its  ap- 
parent angular  elevation  above  the  horizon.  It  is  the  com- 
plement to  90°,  therefore,  of  its  zenith  distance.  The  alti- 
tude and  azimuth  of  an  object  being  known,  its  place  in  the 
visible  heavens  is  determined. 

(105.)  Def.  22.  The  declination  of  a  heavenly  body  is  its 
angular  distance  from  the  equinoctial  or  celestial  equator,  or 
the  complement  to  90°  of  its  angular  distance  from  the 
nearest  pole,  which  latter  distance  is  called  its  Polar  distance. 
Declinations  are  reckoned  plus  or  minus,  according  as  the 
object  is  situated  in  the  northern  or  southern  celestial  hemi- 
sphere. Polar  distances  are  always  reckoned  from  the  North 
Pole,  from  0°  up  to  180°,  by  which  all  doubt  or  ambiguity 
of  expression  with  respect  to  sign  is  avoided. 

(106.)  Def.  23.  Hour  circles  of  the  sphere,  or  circles  of 
declination,  are  great  circles  passing  through  the  poles,  and 
of  course  perpendicular  to  the  equinoctial.  The  hour  circle, 
passing  through  any  particular  heavenly  body,  serves  to 
refer  ic  to  a  point  in  the  equinoctial,  as  a  vertical  circle  does 
to  a  point  in  the  horizon. 

(107.)  Def.  24.  The  hour  angle  of  a  heavenly  body  is  the 
angle  at  the  pole  included  between  the  hour  circle  passing 
through  the  body,  and  the  celestial  meridian  of  the  place  of 
observation.  We  shall  always  reckon  it  positively  from  the 
upper  culmination  (art.  125.)  westwards,  or  in  conformity 
with  the  apparent  diurnal  motion,  completely  round  the 
circle  from  0°  to  360°.  Hour  angles,  generally,  are  angles 
included  at  the  pole  between  different  hour  circles. 

(108.)  Def.  25.  The  right  ascension  of  a  heavenly  body 
is  the  arc  of  the  equinoctial  included  between  a  certain  point 
in  that  circle  called  the  Vernal  Equinox,  and  the  point  in  the 
same  circle  to  which  it  is  referred  by  the  circle  of  declination 
passing  through  it.  Or  it  is  the  angle  included  between  two 
hour  circles,  one  of  which  passes  through  the  vernal  equinox 
(and  is  called  the  equinoctial  colure),  the  other  through  the 


64  OUTLINES   OF   ASTBONOMY. 

body.  How  the  place  of  this  initial  point  on  the  equinoctial 
is  determined,  will  be  explained  further  on. 

(109.)  The  right  ascensions  of  celestial  objects  are  always 
reckoned  eastwards  from  the  equinox,  and  are  estimated 
either  in  degrees,  minutes,  and  seconds,  as  in  the  case  of 
terrestrial  longitudes,  from  0°  to  360°,  which  completes  the 
circle ;  or,  in  time,  in  hours,  minutes,  and  seconds,  from  Oh. 
to  24h.  The  apparent  diurnal  motion  of  the  heavens  being 
contrary  to  the  real  motion  of  the  earth,  this  is  in  conformity 
with  the  westward  reckoning  of  longitudes.  (Art.  91.) 

(110.)  Sidereal  time  is  reckoned  by  the  diurnal  motion  of 
the  stars,  or  rather  of  that  point  in  the  equinoctial  from 
which  right  ascensions  are  reckoned.  This  point  may  bo 
considered  as  a  star,  though  no  star  is,  in  fact,  there ;  and, 
moreover,  the  point  itself  is  liable  to  a  certain  slow  variation, 
— so  slow  however,  as  not  to  affect,  perceptibly,  the  interval, 
of  any  two  of  its  successive  returns  to  the  meridian.  This 
interval  is  called  a  sidereal  day,  and  is  divided  into  24  sidereal 
hours,  and  these  again  into  minutes  and  seconds.  A  clock 
which  marks  sidereal  time,  i.  e.  which  goes  at  such  a  rate  an 
always  to  show  Oh.  Om.  Os.  when  the  equinox  comes  on  the 
meridian,  is  called  a  sidereal  clock,  and  is  an  indispensable 
piece  of  furniture  in  every  observatory.  Hence  the  hour 
angle  of  an  object  reduced  to  time  at  the  rate  of  1  «;>°  per 
hour,  expresses  the  interval  of  sidereal  time  by  which  (if 
its  reckoning  be  positive)  it  has  past  the  meridian  $  or  if 
negative,  the  time  it  wants  of  arriving  at  the  meridian  of  the 
place  of  observation.  So  also  the  right  ascension  of  an  ob- 
ject, if  converted  into  time  at  the  same  rate  (since  360°  being 
described  uniformly  in  24  hours,  15°  must  be  so  described 
in  1  hour),  will  express  the  interval  of  sidereal  time  which 
elapses  from  the  passage  of  the  vernal  equinox  across  the 
meridian  to  that  of  the  object  next  subsequent. 

(111.)  As  a  globe  or  maps  may  be  made  of  the  whole  or 
particular  regions  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  so  also  a  globe, 
or  general  map  of  the  heavens,  as  well  as  charts  of  particu- 
lar parts,  may  be  constructed,  and  the  stars  laid  down  in 
their  proper  situations  relative  to  each  other,  and  to  the  poles 


TERMINOLOGY.  65 

of  the  heavens  and  the  celestial  equator.  Such  a  representa- 
tion,  once  made,  will  exhibit  a  true  appearance  of  the  stars 
as  they  present  themselves  in  succession  to  every  spectator 
on  the  surface,  or  as  they  may  be  conceived  to  be  seen  at 
once  by  one  at  the  centre  of  the  globe.  It  is,  therefore,  in- 
dependent of  all  geographical  localities.  There  will  occur  in 
such  a  representation  neither  zenith,  nadir,  nor  horizon  — 
neither  east  nor  west  points ;  and  although  great  circles  may 
be  drawn  on  it  from  pole  to  pole,  corresponding  to  terrestrial 
meridians,  they  can  no  longer,  in  this  point  of  view,  be  re- 
garded as  the  celestial  meridians  of  fixed  points  on  the  earth's 
surface,  since,  in  the  course  of  one  diurnal  revolution,  every 
point  in  it  passes  beneath  each  of  them.  It  is  on  account  of 
this  change  of  conception,  and  with  a  view  to  establish  a 
complete  distinction  between  the  two  branches  of  Geography 
and  Uranography*,  that  astronomers  have  adopted  different 
terms,  (viz.  declination  and  right  ascension)  to  represent  those 
arcs  in  the  heavens  which  correspond  to  latitudes  and  longi- 
tudes on  the  earth.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  they  term  the 
equator  of  the  heavens  the  equinoctial ;  that  what  are  me- 
ridians on  the  earth  are  called  hour  circles  in  the  heavens, 
and  the  angles  they  include  between  them  at  the  poles  are 
called  hour  angles.  All  this  is  convenient  and  intelligible ; 
and  had  they  been  content  with  this  nomenclature,  no  con- 
fusion could  ever  have  arisen.  Unluckily,  the  early  astro- 
nomers have  employed  also  the  words  latitude  and  longitude 
in  their  uranography,  in  speaking  of  arcs  of  circles  not  cor- 
responding to  those  meant  by  the  same  words  on  the  earth, 
but  having  reference  to  the  motion  of  the  sun  and  planets 
among  the  stars.  It  is  now  too  late  to  remedy  this  confusion, 
which  is  ingrafted  into  every  existing  work  on  astronomy : 
we  can  only  regret,  and  warn  the  reader  of  it,  that  he  may 
be  on  his  guard  when,  at  a  more  advanced  period  of  our  work, 
we  shall  have  occasion  to  define  and  use  the  terms  in  their 
celestial  sense,  at  the  same  time  urgently  recommending  to 
future  writers  the  adoption  of  others  in  their  places. 

*  rrj,  the  earth  ;  ypcufHW,  to  describe  or  represent ;  ovpayos,  the  heaven. 

F 


GH 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


(112.)  It  remains  to  illustrate  these  descriptions  by  re- 
ference to  a  figure.     Let  C  be  the  centre  of  the  earth,  NCS 


its  axis ;  then  are  N  and  S  its  poles ;  E  Q  its  equator ;  A  B 
the  parallel  of  latitude  of  the  station  A  on  its  surface ;  A  P 
parallel  to  S  C  N,  the  direction  in  which  an  observer  at  A  will 
see  the  elevated  pole  of  the  heavens  ;  and  A  Z,  the  prolonga- 
tion of  the  terrestrial  radius  C  A,  that  of  his  zenith.  1ST  A  E  S 
will  be  his  meridian ;  N  G  S  that  of  some  fixed  station,  as 
Greenwich  ;  and  G  E,  or  the  spherical  angle  G  N  E,  his  lon- 
gitude, and  E  A  his  latitude.  Moreover,  if  n  s  be  a  plane 
touching  the  surface  in  A,  this  will  be  his  sensible  horizon ; 
n  As  marked  on  that  plane  by  its  intersection  with  his  me- 
ridian will  be  his  meridian  line,  and  n  and  s  the  north  and 
south  points  of  his  horizon. 

(1 13.  J  Again,  neglecting  the  size  of  the  earth,  or  conceiving 
him  stationed  at  its  centre,  and  referring  every  thing  to  his 
rational  horizon ;  let  the  annexed  figure  represent  the  sphere 
of  the  heavens ;  C  the  spectator ;  Z  his  zenith ;  and  N  his 
nadir :  then  will  H  A  O  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  whose 
poles  are  Z  N,  be  his  celestial  horizon ;  J?p  the  elevated  and 
depressed  poles  of  the  heavens ;  H  P  the  altitude  of  the  pole, 
and  H  P  Z  E  O  his  meridian  ;  E  T  Q,  a  great  circle  perpen- 
dicular to  P  p,  will  be  the  equinoctial ;  and  if  T  represent  the 
equinox,  T  T  will  be  the  right  ascension,  T  S  the  declination, 


CELESTIAL    PERSPECTI VE. 


67 


and  P  S  the  polar  distance  of  any  star  or  object  S,  referred 
to  the  equinoctial  by  the  hour  circle  P  S  Tp ;  and  BSD 


B    Z 

#;  /    / j         /  /V\    \ 

2jLj/  /          /        \\ 

iSi*    1  /^iC\ 

^7^1 

XHU-A 

D\       /  / 

will  be  the  diurnal  circle  it  will  appear  to  describe  about  the 
pole.  Again,  if  we  refer  it  to  the  horizon  by  the  vertical 
circle  ZSM,  O  M  will  be  its  azimuth,  M  S  its  altitude,  and 
Z  S  its  zenith  distance.  H  and  O  are  the  north  and  south, 
e  w  the  east  and  west  points  of  his  horizon,  or  of  the  heavens. 
Moreover,  if  H  h,  O  o,  be  small  circles,  or  parallels  of  decli- 
nation, touching  the  horizon  in  its  north  and  south  points, 
H  h  will  be  the  circle  of  perpetual  apparition,  between  which 
and  the  elevated  pole  the  stars  never  set ;  O  o  that  of  per- 
petual occupation,  between  which  and  the  depressed  pole  they 
never  rise.  In  all  the  zone  of  the  heavens  between  H  h  and 
O  o,  they  rise  and  set ;  any  one  of  them,  as  S,  remaining 
above  the  horizon  in  that  part  of  its  diurnal  circle  repre- 
sented  by  a  B  A,  and  below  it  throughout  all  the  part  repre- 
aented  by  A  D  a.  It  will  exercise  the  reader  to  construct 
this  figure  for  several  different  elevations  of  the  pole,  and  for  a 
variety  of  positions  of  the  star  S  in  each. 

(114.)  Celestial  perspective  is  that  branch  of  the  general 
science  of  perspective  which  teaches  us  to  conclude,  from  a 
knowledge  of  the  real  situation  and  forms  of  objects,  lines, 
angles,  motions,  &c.  with  respect  to  the  spectator,  their  ap- 
parent aspects,  as  seen  by  him  projected  on  the  imaginary 
concave  of  the  heavens;  and,  vice  versa,  from  the  apparent 
configurations  and  movements  of  objects  so  seen  projected, 

F  2 


68  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

to  conclude,  so  far  as  they  can  be  thence  concluded,  their 
real  geometrical  relations  to  each  other  and  to  the  spectator. 
It  agrees  with  ordinary  perspective  when  only  a  small  visual 
area  is  contemplated,  because  the  concave  ground  of  the 
celestial  sphere,  for  a  small  extent,  may  be  regarded  as  a 
plane  surface,  on  which  objects  are  seen  projected  or  depicted 
as  in  common  perspective.  But  when  large  amplitudes  of  the 
visual  area  are  considered,  or  when  the  whole  contents  of 
Space  are  regarded  as  projected  on  the  whole  interior  surface 
of  the  sphere,  it  becomes  necessary  to  use  a  different  phra- 
seology, and  to  resort  to  a  different  form  of  conception.  In 
common  perspective  there  is  a  single  "point  of  sight,"  or 
"  centre  of  the  picture,"  the  visual  line  from  the  eye  to 
which  is  perpendicular  to  the  "  plane  of  the  picture,"  and  all 
straight  lines  are  represented  by  straight  lines.  In  celestial 
perspective,  every  point  to  which  the  view  is  for  the  moment 
directed,  is  equally  entitled  to  be  considered  as  the  "  centre 
of  the  picture,"  every  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  sphere  being 
similarly  related  to  the  eye.  Moreover,  every  straight  line 
(supposed  to  be  indefinitely  prolonged)  is  projected  into  a 
semicircle  of  the  sphere,  that,  namely,  in  which  a  plane  passing 
through  the  line  and  the  eye  cuts  its  surface.  And  every 
system  of  parallel  straight  lines,  in  whatever  direction,  is  pro- 
jected into  a  system  of  semicircles  of  the  sphere,  meeting  in 
two  common  apexes,  or  vanishing  points,  diametrically  op- 
posite to  each  other,  one  of  which  corresponds  to  the  vanishing 
point  of  parallels  in  ordinary  perspective ;  the  other  in  such 
perspective  has  no  existence.  In  other  words,  every  point  in 
the  sphere  to  which  the  eye  is  directed  may  be  regarded  as  one 
of  the  vanishing  points,  or  one  apex  of  a  system  of  straight 
lines  parallel  to  that  radius  of  the  sphere  which  passes  through 
it  or  to  the  direction  of  the  line  of  sight,  seen  in  perspective 
from  the  earth,  and  the  point  diametrically  opposite,  or  that 
from  which  he  is  looking,  as  the  other.  And  any  great  circle 
of  the  sphere  may  similarly  be  regarded  as  the  vanishing  circle 
of  a  system  of  planes,  parallel  to  its  own. 

(115.)  A  familiar  illustration  of  this  is  often  to  be  had  by 
attending  to  the  lines  of  light  seen  in  the  air,  when  the  sun'a 


CELESTIAL    PERSPECTIVE.  69 

rays  are  darted  through  apertures  in  clouds,  the  san  itself 
being  at  the  time  obscured  behind  them.  These  lines  which, 
marking  the  course  of  rays  emanating  from  a  point  almost 
infinitely  distant,  are  to  be  considered  as  parallel  straight  lines, 
are  thrown  into  great  circles  of  the  sphere,  having  two  apexes 
or  points  of  common  intersection  —  one  m  the  place  where 
the  sun  itself  (if  not  obscured)  would  be  seen,  the  other  di- 
ametrically opposite.  The  first  only  is  most  commonly  sug- 
gested when  the  spectator's  view  is  towards  the  sun.  But 
in  mountainous  countries,  the  phenomenon  of  sunbeams 
converging  towards  a  point  diametrically  opposite  to  the  sun, 
and  as  much  depressed  below  the  horizon  as  the  sun  is  elevated 
above  it,  is  not  unfrequently  noticed,  the  back  of  the  spectator 
being  turned  to  the  sun's  place.  Occasionally,  but  much 
more  rarely,  the  whole  course  of  such  a  system  of  sunbeams, 
stretching  in  semicircles  across  the  hemisphere  from  horizon 
to  horizon  (the  sun  being  near  setting),  may  be  seen.*  Thus 
again,  the  streamers  of  the  Aurora  Borealis,  which  are  doubt- 
less electrical  rays,  parallel,  or  nearly  parallel  to  each  other, 
and  to  the  dipping  needle,  usually  appear  to  diverge  from  the 
point  towards  which  the  needle,  freely  suspended,  would  dip 
northwards  (i.  e.  about  70°  below  the  horizon  and  23°  west  of 
north  from  London),  and  in  their  upward  progress  pursue 
the  course  of  great  circles  till  they  again  converge  (in  ap 
pearance)  towards  the  point  diametrically  opposite  (i.  e.  70° 
above  the  horizon,  and  23°  to  the  eastward  of  south), 
forming  a  sort  of  canopy  over  head,  having  that  point  for  its 
centre.  So  also  in  the  phenomenon  of  shooting  stars,  the 
lines  of  direction  which  they  appear  to  take  on  certain  re- 
markable occasions  of  periodical  recurrence,  are  observed,  if 

•  It  is  in  such  cases  only  that  we  conceive  them  as  circles,  the  ordinary  conven 
tions  of  plane  perspective  becoming  untenable.  The  author  had  the  good  fortune 
to  witness  on  one  occasion  the  phenomenon  described  in  the  text  under  circum- 
stances of  more  than  usual  grandeur.  Approaching  Lyons  from  the  south  on 
Sept.  30-  1826.  about  5\h.  r.  m.,  the  sun  was  seen  nearly  setting  behind  broken 
masses  of  stormy  cloud,  from  whose  apertures  streamed  forth  beams  of  rose- 
coloured  light,  traceable  all  across  the  hemisphere  almost  to  their  opposite  point 
of  convergence  behind  the  snowy  precipices  of  Mont  Blanc,  conspicuously 
visible  at  nearly  100  miles  to  the  eastward.  The  impression  produced  was  that 
of  another  but  feebler  sun  about  to  rise  from  behind  the  mountain,  and  darting 
forth  precursory  beams  to  meet  those  of  the  real  one  opposite. 


70  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

prolonged  backwards,  apparently  to  meet  nearly  in  one  point 
of  the  sphere ;  a  certain  indication  of  a  general  near  approach 
to  parallelism  in  the  real  directions  of  their  motions  on  those 
occasions.     On  which  subject  more  hereafter. 

(116.)  In  relation  to  this  idea  of  celestial  perspective,  we 
may  conceive  the  north  and  south  poles  of  the  sphere  as  the 
two  vanishing  points  of  a  system  of  lines  parallel  to  the  axis 
of  the  earth ;  and  the  zenith  and  nadir  of  those  of  a  system 
of  perpendiculars  to  its  surface  at  the  place  of  observation, 
&c.  It  will  be  shown  that  the  direction  of  a  plumb-line  at 
every  place  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  still  water  at 
that  place,  which  is  the  true  horizon;  and  though  mathe- 
matically speaking  no  two  plumb-lines  are  exactly  parallel 
(since  they  converge  to  the  earth's  centre),  yet  over  very 
small  tracts,  such  as  the  area  of  a  building  —  in  one  and  the 
same  town,  &c,  the  difference  from  exact  parallelism  is  so 
small  that  it  may  be  practically  disregarded.*  To  a  spec- 
tator looking  upwards  such  a  system  of  plumb-lines  will  ap- 
pear to  converge  to  his  zenith ;  downwards,  to  his  nadir. 

(117.)  So  also  the  celestial  equator,  or  the  equinoctial,  must 
be  conceived  as  the  vanishing  circle  of  a  system  of  planes  pa- 
rallel to  the  earth's  equator,  or  perpendicular  to  its  axis.  The 
celestial  horizon  of  any  spectator  is  in  like  manner  the 
vanishing  circle  of  all  planes  parallel  to  his  true  horizon,  of 
which  planes  his  rational  horizon  (passing  through  the  earth's 
centre)  is  one,  and  his  sensible  horizon  (the  tangent  plane  of 
his  station)  another. 

(118.)  Owing,  however,  to  the  absence  of  all  the  ordinary 
indications  of  distance  which  influence  our  judgment  in  re- 
spect of  terrestrial  objects;  owing  to  the  want  of  determinate 
figure  and  magnitude  in  the  stars  and  planets  as  commonly 
seen — the  projection  of  the  celestial  bodies  on  the  ground  of 
the  heavenly  concave  is  not  usually  regarded  in  this  its  true 
light  of  a  perspective  representation  or  picture,  and  it  even  re- 
quires an  effort  of  imagination  to  conceive  them  in  their  true 
relations,  as  at  vastly  different  distances,  one  behind  the  other, 

*  An  interval  of  »  mile  corresponds  to  a  convergence  of  plumb-lines  amount- 
ing to  somewhat  less  space  than  a  minute. 


ELEMENTARY    RELATIONS.  71 

and  forming  with  one  another  lines  of  junction  violently  fore- 
shortened, and  including  angles  altogether  differing  from 
those  which  their  projected  representations  appear  to  make. 
To  do  so  at  all  with  effect  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  their 
actual  situations  in  space,  which  it  is  the  business  of  astro- 
nomy to  arrive  at  by  appropriate  considerations.  But  the 
connections  which  subsist  among  the  several  parts  of  the  pic- 
ture, the  purely  geometrical  relations  among  the  angles  and 
sides  of  the  spherical  triangles  of  which  it  consists,  constitute, 
under  the  name  of  Uranometry*,  a  preliminary  and  sub- 
ordinate branch  of  the  general  science,  with  which  it  is 
necessary  to  be  familiar  before  any  further  progress  can  be 
made.  Some  of  the  most  elementary  and  frequently  oc- 
curring of  these  relations  we  proceed  to  explain.  And  first, 
as  immediate  consequences  of  the  above  definitions,  the  fol- 
lowing propositions  will  be  borne  in  mind. 

(119.)   The  altitude  of  the  elevated  pole  is  equal  to  the  lati 
tude  of  the  spectator's  geographical  station. 

For  it  appears,  see  fig.  art.  112.,  that  the  angle  PAZ  be- 
tween the  pole  and  the  zenith  is  equal  to  N  C  A,  and  the  angles 
ZAh  and  N  C  E  being  right  angles,  we  have  PAn  =  ACE. 
Now  the  former  of  these  is  the  elevation  of  the  pole  as  seen 
from  \j»  the  latter  is  the  angle  at  the  earth's  centre  subtended 
by  the  arc  E  A,  or  the  latitude  of  the  place. 

(120.)  Hence  to  a  spectator  at  the  north  pole  of  the  earth, 
the  north  pole  of  the  heavens  is  in  his  zenith.  As  he  travels 
southward  it  becomes  less  and  less  elevated  till  he  reaches 
the  equator,  when  both  poles  are  in  his  horizon — south  of 
the  equator  the  north  pole  becomes  depressed  below,  while 
the  south  rises  above  his  horizon,  and  continues  to  do  so  till 
the  south  pole  of  the  globe  is  reached,  when  that  of  the 
heavens  will  be  in  the  zenith. 

(121.)  The  same  stars,  in  their  diurnal  revolution,  come  to 
the  meridian,  successively,  of  every  place  on  the  globe  once 
in  twenty-four  sidereal  hours.  And,  since  the  diurnal  ro- 
tation is  uniform,  the  interval,  in  sidereal  time,  which  elapses 

*  Ovpauos,  the  heavens  ;  fttrptiy,  to  measure  :  the  measurement  of  the 
heavens. 


72  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

between  the  same  star  coming  upon  the  meridians  of  two 
different  places  is  measured  by  the  difference  of  longitudes 
of  the  places. 

(122.)  Vice  versa  —  the  interval  elapsing  between  two  dif- 
ferent stars  coming  on  the  meridian  of  one  and  the  same  place, 
expressed  in  sidereal  time,  is  the  measure  of  the  difference  of 
right  ascensions  of  the  stars. 

(123.)  The  equinoctial  intersects  the  horizon  in  the  east 
and  west  points,  and  the  meridian  in  a  point  whose  altitude 
is  equal  to  the  co-latitude  of  the  place.  Thus,  at  Greenwich, 
of  which  the  latitude  is  51°  28'  40",  the  altitude  of  the  in- 
tersection of  the  equinoctial  and  meridian  is  38°  31'  20". 
The  north  and  south  poles  of  the  heavens  are  the  poles  of 
the  equinoctial.  The  east  and  west  points  of  the  horizon  of  a 
spectator  are  the  poles  of  his  celestial  meridian.  The  north 
and  south  points  of  his  horizon  are  the  poles  of  his  prime  ver 
tical,  and  his  zenith  and  nadir  are  the  poles  of  his  horizon. 

(124.)  All  the  heavenly  bodies  culminate  (i.  e.  come  to  their 
greatest  altitudes)  on  the  meridian ;  which  is,  therefore,  the 
best  situation  to  observe  them,  being  least  confused  by  the 
inequalities  and  vapours  of  the  atmosphere,  as  well  as  least 
displaced  by  refraction. 

(125.)  All  celestial  objects  within  the  circle  of  perpetual 
apparition  come  twice  on  the  meridian,  above  the  horizon,  in 
every  diurnal  revolution ;  once  above  and  once  below  the  pole. 
These  are  called  their  upper  and  lower  culminations. 

(126.)  The  problems  of  uranometry,  as  we  have  described 
it,  consist  in  the  solution  of  a  variety  of  spherical  triangles, 
both  right  and  oblique  angled,  according  to  the  rules,  and 
by  the  formulae  of  spherical  trigonometry,  which  we  suppose 
known  to  the  reader,  or  for  which  he  will  consult  appropriate 
treatises.  We  shall  only  here  observe  generally,  that  in  all 
problems  in  which  spherical  geometry  is  concerned,  the  student 
will  find  it  a  useful  practical  maxim  rather  to  consider  the 
poles  of  the  great  circles  which  the  question  before  him  refers 
to  than  the  circles  themselves.  To  use,  for  example,  in  the 
relations  he  has  to  consider,  polar  distances  rather  than  de- 
clinations, zenith  distances  rather  than  altitudes,  &c.     Bear- 


ELEMENTARY  RELATIONS.  73 

in^  this  in  mind,  there  are  few  problems  in  uranometry  which 
will  offer  any  difficulty.  The  following  are  the  combinations 
which  most  commonly  occur  for  solution  when  the  place  of 
one  celestial  object  only  on  the  sphere  is  concerned. 

(127.)  In  the  triangle  Z  P  S,  Z  is  the  zenith,  P  the 
elevated  pole,  and  S  the  star,  sun,  or  other  celestial  object. 
In  this  triangle  occur,  1st,  P  Z,  which  being  the  comple- 
ment of  P  H  (the  altitude  of  the  pole),  is  obviously  the  com- 
plement of  the  latitude  (or  the  co-latitude,  as  it  is  called)  of 
the  place ;  2d,  P  S,  the  polar  distance,  or  the  complement  of 
the  declination  (co-declination)  of  the  star;  3d,  Z  S,  the 
zenith  distance  or  co-altitude  of  the  star.  If  P  S  be  greater 
than  90°,  the  object  is  situated  on  the  side  of  the  equinoctial 
opposite  to  that  of  the  elevated  pole.  If  Z  S  be  so,  the  ob 
ject  is  below  the  horizon. 

In  the  same  triangle  the  angles  are,  1st,  Z  P  S  the  hour 
angle  ;  2d,  P  Z  S  (the  supplement  of  S  Z  O,  which  latter 
is  the  azimuth  of  the  star  or  other  heavenly  body),  3d,  P  S  Z, 
an  angle  which,  from  the  infrequency  of  any  practical  re- 
ference to  it,  has  not  acquired  a  name.* 

The  following  five  astronomical  magnitudes,  then,  occur 
among  the  sides  and  angles  of  this  most  useful  triangle :  viz. 
1st,  The  co-latitude  of  the  place  of  observation ;  2d,  the 
polar  distance  ;  3d,  the  zenith  distance ;  4th,  the  hour  angle ; 
and  5th,  the  sub-azimuth  (supplement  of  azimuth)  of  a  given 
celestial  object ;  and  by  its  solution  therefore  may  all  pro- 
blems be  resolved,  in  which  three  of  these  magnitudes  are 
directly  or  indirectly  given,  and  the  other  two  required  to  be 
found. 

(128.)  For  example,  suppose  the  time  of  rising  or  setting 
of  the  sun  or  of  a  star  were  required,  having  given  its  right 
ascension  and  polar  distance.  The  star  rises  when  apparently 
on  the  horizon,  or  really  about  34'  below  it  (owing  to  refrac- 
tion), so  that,  at  the  moment  of  its  apparent  rising,  its  zenith 

•  In  the  practical  discussion  of  the  measures  of  double  star*  and  other  objects 
by  the  aid  of  the  position  micrometer,  this  angle  is  sometimes  required  to  be 
known  ;  and,  when  so  required,  it  will  be  not  inconveniently  referred  to  as  '  the 
englc  of  position  of  the  zenith.'' 


74 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


distance  is  90°  34'  =  ZS.     Its  polar  distance  PS  being  also 
given,  and  the  co-latitude  ZP  of  the  place,  we  have  given 


B    S 

5 

^>K 

7^7/fe 

fit  .7    // 

M 

nkni 

l ^*i<*     l  T^<  \ 

/  A'  ~~~~~A.i 

V/  i      1/   7^ 

/c    /  '            Tl 

xhUa 

D\      /  /  / 

/'w       ^\<i    11 

Q<C___ 

jrf> 

the  three  sides  of  the  triangle,  to  find  the  hour  angle  Z  P  S, 
which,  being  known,  is  to  be  added  to  or  subtracted  from  the 
star's  right  ascension,  to  give  the  sidereal  time  of  setting  or 
rising,  which,  if  we  please,  may  be  converted  into  solar  time 
by  the  proper  rules  and  tables. 

(129.)  As  another  example  of  the  use  of  the  same  triangle, 
we  may  propose  to  find  the  local  sidereal  time,  and  the  latitude 
of  the  place  of  observation,  by  observing  equal  altitudes  of  the 
same  star  east  and  west  of  the  meridian,  and  noting  the  interval 
of  the  observations  in  sidereal  time. 

The  hour  angles  corresponding  to  equal  altitudes  of  a  fixed 
star  being  equal,  the  hour  angle  east  or  west  will  be  measured 
by  half  the  observed  interval  of  the  observations.  In  our 
triangle,  then,  we  have  given  this  hour  angle  Z  P  S,  the  polar 
distance  P  S  of  the  star,  and  Z  S,  its  co-altitude  at  the  moment 
of  observation.  Hence  we  may  find  P  Z,  the  co-latitnde  of 
the  place.  Moreover,  the  hour  angle  of  the  star  being  known, 
and  also  its  right  ascension,  the  point  of  the  equinoctial  is 
known,  which  is  on  the  meridian  at  the  moment  of  observa- 
ation ;  and,  therefore,  the  local  sidereal  time  at  that  moment. 
This  is  a  very  useful  observation  for  determining  the  latitude 
and  time  at  an  unknown  station. 


NATURE    OF   ASTRONOMICAL    INSTRUMENTS.  75 


CHAPTER  III.* 

OP    THE    NATURE    OF    ASTRONOMICAL    INSTRUMENTS   AND   OBSERVA- 
TIONS   IN  GENERAL. OP  SIDEREAL   AND    SOLAR   TIME. OF   THE 

MEASUREMENTS  OP  TIME.  CLOCKS,  CHRONOMETERS. OP  AS- 
TRONOMICAL MEASUREMENTS. PRINCIPLE  OF  TELESCOPIC  SIGHTS 

TO  INCREASE  THE  ACCURACY  OF  POINTING.  —  SIMPLEST  APPLICA- 
TION OF  THIS    PRINCIPLE THE  TRANSIT  INSTRUMENT. OP  THE 

MEASUREMENT  OF  ANGULAR  INTERVALS. METHODS  OF  INCREAS- 
ING THE  ACCURACY  OF  READING. THE  VERNIER.  —  THE  MICRO- 
SCOPE.   OF    THE    MURAL    CIRCLE THE    MERIDIAN    CIRCLE. 

FIXATION    OF    POLAR    AND    HORIZONTAL    POINTS. THE    LEVEL, 

PLUMB-LINE,  ARTIFICIAL  HORIZON. PRINCIPLE  OF  COLLIMATION. 

COLLIMATORS  OF  RITTENHOUSE,  KATER,  AND  BOHNENBERGER. 

OF  COMPOUND  INSTRUMENTS  WITH  CO-ORDINATE  CIRCLES.  —  THE 
EQUATORIAL,  ALTITUDE,  AND  AZIMUTH  INSTRUMENT THEO- 
DOLITE.   OP  THE  SEXTANT  AND  REFLECTING  CIRCLE.  —  PRIN- 
CIPLE   OF    REPETITION. OP    MICROMETERS. PARALLEL    WIRE 

MICROMETER.  —  PRINCIPLE    OF   THE   DUPLICATION    OF    IMAGES. 

THE  HELIOMETER. DOUBLE  REFRACTING  EYE-PIECE. VARIA- 
BLE   PRISM     MICROMETER. OF    THE    POSITION     MICROMETER. 

ILLUMINATION    OF    WIRES. SOLAR  TELESCOPE   AND     EYE-PIECE 

—  HELIOSCOPY.  —  COLLIMATION   OF   LARGE   REFLECTORS. 

(130.)  Our  first  chapters  have  been  devoted  to  the  acquisition 
chiefly  of  preliminary  notions  respecting  the  globe  we  inhabit, 
its  relation  to  the  celestial  objects  which  surround  it,  and  the 
physical  circumstances  under  which  all  astronomical  observa- 
tions must  be  made,  as  well  as  to  provide  ourselves  with  a 
stock  of  technical  words  and  elementary  ideas  of  most  frequent 
and  familiar  use  in  the  sequel.  We  might  now  proceed  to  a 
more  exact  and  detailed  statement  of  the  facts  and  theories 
of  astronomy ;  but,  in  order  to  do  this  with  full  effect,  it  will 
be  desirable  that  the  reader  be  made  acquainted  with  the 

•  The  student  who  is  anxious  to  become  acquainted  with  the  chief  subject 
matter  of  this  work,  may  defer  the  reading  of  that  part  of  this  chapter  which  is 
devoted  to  the  description  of  particular  instruments,  or  content  himself  with  a 
cursory  perusal  of  it,  until  farther  advanced,  when  it  will  be  necessary  to  return 
to  it. 


76  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

principal  means  which  astronomers  possess,  of  determining, 
with  the  degree  of  nicety  their  theories  require,  the  data  on 
which  they  ground  their  conclusions ;  in  other  words,  of  as- 
certaining by  measurement  the  appai*ent  and  real  magnitudes 
with  which  they  are  conversant.  It  is  only  when  in  pos- 
session of  this  knowledge  that  he  can  fully  appretiate  either 
the  truth  of  the  theories  themselves,  or  the  degree  of  reliance 
to  be  placed  on  any  of  their  conclusions  antecedent  to  trial : 
since  it  is  only  by  knowing  what  amount  of  error  can  cer- 
tainly be  perceived  and  distinctly  measured,  that  he  can 
satisfy  himself  whether  any  theory  offers  so  close  an  approx- 
imation, in  its  numerical  results,  to  actual  phenomena,  as  will 
justify  him  in  receiving  it  as  a  true  representation  of  nature. 
(131.)  Astronomical  instrument-making  may  be  justly 
regarded  as  the  most  refined  of  the  mechanical  arts,  and  that 
in  which  the  nearest  approach  to  geometrical  precision  is  re- 
quired, and  has  been  attained.  It  may  be  thought  an  easy 
thing,  by  one  unacquainted  with  the  niceties  required,  to  turn 
a  circle  in  metal,  to  divide  its  circumference  into  360  equal 
parts,  and  these  again  into  smaller  subdivisions,  —  to  place  it 
accurately  on  its  centre,  and  to  adjust  it  in  a  given  position  ; 
but  practically  it  is  found  to  be  one  of  the  most  difficult. 
Nor  will  this  appear  extraordinary,  when  it  is  considered  that, 
owing  to  the  application  of  telescopes  to  the  purposes  of  an- 
gular measurement,  every  imperfection  of  structure  or  divi- 
sion becomes  magnified  by  the  whole  optical  power  of  that 
instrument ;  and  that  thus,  not  only  direct  errors  of  work- 
manship, arising  from  unsteadiness  of  hand  or  imperfection  of 
tools,  but  those  inaccuracies  which  originate  in  far  more 
uncontrollable  causes,  such  as  the  unequal  expansion  and 
contraction  of  metallic  masses  by  a  change  of  temperature, 
and  their  unavoidable  flexure  or  bending  by  their  own  weight, 
become  perceptible  and  measurable.  An  angle  of  one  minute 
occupies,  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle  of  10  inches  in 
radius,  only  about  7j(jth  part  of  an  inch,  a  quantity  too  small 
to  be  certainly  dealt  with  without  the  use  of  magnifying 
glasses;  yet  one  minute  is  a  gross  quantity  in  the  astro- 
nomical measurement  of  an  angle.     With  the  instruments 


INSTRUMENTAL    ALD    OTHER    SOURCES    OF    ERROR.     77 

now  employed  in  observatories,  a  single  second,  or  the  60th 
part  of  a  minute,  is  rendered  a  distinctly  visible  and  appreti- 
able  quantity.  Now,  the  arc  of  a  circle,  subtended  by  one 
second,  is  less  than  the  200,000th  part  of  the  radius,  so  that  on 
a  circle  of  6  feet  in  diameter  it  would  occupy  no  greater  linear 
extent  than  y^uth  Par^  °^  an  *ncn »  a  <luantity  requiring  a 
powerful  microscope  to  be  discerned  at  all.  Let  any  one 
figure  to  himself,  therefore,  the  difficulty  of  placing  on  the 
circumference  of  a  metallic  circle  of  such  dimensions  (sup- 
posing the  difficulty  of  its  construction  surmounted),  360 
marks,  dots,  or  cognizable  divisions,  which  shall  all  be  true  to 
their  places  within  such  narrow  limits ;  to  say  nothing  of  the 
subdivision  of  the  degrees  so  marked  off  into  minutes,  and  of 
these  again  into  seconds.  Such  a  work  has  probably  baffled, 
and  will  probably  for  ever  continue  to  baffle,  the  utmost 
stretch  of  human  skill  and  industry ;  nor,  if  executed,  could 
it  endure.  The  ever  varying  fluctuations  of  heat  and  cold 
have  a  tendency  to  produce  not  merely  temporary  and 
transient,  but  permanent,  uncompensated  changes  of  form  in 
all  considerable  masses  of  those  metals  which  alone  are  applic 
able  to  such  uses ;  and  their  own  weight,  however  symmetri- 
cally formed,  must  always  be  unequally  sustained,  since  it  is 
impossible  to  apply  the  sustaining  power  to  every  part  sepa- 
rately :  even  could  this  be  done,  at  all  events  force  must  be 
used  to  move  and  to  fix  them  ;  which  can  never  be  done  with- 
out producing  temporary  and  risking  permanent  change  of 
form.  It  is  true,  by  dividing  them  on  their  centres,  and  in 
the  identical  places  they  are  destined  to  occupy,  and  by  a 
thousand  ingenious  and  delicate  contrivances,  wonders  have 
been  accomplished  in  this  department  of  art,  and  a  degree  of 
perfection  has  been  given,  not  merely  to  chefs  (Tceuvre,  but  to 
instruments  of  moderate  prices  and  dimensions,  and  in  ordi- 
nary use,  which,  on  due  consideration,  must  appear  very 
surprising.  But  though  we  are  entitled  to  look  for  wonders 
at  the  hands  of  scientific  artists,  we  are  not  to  expect  miracles. 
The  demands  of  the  astronomer  will  always  surpass  the  power 
of  the  artist ;  and  it  must,  therefore,  be  constantly  the  aim 
of  the  former  to  make  himself,  as  far  as  possible,  independent 


78  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

of  the  imperfections  incident  to  every  work  the  latter  can 
place  in  his  hands.  He  must,  therefore,  endeavour  so  to 
combine  his  observations,  so  to  choose  his  opportunities,  and 
so  to  familiarize  himself  with  all  the  causes  which  may  pro- 
duce instrumental  derangement,  and  with  all  the  peculiarities 
of  structure  and  material  of  each  instrument  he  possesses,  as 
not  to  allow  himself  to  be  misled  by  their  errors,  but  to  ex  • 
tract  from  their  indications,  as  far  as  possible,  all  that  is  true, 
and  reject  all  that  is  erroneous.  It  is  in  this  that  the  art  of 
the  practical  astronomer  consists,  —  an  art  of  itself  of  a  curious 
and  intricate  nature,  and  of  which  we  can  here  only  notice 
some  of  the  leading  and  general  features. 

(132.)  The  great  aim  of  the  practical  astronomer  being 
numerical  correctness  in  the  results  of  instrumental  measure- 
ment, his  constant  care  and  vigilance  must  be  directed  to  the 
detection  and  compensation  of  errors,  either  by  annihilating, 
or  by  taking  account  of,  and  allowing  for  them.  Now,  if  we 
examine  the  sources  from  which  errors  may  arise  in  any  in- 
strumental determination,  we  shall  find  them  chiefly  Teducible 
to  three  principal  heads  :  — 

(133.)  1st,  External  or  incidental  causes  of  error;  com- 
prehending those  which  depend  on  external,  uncontrollable 
circumstances:  such  as,  fluctuations  of  weather,  which  disturb 
the  amount  of  refraction  from  its  tabulated  value,  and,  being 
reducible  to  no  fixed  law,  induce  uncertainty  to  the  extent 
of  their  own  possible  magnitude ;  such  as,  by  varying  the 
temperature  of  the  air,  vary  also  the  form  and  position  of  the 
instruments  used,  by  altering  the  relative  magnitudes  and  the 
tension  of  their  parts  ;  and  others  of  the  like  nature. 

(134.)  2dly,  Errors  of  observation :  such  as  arise,  for  ex- 
ample, from  inexpertness,  defective  vision,  slowness  in  seizing 
the  exact  instant  of  occurrence  of  a  phenomenon,  or  preci- 
pitancy in  anticipating  it,  &c.  ;  from  atmospheric  indistinct- 
ness ;  insufficient  optical  power  in  the  instrument,  and  the 
like.  Under  this  head  may  also  be  classed  all  errors  arising 
from  momentary  instrumental  derangement,  —  slips  in  clamp- 
ing, looseness  of  screws,  &c. 

( 1 35.)  3dly,  The  third,  and  by  far  the  most  numerous  class 


INSTRUMENTAL    AND    OTHER    SOURCES    OF    ERROR.      70 

of  errors  to  which  astronomical  measurements  are  liable,  arise 
from  causes  which  may  be  deemed  instrumental,  and  which 
may  be  subdivided  into  two  principal  classes.  The^r*^  com- 
prehends those  which  arise  from  an  instrument  not  being  what 
it  professes  to  be,  which  is  error  of  workmanship.  Thus,  if 
a  pivot  or  axis,  instead  of  being,  as  it  ought,  exactly  cylin- 
drical, be  slightly  flattened,  or  elliptical,  —  if  it  be  not  exactly 
(as  it  is  intended  it  should  be)  concentric  with  the  circle  it 
carries ;  —  if  this  circle  (so  called)  be  in  reality  not  exactly 
circular,  or  not  in  one  plane  ;  —  if  its  divisions,  intended  to 
be  precisely  equidistant,  should  be  placed  in  reality  at  un 
equal  intervals,  —  and  a  hundred  other  things  of  the  same 
sort.  These  are  not  mere  speculative  sources  of  error,  but 
practical  annoyances,  which  every  observer  has  to  contend 
with. 

(136.)  The  other  subdivision  of  instrumental  errors  com- 
prehends such  as  arise  from  an  instrument  not  being  placed 
in  the  position  it  ought  to  have ;  and  from  those  of  its  parts, 
which  are  made  purposely  moveable,  not  being  properly  dis- 
posed inter  se.  These  are  errors  of  adjustment.  Some  are 
unavoidable,  as  they  arise  from  a  general  unsteadiness  of  the 
soil  or  building  in  which  the  instruments  are  placed ;  which, 
though  too  minute  to  be  noticed  in  any  other  way,  become 
appretiable  in  delicate  astronomical  observations :  others, 
again,  are  consequences  of  imperfect  workmanship,  as  where 
an  instrument  once  well  adjusted  will  not  remain  so,  but 
keeps  deviating  and  shifting.  But  the  most  important  of  this 
class  of  errors  arise  from  the  non-existence  of  natural  indica- 
tions, other  than  those  afforded  by  astronomical  observations 
themselves,  whether  an  instrument  has  or  has  not  the  exact 
position,  with  respect  to  the  horizon  and  its  cardinal  points, 
the  axis  of  the  earth,  or  to  other  principal  astronomical  lines 
and  circles,  which  it  ought  to  have  to  fulfil  properly  its  objects. 

(137.)  Now,  with  respect  to  the  first  two  classes  of  error, 
it  must  be  observed,  that,  in  so  far  as  they  cannot  be  reduced 
to  known  laws,  and  thereby  become  subjects  of  calculation 
and  due  allowance,  they  actually  vitiate,  to  their  full  extent, 
the  results  of  any  observations  in  which  they  subsist.    Being, 


80  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

however,  in  their  nature  casual  and  accidental,  their  effecta 
necessarily  lie  sometimes  one  way,  sometimes  the  other ; 
sometimes  diminishing,  sometimes  tending  to  increase  the  re- 
sults. Hence,  by  greatly  multiplying  observations,  under 
varied  circumstances,  by  avoiding  unfavourable,  and  taking 
advantage  of  favourable  circumstances  of  weather,  or  other- 
wise using  opportunity  to  advantage  —  and  finally,  by  taking 
the  mean  or  average  of  the  results  obtained,  this  class  of 
errors  may  be  so  far  subdued,  by  setting  them  to  destroy  one 
another,  as  no  longer  sensibly  to  vitiate  any  theoretical  or 
practical  conclusion.  This  is  the  great  and  indeed  only 
resource  against  such  errors,  not  merely  to  the  astronomer, 
but  to  the  investigator  of  numerical  results  in  every  depart- 
ment of  physical  research. 

(138.)  With  regard  to  errors  of  adjustment  and  work- 
manship, not  only  the  possibility,  but  the  certainty  of  their  ex- 
istence, in  every  imaginable  form,  in  all  instruments,  must  be 
contemplated.  Human  hands  or  machines  never  formed  a 
circle,  drew  a  straight  line,  or  erected  a  perpendicular,  nor 
ever  placed  an  instrument  in  perfect  adjustment,  unless  acci- 
dentally; and  then  only  during  an  instant  of  time.  This 
does  not  prevent,  however,  that  a  great  approximation  to  all 
these  desiderata  should  be  attained.  But  it  is  the  peculiarity 
of  astronomical  observation  to  be  the  ultimate  means  of  de- 
tection of  all  mechanical  defects  which  elude  by  their  mi- 
nuteness every  other  mode  of  detection.  What  the  eye 
cannot  discern  nor  the  touch  perceive,  a  course  of  astronomical 
observations  will  make  distinctly  evident.  The  imperfect 
products  of  man's  hands  are  here  tested  by  being  brought  into 
comparison  under  very  great  magnifying  powers  (corresponding 
in  effect  to  a  great  increase  in  acuteness  of  perception)  with 
the  perfect  workmanship  of  nature ;  and  there  is  none  which 
will  bear  the  trial.  Now,  it  may  seem  like  arguing  in  a 
vicious  circle,  to  deduce  theoretical  conclusions  and  laws  from 
observation,  and  then  to  turn  round  upon  the  instruments 
with  which  those  observations  were  made,  accuse  them  of  im- 
perfection, and  attempt  to  detect  and  rectify  their  errors  by 
means  of  the  very  laws  and  theories  which  they  have  helped 


INSTRUMENTAL   SOURCES  OF   ERROR.  81 

us  to  a  knowledge  of.  A  little  consideration,  however,  will 
suffice  to  show  that  such  a  course  of  proceeding  is  perfectly 
legitimate. 

(139.)  The  steps  by  which  we  arrive  at  the  laws  of  natural 
phenomena,  and  especially  those  which  depend  for  their  veri- 
fication on  numerical  determinations,  are  necessarily  suc- 
cessive. Gross  results  and  palpable  laws  are  arrived  at  by 
rude  observation  with  coarse  instruments,  or  without  any  in- 
struments at  all,  and  are  expressed  in  language  which  is  not 
to  be  considered  as  absolute,  but  is  to  be  interpreted  with  a 
degree  of  latitude  commensurate  to  the  imperfection  of  the 
observations  themselves.  These  results  are  corrected  and  re- 
fined by  nicer  scrutiny,  and  with  more  delicate  means.  The 
first  rude  expressions  of  the  laws  which  embody  them  are 
perceived  to  be  inexact.  The  language  used  in  their  ex- 
pression is  corrected,  its  terms  more  rigidly  defined,  or  fresh 
terms  introduced,  until  the  new  state  of  language  and  termi- 
nology is  brought  to  fit  the  improved  state  of  knowledge 
of  facts.  In  the  progress  of  this  scrutiny  subordinate  laws 
are  brought  into  view  which  still  further  modify  both  the 
verbal  statement  and  numerical  results  of  those  which  first 
offered  themselves  to  our  notice ;  and  when  these  are  traced 
out  and  reduced  to  certainty,  others,  again,  subordinate  to 
them,  make  their  appearance,  and  become  subjects  of  further 
inquiry.  Now,  it  invariably  happens  (and  the  reason  is 
evident)  that  the  first  glimpse  we  catch  of  such  subordinate 
laws  —  the  first  form  in  which  they  are  dimly  shadowed  out 
to  our  minds  —  is  that  of  errors.  We  perceive  a  discordance 
between  what  we  expect,  and  what  we  find.  The  first  oc- 
currence of  such  a  discordance  we  attribute  to  accident.  It 
happens  again  and  again ;  and  we  begin  to  suspect  our  in- 
struments. We  then  inquire,  to  what  amount  of  error  their 
determinations  can,  by  possibility,  be  liable.  If  their  limit  of 
possible  error  exceed  the  observed  deviation,  we  at  once  con- 
demn the  instrument,  and  set  about  improving  its  construc- 
tion or  adjustments.  Still  the  same  deviations  occur,  and, 
so  far  from  being  palliated,  are  more  marked  and  better  de- 
fined than  before.     We  are  now  sure  that  we  are  on  the 

Q 


8«  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMT. 

traces  of  a  law  of  nature,  and  we  pursue  it  till  we  have 
reduced  it  to  a  definite  statement,  and  verified  it  by  repeated 
observation,  under  every  variety  of  circumstances. 

(140.)  Now,  in  the  course  of  this  inquiry,  it  will  not  fail 
to  happen  that  other  discordances  will  strike  us.  Taught  by 
experience,  we  suspect  the  existence  of  some  natural  law, 
before  unknown ;  we  tabulate  (i.  e.  draw  out  in  order)  the 
results  of  our  observations  ;  and  we  perceive,  in  this  synoptic 
statement  of  them,  distinct  indications  of  a  regular  progres- 
sion. Again  we  improve  or  vary  our  instruments,  and  we 
now  lose  sight  of  this  supposed  new  law  of  nature  altogether, 
or  find  it  replaced  by  some  other,  of  a  totally  different  cha- 
racter. Thus  we  are  led  to  suspect  an  instrumental  cause 
for  what  we  have  noticed.  We  examine,  therefore,  the  theory 
of  our  instrument ;  we  suppose  defects  in  its  structure,  and, 
by  the  aid  of  geometry,  we  trace  their  influence  in  intro- 
ducing actual  errors  into  its  indications.  These  errors  have 
their  laws,  which,  so  long  as  we  have  no  knowledge  of  causes 
to  guide  us,  may  be  confounded  with  laws  of  nature,  as  they 
are  mixed  up  with  them  in  their  effects.  They  are  not  for- 
tuitous, like  errors  of  observation,  but,  as  they  arise  from 
sources  inherent  in  the  instrument,  and  unchangeable  while 
it  and  its  adjustments  remain  unchanged,  they  are  reducible 
to  fixed  and  ascertainable  forms ;  each  particular  defect, 
whether  of  structure  or  adjustment,  producing  its  own  ap- 
propriate form  of  error.  When  these  are  thoroughly  inves- 
tigated, we  recognize  among  them  one  which  coincides  in  its 
nature  and  progression  with  that  of  our  observed  discord- 
ances. The  mystery  is  at  once  solved.  We  have  detected, 
by  direct  observation,  an  instrumental  defect. 

(141.)  It  is,  therefore,  a  chief  requisite  for  the  practical 
astronomer  to  make  himself  completely  familiar  with  the 
theory  of  his  instruments.  By  this  alone  is  he  enabled  at  once 
to  decide  what  effect  on  his  observations  any  given  imperfec- 
tion of  structure  or  adjustment  will  produce  in  any  given 
circumstances  under  which  an  observation  can  be  made.  This 
alone  also  can  place  him  in  a  condition  to  derive  available 
and  practical  means  of  destroying  and  eliminating  altogether 


INSTRUMENTAL   SOURCES   OF    ERROR.  8.1 

the  influence  of  such  imperfections,  by  so  arranging  his  ob- 
servations, that  it  shall  affect  their  results  in  opposite  ways, 
and  that  its  influence  shall  thus  disappear  from  their  mean, 
which  is  one  of  the  chief  modes  by  which  precision  is  attained 
in  practical  astronomy.  Suppose,  for  example,  the  principle 
of  an  instrument  required  that  a  circle  should  be  concentric 
with  the  axis  on  which  it  is  made  to  turn.  As  this  is  a  con- 
dition which  no  workmanship  can  exactly  fulfil,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  inquire  what  errors  will  be  produced  in  observa- 
tions made  and  registered  on  the  faith  of  such  an  instrument, 
by  any  assigned  deviation  in  this  respect ;  that  is  to  say,  what 
would  be  the  disagreement  between  observations  made  with 
it  and  with  one  absolutely  perfect,  could  such  be  obtained. 
Now,  simple  geometrical  considerations  suffice  to  show — 1st. 
that  if  the  axis  be  excentric  by  a  given  fraction  (say  one 
thousandth  part)  of  the  radius  of  the  circle,  all  angles  read  off 
on  that  part  of  the  circle  towards  which  the  excentricity  lies, 
will  appear  by  that  fractional  amount  too  small,  and  all  on 
the  opposite  side  too  large.  And,  2dly,  that  whatever  be  the 
amount  of  the  excentricity,  and  on  whatever  part  of  the  circle 
any  proposed  angle  is  measured,  the  effect  of  the  error  in 
question  on  the  result  of  observations  depending  on  the 
graduation  of  its  circumference  (or  limb,  as  it  is  technically 
called)  will  be  completely  annihilated  by  the  very  easy  method 
of  always  reading  off  the  divisions  on  two  diametrically  op- 
posite points  of  the  circle,  and  taking  a  mean ;  for  the  effect 
of  excentricity  is  always  to  increase  the  arc  representing  the 
angle  in  question  on  one  side  of  the  circle,  by  just  the  same 
quantity  by  which  it  diminishes  that  on  the  other.  Again, 
suppose  that  the  proper  use  of  the  instrument  required  that 
this  axis  should  be  exactly  parallel  to  that  of  the  earth.  As 
it  never  can  be  placed  or  remain  so,  it  becomes  a  question, 
what  amount  of  error  will  arise,  in  its  use,  from  any  assigned 
deviation,  whether  in  a  horizontal  or  vertical  plane,  from  this 
precise  position.  Such  inquiries  constitute  the  theory  of  in- 
strumental errors;  a  theory  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
practice,  and  one  of  which  a  complete  knowledge  will  enable 
an  observer,  with   moderate   instrumental   means,  often  to 

a  * 


«4  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

attain  a  degree  of  precision  which  might  seem  to  belong  only 
to  the  most  refined  and  costly.  This  theory,  as  will  readily 
be  apprehended,  turns  almost  entirely  on  considerations  of 
pure  geometry,  and  those  for  the  most  part  not  difficult.  In 
the  present  work,  however,  we  have  no  further  concern  with 
it.  The  astronomical  instruments  we  propose  briefly  to  de- 
scribe in  this  chapter  will  be  considered  as  perfect  both  in 
construction  and  adjustment.* 

(142.)  As  the  above  remarks  are  very  essential  to  a  right 
understanding  of  the  philosophy  of  our  subject  and  the  spirit 
of  astronomical  methods,  we  shall  elucidate  them  by  taking 
one  or  two  special  cases.  Observant  persons,  before  the  in- 
vention of  astronomical  instruments,  had  already  concluded 
the  apparent  diurnal  motions  of  the  stars  to  be  performed  in 
circles  about  fixed  poles  in  the  heavens,  as  shown  in  the. 
foregoing  chapter.  In  drawing  this  conclusion,  however, 
refraction  was  entirely  overlooked,  or,  if  forced  on  their  notice 
by  its  great  magnitude  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  the  horizon,  was  regarded  as  a  local  irregularity,  and,  as 
such,  neglected,  or  slurred  over.  As  soon,  however,  as  the 
diurnal  paths  of  the  stars  were  attempted  to  be  traced  by  in- 
struments, even  of  the  coarsest  kind,  it  became  evident  that 
the  notion  of  exact  circles  described  about  one  and  the 
same  pole  would  not  represent  the  phenomena  correctly, 
but  that,  owing  to  some  cause  or  other,  the  apparent  diurnal 
orbit  of  every  star  is  distorted  from  a  circular  into  an  oval 
form,  its  lower  segment  being  flatter  than  its  upper ;  and  the 
deviation  being  greater  the  nearer  the  star  approached  the 
horizon,  the  effect  being  the  same  as  if  the  circle  had  been 
squeezed  upwards  from  below,  and  the  lower  parts  more  than 
the  higher.  For  such  an  effect,  as  it  was  soon  found  to  arise 
from  no  casual  or  instrumental  cause,  it  became  necessary  to 
seek  a  natural  one ;  and  refraction  readily  occurred,  to  solve 
the  difficulty.     In  fact,  it  is  a  case  precisely  analogous  to 

*  The  principle  on  which  the  chief  adjustments  of  two  or  three  of  the  most 
useful  and  common  instruments,  such  as  the  transit,  the  equatorial,  and  the 
sextant,  are  performed,  are,  however,  noticed,  for  the  convenience  of  readers  who 
may  use  such  instruments  without  going  further  into  the  arcana  of  practical 
astronomy. 


SIDEREAL   AND    SOLAR   TIME.  85 

what  we  have  already  noticed  (art.  47.),  of  the  apparent  dis- 
tortion of  the  sun  near  the  horizon,  only  on  a  larger  scale, 
and  traced  up  to  greater  altitudes.  This  new  law  once 
established,  it  became  necessary  to  modify  the  expression  of 
that  anciently  received,  by  inserting  in  it  a  salvo  for  the 
effect  of  refraction,  or  by  making  a  distinction  between  the 
apparent  diurnal  orbits,  as  affected  by  refraction,  and  the  true 
ones  cleared  of  that  effect.  This  distinction  between  the  ap- 
parent and  the  true — between  the  uncorrected  and  corrected — 
between  the  rough  and  obvious,  and  the  refined  and  ultimate — 
is  of  perpetual  occurrence  in  every  part  of  astronomy. 

(143.)  Again.  The  first  impression  produced  by  a  view 
of  the  diurnal  movement  of  the  heavens  is  that  all  the 
heavenly  bodies  perform  this  revolution  in  one  common 
period,  viz.  a  day,  or  24  hours.  But  no  sooner  do  we  come 
to  examine  the  matter  instrumentally,  i.  e.  by  noting,  by  time- 
keepers, their  successive  arrivals  on  the  meridian,  than  we  find 
differences  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  any  error  of  ob- 
servation. All  the  stars,  it  is  true,  occupy  the  same  interval 
of  time  between  their  successive  appulses  to  the  meridian,  or 
to  any  vertical  circle;  but  this  is  a  very  different  one  from 
that  occupied  by  the  sun.  It  is  palpably  shorter ;  being,  in 
fact,  only  23h  56'  4-09",  instead  of  24  hours,  such  hours  as 
our  common  clocks  mark.  Here,  then,  we  have  already  two 
different  days,  a  sidereal  and  a  solar:  and  if,  instead  of  the 
sun,  we  observe  the  moon,  we  find  a  third,  much  longer  than 
either,  —  a  lunar  day,  whose  average  duration  is  24h  54m  of 
our  ordinary  time,  which  last  is  solar  time,  being  of  necessity 
conformable  to  the  sun's  successive  re-appearances,  on  which 
all  the  business  of  life  depends. 

(144.)  Now,  all  the  stars  are  found  to  be  unanimous  in 
giving  the  same  exact  duration  of  23h  56'  4-09",  for  the 
sidereal  day ;  which,  therefore,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  receive 
as  the  period  in  which  the  earth  makes  one  revolution  on  its 
axis.  We  are,  therefore,  compelled  to  look  on  the  sun  and 
moon  as  exceptions  to  the  general  law ;  as  having  a  different 
nature,  or  at  least  a  different  relation  to  us,  from  the  stars ; 
and  as  having  motions,  real  or  apparent,  of  their  own,  inde- 


Sd  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMT. 

pendent  of  the  rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  axis.  Thus  a 
great  and  most  important  distinction  is  disclosed  to  us. 

(145.)  To  establish  these  facts,  almost  no  apparatus  is 
required.  An  observer  need  only  station  himself  to  the 
north  of  some  well-defined  vertical  object,  as  the  angle  of  a 
building,  and,  placing  his  eye  exactly  at  a  certain  fixed  point 
(such  as  a  small  hole  in  a  plate  of  metal  nailed  to  some 
immoveable  support),  notice  the  successive  disappearances  of 
any  star  behind  the  building,  by  a  watch.*  When  he  ob- 
serves the  sun,  he  must  shade  his  eye  with  a  dark-coloured 
or  smoked  glass,  and  notice  the  moments  when  its  western 
and  eastern  edges  successively  come  up  to  the  wall,  from 
which,  by  taking  half  the  interval,  he  will  ascertain  (what  he 
cannot  directly  observe)  the  moment  of  disappearance  of  its 
centre. 

(146.)  When,  in  pursuing  and  establishing  this  general 
fact,  we  are  led  to  attend  more  nicely  to  the  times  of  the 
daily  arrival  of  the  sun  on  the  meridian,  irregularities  (such 
they  first  seem  to  be)  begin  to  make  their  appearance.  The 
intervals  between  two  successive  arrivals  are  not  the  same  at 
all  times  of  the  year.  They  are  sometimes  greater,  sometimes 
less,  than  24  hours,  as  shown  by  the  clock ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  solar  day  is  not  always  of  the  same  length.  About  the 
2 1  st  of  December,  for  example,  it  is  half  a  minute  longer,  and 
about  the  same  day  of  September  nearly  as  much  shorter, 
than  its  average  duration.  And  thus  a  distinction  is  again 
pressed  upon  our  notice  betwen  the  actual  solar  day,  which  is 
never  two  days  in  succession  alike,  and  the  mean  solar  dag 
of  24  hours,  which  is  an  average  of  all  the  solar  days 
throughout  the  year.  Here,  then,  a  new  source  of  inquiry 
opens  to  us.     The  sun's  apparent  motion  is  not  only  not  the 


*  This  is  an  excellent  practical  method  of  ascertaining  the  rate  of  a  clock  or 
watch,  being  exceedingly  accurate  if  a  few  precautions  are  attended  to;  the 
chief  of  which  is,  to  take  care  that  that  part  of  the  edge  behind  which  the  star 
(a  bright  one,  not  a  planet)  disappears  shall  be  quite  smooth  ;  as  otherwise  vari- 
able refraction  may  transfer  the  point  of  disappearance  from  a  protuberance  to  a 
notch,  and  thus  vary  the  moment  of  observation  unduly.  This  is  easily  secured, 
try  nailing  up  a  smooth-edged  board.  The  verticality  of  its  edge  should  be 
ensured  l>y  the  use  of  a  plumb-line. 


INEQUALITY    OF   SOLAR   DAYS.  87 

same  with  that  of  the  stars,  but  it  is  not  (as  the  latter  is) 
uniform.  It  is  subject  to  fluctuations,  whose  laws  become 
matter  of  investigation.  But  to  pursue  these  laws,  we  re- 
quire nicer  means  of  observation  than  what  we  have  de- 
scribed, and  are  obliged  to  call  in  to  our  aid  an  instrument 
called  the  transit  instrument,  especially  destined  for  such 
observations,  and  to  attend  minutely  to  all  the  causes  of 
irregularity  in  the  going  of  clocks  and  watches  which  may 
affect  our  reckoning  of  time.  Thus  we  become  involved  by 
degrees  in  more  and  more  delicate  instrumental  inquiries; 
and  we  speedily  find  that,  in  proportion  as  we  ascertain  the 
amount  and  law  of  one  great  or  leading  fluctuation,  or  in- 
equality, as  it  is  called,  of  the  sun's  diurnal  motion,  we  bring 
into  view  others  continually  smaller  and  smaller,  which  were 
before  obscured,  or  mixed  up  with  errors  of  observation  and 
instrumental  imperfections.  In  short,  we  may  not  inaptly 
compare  the  mean  length  of  the  solar  day  to  the  mean  or 
average  height  of  water  in  a  harbour,  or  the  general  level 
of  the  sea  unagitated  by  tide  or  waves.  The  great  annual 
fluctuation  above  noticed  may  be  compared  to  the  daily  vari- 
ations of  level  produced  by  the  tides,  which  are  nothing  but 
enormous  waves  extending  over  the  whole  ocean,  while  the 
smaller  subordinate  inequalities  may  be  assimilated  to  waves 
ordinarily  so  called,  on  which,  when  large,  we  perceive  lesser 
undulations  to  ride,  and  on  these,  again,  minuter  ripplings, 
to  the  series  of  whose  subordination  we  can  perceive  no  end. 
(147.)  With  the  causes  of  these  irregularities  in  the  solar 
motion  we  have  no  concern  at  present ;  their  explanation  be- 
longs to  a  more  advanced  part  of  our  subject :  but  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  solar  and  sidereal  days,  as  it  pervades 
every  part  of  astronomy,  requires  to  be  early  introduced,  and 
never  lost  sight  of.  It  is,  as  already  observed,  the  mean  or 
average  length  of  the  solar  day,  which  is  used  in  the  civil 
reckoning  of  time.  It  commences  at  midnight,  but  astro- 
nomers, even  when  they  use  mean  solar  time,  depart  from 
the  civil  reckoning,  commencing  their  day  at  noon,  and 
reckoning  the  hours  from  0  round  to  24.  Thus,  1 1  o'elock 
in  the  forenoon  of  the  second  of  January,  in  the  civil  reckon- 


88  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ing  of  time,  corresponds  to  January  1  day  23  hours  in  the 
astronomical  reckoning;  and  1  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of 
the  former,  to  January  2  days  1  hour  of  the  latter  reckoning. 
This  usage  has  its  advantages  and  disadvantages,  but  the 
latter  seem  to  preponderate ;  and  it  would  be  well  if,  in  con- 
sequence, it  could  be  broken  through,  and  the  civil  reckoning 
substituted.  Uniformity  in  nomenclature  and  modes  of 
reckoning  in  all  matters  relating  to  time,  space,  weight,  mea- 
sure, fyc,  is  of  such  vast  and  paramount  importance  in  every 
relation  of  life  as  to  outweigh  every  consideration  of  technical 
convenience  or  custom.  * 

(148.)  Both  astronomers  and  civilians,  however,  who  in- 
habit different  points  of  the  earth's  surface,  differ  from  each 
other  in  their  reckoning  of  time ;  as  it  is  obvious  they  must, 
if  we  consider  that,  when  it  is  noon  at  one  place,  it  is  mid- 
night at  a  place  diametrically  opposite ;  sunrise  at  another ; 
and  sunset,  again,  at  a  fourth.  Hence  arises  considerable  in- 
convenience, especially  as  respects  places  differing  very  widely 
In  situation,  and  which  may  even  in  some  critical  cases  in- 
volve the  mistake  of  a  whole  day.  To  obviate  this  incon- 
venience, there  has  lately  been  introduced  a  system  of 
reckoning  time  by  mean  solar  days  and  parts  of  a  day  counted 
from  a  fixed  instant,  common  to  all  the  world,  and  determined 
by  no  local  circumstance,  such  as  noon  or  midnight,  but  by 
the  motion  of  the  sun  among  the  stars.  Time,  so  reckoned, 
is  called  equinoctial  time;  and  is  numerically  the  same,  at 
the  same  instant,  in  every  part  of  the  globe.  Its  origin  will 
be  explained  more  fully  at  a  more  advanced  stage  of  our 
work. 

(149.)  Time  is  an  essential  element  in  astronomical  obser- 
vation, in  a  twofold  point  of  view:  —  1st,  As  the  represen- 

*  The  only  disadvantage  to  astronomers  of  using  the  civil  reckoning  is  this  — 
that  their  observations  being  chiefly  carried  on  during  the  night,  the  day  of  their 
date  will,  in  this  reckoning,  always  have  to  be  changed  at  midnight,  and  the 
former  and  latter  portion  of  every  night's  observations  will  belong  to  two  differ- 
ently numbered  civil  days  of  the  month.  There  is  no  denying  this  to  be  an 
inconvenience.  Habit,  however,  would  alleviate  it ;  and  some  inconveniences 
must  be  cheerfully  submitted  to  by  all  who  resolve  to  act  on  general  principles. 
All  other  classes  of  men,  whose  occupation  extends  to  the  night  as  well  as  day, 
submit  to  it,  and  find  their  advantage  in  doing  so. 


MEASUREMENT   OF    TIME.  89 

tative  of  angular  motion.  The  earth's  diurnal  motion  being 
uniform,  every  star  describes  its  diurnal  circle  uniformly ; 
and  the  time  elapsing  between  the  passage  of  the  stars  in 
succession  across  the  meridian  of  any  observer  becomes, 
therefore,  a  direct  measure  of  their  differences  of  right  as- 
cension. 2dly,  As  the  fundamental  element  (or  natural  in- 
dependent variable,  to  use  the  language  of  geometers)  in  all 
dynamical  theories.  The  great  object  of  astronomy  is  the 
determination  of  the  laws  of  the  celestial  motions,  and  their 
reference  to  their  proximate  or  remote  causes.  Now,  the 
statement  of  the  law  of  any  observed  motion  in  a  celestial 
object  can  be  no  other  than  a  proposition  declaring  what  has 
been,  is,  and  will  be,  the  real  or  apparent  situation  of  that 
object  at  any  time,  past,  present,  or  future.  To  compare 
such  laws,  therefore,  with  observation,  we  must  possess  a 
register  of  the  observed  situations  of  the  object  in  question, 
and  of  the  times  when  they  were  observed. 

(150.)  The  measurement  of  time  is  performed  by  clocks, 
chronometers,  clepsydras,  and  hour-glasses.  The  two  former 
are  alone  used  in  modern  astronomy.  The  hour-glass  is  a 
coarse  and  rude  contrivance  for  measuring,  or  rather  counting 
out,  fixed  portions  of  time,  and  is  entirely  disused.  The 
clepsydra,  which  measured  time  by  the  gradual  emptying  of 
a  large  vessel  of  water  through  a  determinate  orifice,  is  sus- 
ceptible of  considerable  exactness,  and  was  the  only  depen- 
dence of  astronomers  before  the  invention  of  clocks  and 
watches.  At  present  it  is  abandoned,  owing  to  the  greater 
convenience  and  exactness  of  the  latter  instruments.  In  one 
case  only  has  the  revival  of  its  use  been  proposed ;  viz.  for 
the  accurate  measurement  of  very  small  portions  of  time,  by 
the  flowing  out  of  mercury  from  a  small  orifice  in  the  bottom 
of  a  vessel,  kept  constantly  full  to  a  fixed  height.  The  stream 
is  intercepted  at  the  moment  of  noting  any  event,  and 
directed  aside  into  a  receiver,  into  which  it  continues  to  run, 
till  the  moment  of  noting  any  other  event,  when  the  inter- 
cepting cause  is  suddenly  removed,  the  stream  flows  in  its 
original  course,  and  ceases  to  run  into  the  receiver.  The 
weight  of  mercury  received,  compared  with  the  weight  re- 


90  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ceived  in  an  interval  of  time  observed  by  the  clock,  gives  the 
interval  between  the  events  observed.  This  ingenious  and 
simple  method  of  resolving,  with  all  possible  precision,  a  pro- 
blem of  much  importance  in  many  physical  inquiries,  is  due 
to  the  late  Captain  Kater. 

(151.)  The  pendulum  clock,  however,  and  the  balance 
watch,  with  those  improvements  and  refinements  in  its  struc- 
ture which  constitute  it  emphatically  a  chronometer  *,  are  the 
instruments  on  which  the  astronomer  depends  for  his  know- 
ledge of  the  lapse  of  time.  These  instruments  are  now 
brought  to  such  perfection,  that  an  habitual  irregularity  in 
the  rate  of  going,  to  the  extent  of  a  single  second  in  twenty - 
four  hours  in  two  consecutive  days,  is  not  tolerated  in  one  of 
good  character ;  so  that  any  interval  of  time  less  than  twenty- 
four  hours  may  be  certainly  ascertained  within  a  few  tenths 
of  a  second,  by  their  use.  In  proportion  as  intervals  are 
longer,  the  risk  of  error,  as  well  as  the  amount  of  error 
risked,  becomes  greater,  because  the  accidental  errors  of  many 
days  may  accumulate ;  and  causes  producing  a  slow  progres- 
sive change  in  the  rate  of  going  may  subsist  unperceived.  It 
is  not  safe,  therefore,  to  trust  the  determination  of  time  to 
clocks,  or  watches,  for  many  days  in  succession,  without 
checking  them,  and  ascertaining  their  errors  by  reference  to 
natural  events  which  we  know  to  happen,  day  after  day,  at 
equal  intervals.  But  if  this  be  done,  the  longest  intervals 
may  be  fixed  with  the  same  precision  as  the  shortest ;  since, 
in  fact,  it  is  then  only  the  times  intervening  between  the  first 
and  the  last  moments  of  such  long  intervals,  and  such  of  those 
periodically  recurring  events  adopted  for  our  points  of  reckon- 
ing, as  occur  within  twenty -four  hours  respectively  of  either, 
which  we  measure  by  artificial  means.  The  whole  days  are 
counted  out  for  us  by  nature ;  the  fractional  parts  only,  at 
either  end,  are  measured  by  our  clocks.  To  keep  the  reckon- 
ing of  the  integer  days  correct,  so  that  none  shall  be  lost  or 
counted  twice,  is  the  object  of  the  calendar.  Chronology 
marks  out  the  order  of  succession  of  events,  and  refers  them 

•   Xpofos,  time  ;  fitr/xiy,  to  measure. 


PRINCIPLE    OP    TELESCOPIC    SIGHTS.  91 

to  their  proper  years  and  days  ;  while  chronometry,  ground- 
ing its  determinations  on  the  precise  observation  of  such 
regularly  periodical  events  as  can  be  conveniently  and  exactly 
subdivided,  enables  us  to  fix  the  moments  in  which  phenomena 
occur,  with  the  last  degree  of  precision. 

(152.)  In  the  culmination  or  transit  (i.  e.  the  passage  across 
the  meridian  of  an  observer,)  of  every  star  in  the  heavens,  he 
is  furnished  with  such  a  regularly  periodical  natural  event  as 
we  allude  to.  Accordingly,  it  is  to  the  transits  of  the 
brightest  and  most  conveniently  situated  fixed  stars  that 
astronomers  resort  to  ascertain  their  exact  time,  or,  which 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  to  determine  the  exact  amount  of 
error  of  their  clocks. 

(153.)  Before  we  describe  the  instrument  destined  for  the 
purpose  of  observing  such  culminations,  however,  or  those  in- 
tended for  the  measurement  of  angular  intervals  in  the  sphere, 
it  is  requisite  to  place  clearly  before  the  reader  the  principle 
on  which  the  telescope  is  applied  in  astronomy  to  the  precise 
determination  of  a  direction  in  space,  —  that,  namely  of  the 
visual  ray  by  which  we  see  a  star  or  any  other  distant  object. 

(154.)  The  telescope  most  commonly  used  in  astronomy 
for  these  purposes  is  the  refracting  telescope,  which  consists 
of  an  object-glass  (either  single,  or  as  is  now  almost  universal, 
double,  forming  what  is  called  in  optics,  an  achromatic  com- 
bination) A ;  a  tube  A  B,  into  which  the  brass  cell  of  the 

a b  „ 

e  m 


-*- 


object-glass  is  firmly  screwed,  and  an  eye-lens  C,  for  which  is 
often  substituted  a  combination  of  glasses  designed  to  increase 
the  magnifying  power  of  the  telescope,  or  otherwise  give 
more  distinctness  of  vision  according  to  optical  principles 
which  we  have  no  occasion  here  to  refer  to.  This  also  is 
fitted  into  a  cell,  which  is  screwed  firmly  into  the  end  B  of 
the  tube,  so  that  object-glass,  tube,  and  eye-glass  may  be 
considered  as  forming  one  piece,  invariable  in  the  relative 
position  of  its  parts. 


92  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(155.)  The  lino  P  Q  joining  the  centres  of  the  object  and 
eye-glasses  and  produced,  is  called  the  axis  or  line  of  collima- 
tion  of  the  telescope.  And  it  is  evident,  that  the  situation  of 
this  line  holds  a  fixed  relation  to  the  tube  and  its  appendages, 
so  long  as  the  object  and  eye-glasses  maintain  their  fixity  in 
this  respect. 

(156.)  Whatever  distant  object  E  this  line  is  directed  to, 
an  inverted  picture  or  image  of  that  object  F  is  formed  (ac- 
cording to  the  principles  of  optics),  in  the  focus  of  the  object- 
glass,  and  may  there  be  viewed  as  if  it  were  a  real  object, 
through  the  eye-lens  C,  which  (if  of  short  focus)  enables  us 
to  magnify  it  just  as  such  a  lens  would  magnify  a  material 
object  in  the  same  place. 

(157.)  Now  as  this  image  is  formed  and  viewed  in  the 
air,  being  itself  immaterial  and  impalpable  —  nothing  prevents 
our  placing  in  that  very  place  F  in  the  axis  of  the  telescope,  a 
real,  substantial  object  of  very  definite  form  and  delicate 
make,  such  as  a  fine  metallic  point,  as  of  a  needle  —  or  bet- 
ter still,  a  cross  formed  by  two  very  fine  threads  (spider-lines), 
thin  metallic  wires,  or  lines  drawn  on  glass  intersecting  each 
other  at  right  angles  —  and  whose  intersection  is  all  but  a 
mathematical  point.  If  such  a  point,  wire,  or  cross  be  care- 
fully placed  and  firmly  fixed  in  the  exact  focus  F,  both  of  the 
object  and  eye-glass,  it  will  be  seen  through  the  latter  at  tht 
same  time,  and  occupying  the  same  precise  place  as  the  image 
of  the  distant  star  E.  The  magnifying  power  of  the  lens 
renders  perceptible  the  smallest  deviation  from  perfect  coinci- 
dence, which,  should  it  exist,  is  a  proof,  that  the  axis  Q  P  is 
not  directed  rigorously  towards  E.  In  that  case,  a  fine  mo- 
tion (by  means  of  a  screw  duly  applied),  communicated  to 
the  telescope,  will  be  necessary  to  vary  the  direction  of  the 
axis  till  the  coincidence  is  rendered  perfect.  So  precise  is 
this  mode  of  pointing  found  in  practice,  that  the  axis  of  a 
telescope  may  be  directed  towards  a  star  or  other  definite  ce- 
lestial object  without  an  error  of  more  than  a  few  tenths  of  a 
second  of  angular  measure. 

(158.)  This  application  of  the  telescope  may  be  considered 
as  completely  annihilating  that  part  of  the  error  of  observa- 


TnK   TRANSIT    INSTRUMENT.  93 

tion  which  might  otherwise  arise  from  an  erroneous  estimation 
of  the  direction  in  which  an  object  lies  from  the  observer's 
eye,  or  from  the  centre  of  the  instrument.  It  is,  in  fact,  the 
grand  source  of  all  the  precision  of  modern  astronomy,  with- 
out which  all  other  refinements  in  instrumental  workmanship 
would  be  thrown  away;  the  errors  capable  of  being  com- 
mitted in  pointing  to  an  object,  without  such  assistance,  being 
far  greater  than  what  could  arise  from  any  but  the  very 
coarsest  graduation.  *  In  fact,  the  telescope  thus  applied 
becomes,  with  respect  to  angular,  what  the  microscope  is  with 
respect  to  linear  dimension.  By  concentrating  attention  on 
its  smallest  parts,  and  magnifying  into  palpable  intervals  the 
minutest  differences,  it  enables  us  not  only  to  scrutinize  the 
form  and  structure  of  the  objects  to  which  it  is  pointed,  but 
to  refer  their  apparent  places,  with  all  but  geometrical  pre- 
cision, to  the  parts  of  any  scale  with  which  we  propose  to 
compare  them. 

(159.)  We  now  return  to  our  subject,  the  determination  of 
time  by  the  transits  or  culminations  of  celestial  objects.  The 
instrument  with  which  such  culminations  are  observed  is 
called  a  transit  instrument.  It  consists  of  a  telescope  firmly 
fastened  on  a  horizontal  axis  directed  to  the  east  and  west 
points  of  the  horizon,  or  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 

•  The  honour  of  this  capital  improvement  has  been  successfully  vindicated 
by  Derham  (Phil.  Trans,  xxx.  603.)  to  our  young,  talented,  and  unfortunate 
countryman  Gascoigne,  from  his  correspondence  with  Crabtree  and  Horrockes, 
in  his  (Derham's)  possession.  The  passages  cited  by  Derham  from  these  letters 
leave  no  doubt  that,  so  early  as  1640,  Gascoigne  had  applied  telescopes  to  his 
quadrants  and  sextants,  with  threads  in  the  common  focus  of  the  glasses  ;  and  had 
even  carried  the  invention  so  far  as  to  illuminate  the  field  of  view  by  artificial 
light,  which  he  found  "  very  helpful  when  the  moon  appeareth  not,  or  it  is  not  other 
wise  light  enough."  These  inventions  were  freely  communicated  by  him  to 
Crabtree,  and  through  him  to  his  friend  Horrockes,  the  pride  and  boast  of 
British  astronomy  ;  both  of  whom  expressed  their  unbounded  admiration  of  this 
and  many  other  of  his  delicate  and  admirable  improvements  in  the  art  of  obser- 
vation. Gascoigne,  however,  perished,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  at  the  battie 
of  Marston  Moor ;  and  the  premature  and  sudden  death  of  Horrockes,  at  a  yet 
earlier  age,  will  account  for  the  temporary  oblivion  of  the  invention.  It  was 
revived,  or  re-invented,  in  1667,  by  Picard  and  Auzout  (Lalande,  Astron. 
2310.),  after  which  its  use  became  universal.  Morin,  even  earlier  than  Gas- 
coigne (in  16S5),  had  proposed  to  substitute  the  telescope  for  plain  sights  ;  but 
it  is  the  thread  or  wire  stretched  in  the  focus  with  which  the  image  of  a  star 
can  be  brought  to  exact  coincidence,  which  gives  the  telescope  its  advantage  in 
practice ;  and  the  idea  of  this  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  Morin.  See 
Lalande,  ubi  supra. ) 


94 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


meridian  of  the  place  of  observation.  The  extremities  of  the 
axis  are  formed  into  cylindrical  pivots  of  exactly  equal  di- 
ameters, which  rest  in  notches  formed  in  metallic  supports, 
bedded  (in  the  case  of  large  instruments)  on  strong  pieces  of 
stone,  and  susceptible  of  nice  adjustment  by  screws,  both  in 
a  vertical  and  horizontal  direction.  By  the  former  adjust- 
ment, the  axis  can  be  rendered  precisely  horizontal,  by  level- 
ling it  with  a  level  made  to  rest  on  the 
pivots.  By  the  latter  adjustment  the 
axis  is  brought  precisely  into  the  east 
and  west  direction,  the  criterion  of 
which  is  furnished  by  the  observations 
themselves  made  with  the  instrument, 
hi  a  manner  presently  to  be  explained, 
or  by  a  well-defined  object,  called  a  meridian  mark,  originally 
determined  by  such  observations,  and  then,  for  convenience 
of  ready  reference,  permanently  established,  at  a  great  dis- 
tance, exactly  in  a  meridian  line  passing  through  the  central 
point  of  the  whole  instrument.  It  is  evident,  from  this  de- 
scription, that,  if  the  axis,  or  line  of  collimation  of  the 
telescope  be  once  well  adjusted  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of 
the  transit,  it  will  never  quit  the  plane  of  the  meridian,  when 
the  instrument  is  turned  round  on  its  axis  of  rotation. 

(160.)  In  the  focus  of  the  eye-piece,  and  at  right  angles  to 
the  length  of  the  telescope,  is  placed,  not  a  single  cross,  as  in 
our  general  explanation  in  art.  157.,  but  a  system  of  one 
horizontal  and  several  equidistant  vertical 
threads  or  wires,  (five  or  seven  are  more 
usually  employed,)  as  represented  in  the  an- 
nexed figure,  which  always  appear  in  the 
jield  of  view,  when  properly  illuminated,  by 
day  by  the  light  of  the  sky,  by  night  by  that 
of  a  lamp  introduced  by  a  contrivance  not  necessary  here 
to  explain.  The  place  of  this  system  of  wires  may  be 
altered  by  adjusting  screws,  giving  it  a  lateral  (horizontal) 
motion ;  and  it  is  by  this  means  brought  to  such  a  position, 
that  the  middle  one  of  the  vertical  wires  shai  I  intersect  the 
line  of  collimation  of  the  telescope,  where  it  is  arrested  and 


PRINCIPLE     OP    REVERSAL.  95 

permanently  fastened.*  In  this  situation  it  is  evident  that 
the  middle  thread  will  be  a  visible  representation  of  that 
portion  of  the  celestial  meridian  to  which  the  telescope 
is  pointed ;  and  when  a  star  is  seen  to  cross  this  wire  in  the 
telescope,  it  is  in  the  act  of  culminating,  or  passing  the 
celestial  meridian.  The  instant  of  this  event  is  noted  by  the 
clock  or  chronometer,  which  forms  an  indispensable  accom- 
paniment of  the  transit  instrument.  For  greater  precision, 
the  moments  of  its  crossing  all  the  vertical  threads  is  noted, 
and  a  mean  taken,  which  (since  the  threads  are  equidistant) 
would  give  exactly  the  same  result,  were  all  the  observations 
perfect,  and  will,  of  course,  tend  to  subdivide  and  destroy  their 
errors  in  an  average  of  the  whole  in  the  contrary  case. 

(161.)  For  the  mode  of  executing  the  adjustments,  and 
allowing  for  the  errors  unavoidable  in  the  use  of  this  simple 
and  elegant  instrument,  the  reader  must  consult  works 
especially  devoted  to  this  department  of  practical  astronomy,  f 
We  shall  here  only  mention  one  important  verification  of  its 
correctness,  which  consists  in  reversing  the  ends  of  the  axis, 
or  turning  it  east  for  west.  If  this  be  done,  and  it  continue 
to  give  the  same  results,  and  intersect  the  same  point  on  the 
meridian  mark,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  line  of  collimation  of 
the  telescope  is  truly  at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  and  describes 
strictly  a  plane,  i.  e.  marks  out  in  the  heavens  a  great  circle. 
In  good  transit  observations,  an  error  of  one  or  two  tenths 
of  a  second  of  time  in  the  moment  of  a  star's  culmination  is 
the  utmost  which  need  be  apprehended,  exclusive  of  the  error 
of  the  clock :  in  other  words,  a  clock  may  be  compared  with 
the  earth's  diurnal  motion  by  a  single  observation,  without 
risk  of  greater  error.  By  multiplying  observations,  of  course, 
a  yet  greater  degree  of  precision  may  be  obtained. 

(162.)  The  plane  described  by  the  line  of  collimation  of 

*  There  is  no  way  of  bringing  the  true  optic  axis  of  the  object  glass  to  co- 
incide exactly  with  the  line  of  collimation,  but,  so  long  as  the  object  glass  does 
not  shift  or  shake  in  its  cell,  any  line  holding  an  invariable  position  with  respect  to 
that  axis,  may  be  taken  for  the  conventional  or  astronomical  axis  with  equal 
effect 

■(•  See  Dr.  Pearson's  Treatise  on  Practical  Astronomy.  Alto  Bianchi  Soprm 
lo  Stromeuto  lie'  Passagi.      Ephem.  di  Milano,  1824. 


98  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

ft  transit  ought  to  be  that  of  the  meridian  of  the  place  of  ob- 
servation. To  ascertain  whether  it  is  so  or  not,  celestial 
observation  must  be  resorted  to.  Now,  as  the  meridian  is  a 
great  circle  passing  through  the  pole,  it  necessarily  bisects 
the  diurnal  circles  described  by  all  the  stars,  all  which  describe 
the  two  semicircles  so  arising  in  equal  intervals  of  12  sidereal 
hours  each.  Hence,  if  we  choose  a  star  whose  whole  diurnal 
circle  is  above  the  horizon,  or  which  never  sets,  and  observe 
the  moments  of  its  upper  and  lower  transits  across  the 
middle  wire  of  the  telescope,  if  we  find  the  two  semidiurnal 
portions  east  and  west  of  the  plane  described  by  the  telescope 
to  be  described  in  precisely  equal  times,  we  may  be  sure  that 
plane  is  the  meridian. 

(163.)  The  angular  intervals  measured  by  means  of  the 
transit  instrument  and  clock  are  arcs  of  the  equinoctial,  inter- 
cepted between  circles  of  declination  passing  through  the 
objects  observed ;  and  their  measurement,  in  this  case,  is  per- 
formed by  no  artificial  graduation  of  circles,  but  by  the  help 
of  the  earth's  diurnal  motion,  which  carries  equal  arcs  of  the 
equinoctial  across  the  meridian,  in  equal  times,  at  the  rate  of 
15°  per  sidereal  hour.  In  all  other  cases,  when  we  would 
measure  angular  intervals,  it  is  necessary  to  have  recourse  to 
circles,  or  portions  of  circles,  constructed  of  metal  or  other 
firm  and  durable  material,  and  mechanically  subdivided  into 
equal  parts,  such  as  degrees,  minutes,  &c.  The  simplest  and 
most  obvious  mode  in  which  the  measurement  of  the  angular 
interval  between  two  directions  in  space  can  be  performed 
is  as  follows.  Let  A  B  C  D  be  a  circle,  divided  into  360 
degrees,  (numbered  in  order  from  any  point  0°  in  the  circum- 
ference, round  to  the  same  point  again,)  and  connected  with 
its  centre  by  spokes  or  rays,  x,  y,  z,  firmly  united  to  its  circum- 
ference or  limb.  At  the  centre  let  a  circular  hole  be  pierced, 
in  which  shall  move  a  pivot  exactly  fitting  it,  carrying  a  tube, 
whose  axis,  a  b,  is  exactly  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  circle, 
or  perpendicular  to  the  pivot ;  and  also  two  arms,  m,  n,  at 
right  angles  to  it,  and  forming  one  piece  with  the  tube  and 
the  axis ;  so  that  the  motion  of  the  axis  on  the  centre  shall 
carry  the  tube  and  arms  smoothly  round  the  circle,  to  be 


MEASUREMENT   OF    ANGULAR   INTERVALS.  97 

arrested  and  fixed  at  any  point  we  please,  by  a  contrivance 
called  a  clamp.  Suppose,  now,  we  would  measure  the  angu- 
lar interval  between  two  fixed  objects,  S,  T.     The  plane  of 

the  circle  must  first  be  ad- 
justed so  as  to  pass  through 
s  them  both,  and  immoveably 
fixed  and  maintained  in  that 
position.  This  done,  let  the 
axis  a  b  of  the  tube  be 
r  directed  to  one  of  them,  S, 
and  clamped.  Then  will  a 
mark  on  the  arm  m  point 
either  exactly  to  some  one  of  the  divisions  on  the  limb, 
or  between  two  of  them  adjacent.  In  the  former  case, 
the  division  must  be  noted  as  the  reading  of  the  arm  m.  In 
the  latter,  the  fractional  part  of  one  whole  interval  between 
the  consecutive  divisions  by  which  the  mark  on  m  surpasses 
the  last  inferior  division  must  be  estimated  or  measured  by 
some  mechanical  or  optical  means.  (See  art.  165.)  The 
division  and  fractional  part  thus  noted,  and  reduced  into 
degrees,  minutes,  and  seconds,  is  to  be  set  down  as  the  read- 
ing of  the  limb  corresponding  to  that  position  of  the  tube  ab, 
where  it  points  to  the  object  S.  The  same  must  then  be 
done  for  the  object  T ;  the  tube  pointed  to  it,  and  the  limb 
"  read  off"  the  position  of  the  circle  remaining  meanwhile 
unaltered.  It  is  manifest,  then,  that,  if  the  lesser  of  these 
readings  be  subtracted  from  the  greater,  their  difference  will 
be  the  angular  interval  between  S  and  T,  as  seen  from  the 
centre  of  the  circle,  at  whatever  point  of  the  limb  the  com- 
mencement of  the  graduations  or  the  point  0°  be  situated. 

(164.)  The  very  same  result  will  be  obtained,  if,  instead 
of  making  the  tube  moveable  upon  the  circle,  we  connect  it 
invariably  with  the  latter,  and  make  both  revolve  together 
on  an  axis  concentric  with  the  circle,  and  forming  one  piece 
with  it,  working  in  a  hollow  formed  to  receive  and  fit  it  in 
some  fixed  support.  Such  a  combination  is  represented  in 
section  in  the  annexed  sketch.  T  is  the  tube  or  sight, 
fastened,  at  p  p,  on  the  circle  A  15,  whose  axis.  D,  works  in 

u 


i>8 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


the  solid  metallic  centring  E,  from  which  originates  an  arm, 
F,  carrying  at  its  extremity  an  index,  or  other  proper  mark. 


to  point  out  and  read  off  the  exact  division  of  the  circle  at  B, 
the  point  close  to  it.  It  is  evident  that,  as  the  telescope  and 
circle  revolve  through  any  angle,  the  part  of  the  limb  of  the 
latter,  which  by  such  revolution  is  carried  past  the  index  F, 
will  measure  the  angle  described.  This  is  the  most  usual 
mode  of  applying  divided  circles  in  astronomy. 

(165.)  The  index  F  may  either  be  a  simple  pointer,  like  a 
clock  hand  {Jig.  a);  or  a  vernier  {fig.  b) ;  or,  lastly,  a  com- 


*W 


g-IL 


* — XJ-1' 


^ 


pound  microscope  {fig.  c\  represented  in  section  m  fig.  d, 
and  furnished  with  a  cross  in  the  common  focus  of  its  object 
and  eye-glass,  moveable  by  a  fine-threaded  6crew,  by  which 
the  intersection  of  the  cross  may  be  brought  to  exact  coinci- 
dence with  the  image  of  the  nearest  of  the  divisions  of  the 
circle  formed  in  the  focus  of  the  object  lens  upon  the  very 
same  principle  with  that  explained,  art.  157.  for  the  point- 
ing of  the  telescope,  only  that  here  the  fiducial  cross  is  made 
moveable ;  and  by  the  turns  and  parts  of  a  turn  of  the  screw 


SOURCES   OF    INSTRUMENTAL    EXACTNESS.  99 

required  for  this  purpose  the  distance  of  that  division  from 
the  original  or  zero  point  of  the  microscope  may  be  estimated. 
This  simple  but  delicate  contrivance  gives  to  the  reading  off 
of  a  circle  a  degree  of  accuracy  only  limited  by  the  power  of 
the  microscope  and  the  perfection  with  which  a  screw  can 
be  executed,  and  places  the  subdivision  of  angles  on  the  same 
footing  of  optical  certainty  which  is  introduced  into  their 
measurement  by  the  use  of  the  telescope. 

(166.)  The  exactness  of  the  result  thus  obtained  must 
depend,  1st,  on  the  precision  with  which  the  tube  a  b  can  be 
pointed  to  the  objects ;  2dly,  on  the  accuracy  of  graduation 
of  the  limb ;  3dly,  on  the  accuracy  with  which  the  subdi- 
vision of  the  intervals  between  any  two  consecutive  gradua- 
tions can  be  performed.  The  mode  of  accomplishing  the 
latter  object  with  any  required  exactness  has  been  explained 
in  the  last  article.  With  regard  to  the  graduation  of  the 
limb,  being  merely  of  a  mechanical  nature,  we  shall  pass  it 
without  remark,  further  than  this,  that,  in  the  present  state 
of  instrument-making,  the  amount  of  error  from  this  source 
of  inaccuracy  is  reduced  within  very  narrow  limits  indeed.* 
With  regard  to  the  first,  it  must  be  obvious  that,  if  the  sights 
a  b  be  nothing  more  than  simple  crosses,  or  pin-holes  at  the 
ends  of  a  hollow  tube,  or  an  eye-hole  at  one  end,  and  a  cross  at 
the  other,  no  greater  nicety  in  pointing  can  be  expected  than 
what  simple  vision  with  the  naked  eye  can  command.  But 
if,  in  place  of  these  simple  but  coarse  contrivances,  the  tube 
itself  be  converted  into  a  telescope,  having  an  object-glass  at 
b,  an  eye-piece  at  a,  and  a  fiducial  cross  in  their  common 
focus,  as  explained  in  art.  157. ;  and  if  the  motion  of  the 
tube  on  the  limb  of  the  circle  be  arrested  when  the  object  is 
brought  just  into  coincidence  with  the  intersectional  point  of 
that  cross,  it  is  evident  that  a  greater  degree  of  exactness 
may  be  attained  in  the  pointing  of  the  tube  than  by  the  un- 
assisted eye,  in  proportion  to  the  magnifying  power  and 
distinctness  of  the  telescope  used. 

*  In  the  great  Ertel  circle  at  Pulkova,  the  prohable  amount  of  the  accidental 
enror  of  division  is  stated  by  M.  Struve  not  to  exceed  0"-264.  Desc.  dc  YOba. 
centrale  de  Pulkova,  p.  147 

h  S 


100  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(167.)  The  simplest  mode  in  which  the  measurement  of 
an  angular  interval  can  be  executed,  is  what  we  have  just 
described ;  but,  in  strictness,  this  mode  is  applicable  only  to 
terrestrial  angles,  such  as  those  occupied  on  the  sensible 
horizon  by  the  objects  which  surround  our  station, — because 
these  only  remain  stationary  during  the  interval  while  the 
telescope  is  shifted  on  the  limb  from  one  object  to  the  other. 
But  the  diurnal  motion  of  the  heavens,  by  destroying  this 
essential  condition,  renders  the  direct  measurement  of  an- 
gular distance  from  object  to  object  by  this  means  impossible. 
The  same  objection,  however,  does  not  apply  if  we  seek  only 
to  determine  the  interval  between  the  diurnal  circles  de- 
scribed by  any  two  celestial  objects.  Suppose  every  star,  in 
its  diurnal  revolution,  were  to  leave  behind  it  a  visible  trace 
in  the  heavens, — a  fine  line  of  light,  for  instance, — then  a 
telescope  once  pointed  to  a  star,  so  as  to  have  its  image 
brought  to  coincidence  with  the  intersection  of  the  wires, 
would  constantly  remain  pointed  to  some  portion  or  other  of 
this  line,  which  would  therefore  continue  to  appear  in  its 
field  as  a  luminous  line,  permanently  intersecting  the  same 
point,  till  the  star  came  round  again.  From  one  such  line 
to  another  the  telescope  might  be  shifted,  at  leisure,  without 
error ;  and  then  the  angular  interval  between  the  two  diurnal 
circles,  in  the  plane  of  the  telescope's  rotation,  might  be  mea- 
sured. Now,  though  we  cannot  see  the  path  of  a  star  in  the 
heavens,  we  can  wait  till  the  star  itself  crosses  the  field  of 
view,  and  seize  the  moment  of  its  passage  to  place  the  inter- 
section of  its  wires  so  that  the  star  shall  traverse  it;  by 
which,  when  the  telescope  is  well  clamped,  we  equally  well 
secure  the  position  of  its  diurnal  circle  as  if  we  continued  to 
see  it  ever  so  long.  The  reading  off  of  the  limb  may  then  be 
performed  at  leisure;  and  when  another  star  comes  round 
into  the  plane  of  the  circle,  we  may  unclamp  the  telescope, 
and  a  similar  observation  will  enable  us  to  assign  the  place  of 
its  diurnal  circle  on  the  limb :  and  the  observations  may  be 
repeated  alternately,  every  day,  as  the  stars  pass,  till  we  sire 
satisfied  with  their  result. 


OF    THE    MURAL    CIRCLE.  101 

(168.)  This  is  the  principle  of  the  mural  circle,  which  is 
nothing  more  than  such  a  circle  as  we  have  described  in  art. 
163.,  firmly  supported,  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian,  on  a 
long  and  powerful  horizontal  axis.  This  axis  is  let  into  a 
massive  pier,  or  wall,  of  stone  (whence  the  name  of  the  in- 
strument), and  so  secured  by  screws  as  to  be  capable  of  ad- 
justment both  in  a  vertical  and  horizontal  direction  ;  so  that, 
like  the  axis  of  the  transit,  it  can  be  maintained  in  the  exact 
direction  of  the  east  and  west  points  of  the  horizon,  the  plane 
of  the  circle  being  consequently  truly  meridional. 

(169.)  The  meridian,  being  at  right  angles  to  all  the  di- 
urnal circles  described  by  the  stars,  its  arc  intercepted  be- 
tween any  two  of  them  will  measure  the  least  distance 
between  these  circles,  and  will  be  equal  to  the  difference  of 
the  declinations,  as  also  to  the  difference  of  the  meridian  alti- 
tudes of  the  objects  —  at  least  when  corrected  for  refraction. 
These  differences,  then,  are  the  angular  intervals  directly 
measured  by  the  mural  circle.  But  from  these,  supposing 
the  law  and  amount  of  refraction  known,  it  is  easy  to  con- 
clude, not  their  differences  only,  but  the  quantities  them- 
selves, as  we  shall  now  explain. 

(170.)  The  declination  of  a  heavenly  body  is  the  comple- 
ment of  its  distance  from  the  pole.  The  pole,  being  a  point 
in  the  meridian,  might  be  directly  observed  on  the  limb  of  the 
circle,  if  any  star  stood  exactly  therein  ;  and  thence  the  polar 
distances,  and,  of  course,  the  declinations  of  all  the  rest, 
might  be  at  once  determined.  But  this  not  being  the  case, 
a  bright  star  as  near  the  pole  as  can  be  found  is  selected,  and 
observed  in  its  upper  and  lower  culminations ;  that  is,  when 
it  passes  the  meridian  above  and  below  the  pole.  Now,  as  its 
distance  from  the  pole  remains  the  same,  the  difference  of 
reading  off  the  circle  in  the  two  cases  is,  of  course  (when 
corrected  for  refraction),  equal  to  twice  the  polar  distance  of 
the  star ;  the  arc  intercepted  on  the  limb  of  the  circle  being, 
in  this  case,  equal  to  the  angular  diameter  of  the  star's  diurnal 
circle.  In  the  annexed  diagram,  H  P  O  represents  the  celestial 
meridian,  1*  the  pole,  B  R,  A  Q,  C  D  the  diurnal  circles  of 


102 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


stars  which  arrive  on  the   meridian  at  B,  A,  and  C  in  their 

upper  and  at  R,  Q,  D  in  their  lower  culminations,  of  whicli  D 

and  Q  happen  above  the  horizon 

HO.    P  is   the  pole;    and  if  we 

suppose   h  p  o  to  be  the  mural 

circle,  having  S  for  its  centre,  b  a 

c  p  d  will  be  the   points   on  its 

circumference  corresponding  to  B 

A  C  P  D  in  the  heavens.     Now 

the  arcs  b  a,  b  c,  b  d,  and  c  d  are 

given  immediately  by  observation ; 

and  since  C  P  =  P  D,  we  have  also  cp=p  d,  and  each  of  them 

=  \  c  d,  consequently  the  place  of  the  polar  point,  as  it  is 

called,  upon  the  limb  of  the  circle  becomes  known,  and  the 

arcs  pb,  p  a,  pc,    which  represent  on  the    circle    the  polar 

distances  required,  become  also  known. 

(171.)  The  situation  of  the  pole  star,  which  is  a  very  bril- 
liant one,  is  eminently  favourable  for  this  purpose,  being  only 
about  a  degree  and  half  from  the  pole ;  it  is,  therefore,  the 
star  usually  and  almost  solely  chosen  for  this  important  pur- 
pose; the  more  especially  because,  both  its  culminations 
taking  place  at  great  and  not  very  different  altitudes,  the  re- 
fractions by  which  they  are  affected  are  of  small  amount,  and 
differ  but  slightly  from  each  other,  so  that  their  correction  is 
easily  and  safely  applied.  The  brightness  of  the  pole  star, 
too,  allows  it  to  be  easily  observed  in  the  daytime.  In  con- 
sequence of  these  peculiarities,  this  star  is  one  of  constant 
resort  with  astronomers  for  the  adjustment  and  verification  of 
instruments  of  almost  every  description.  In  the  case  of  the 
transit,  for  instance,  it  furnishes  an  excellent  object  for  the 
application  of  the  method  of  testing  the  meridiunal  situation 
of  the  instrument  described  in  art.  162.,  in  fact,  the  most 
advantageous  of  any  for  that  purpose,  owing  to  its  being 
the  most  remote  from  the  zenith,  at  its  upper  culmination, 
of  all  bright  stars  observable  both  above  and  below  the 
pole. 

(172.)  The  place  of  the  polar  point  on  the  limb  of  the  mural 


OBSERVATION    BY    REFLECTION    ON    MERCURY.  108 

circle  once  determined,  becomes  an  origin,  or  zero  point,  from 
which  the  polar  distances  of  all  objects,  referred  to  other 
points  on  the  same  limb,  reckon.  It  matters  not  whether  the 
actual  commencement  0°  of  the  graduations  stand  there,  or 
not ;  since  it  is  only  by  the  differences  of  the  readings  that 
the  arcs  on  the  limb  are  determined ;  and  hence  a  great  ad- 
vantage is  obtained  in  the  power  of  commencing  anew  a  fresh 
series  of  observations,  in  which  a  different  part  of  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  circle  shall  be  employed,  and  different 
graduations  brought  into  use,  by  which  inequalities  of  divi- 
sion may  be  detected  and  neutralized.  This  is  accomplished 
practically  by  detaching  the  telescope  from  its  old  bearings 
on  the  circle,  and  fixing  it  afresh,  by  screws  or  clamps,  on  a 
different  part  of  the  circumference. 

(173.)  A  point  on  the  limb  of  the  mural  circle,  not  less  im- 
portant than  the  polar  point,  is  the  horizontal  point,  which, 
being  once  known,  becomes  in  like  manner  an  origin,  or  zero 
point,  from  which  altitudes  are  reckoned.  The  principle  of 
its  determination  is  ultimately  nearly  the  same  with  that  of 
the  polar  point.  As  no  star  exists  in  the  celestial  horizon, 
the  observer  must  seek  to  determine  two  points  on  the  limb, 
the  one  Qf  which  shall  be  precisely  as  far  below  the  horizon- 
tal point  as  the  other  is  above  it.  For  this  purpose,  a  star 
is  observed  at  its  culmination  on  one  night,  by  pointing  the 
telescope  directly  to  it,  and  the  next,  by  pointing  to  the  image 
of  the  same  star  reflected  in  the  still,  unruffled  surface  of  a 
fluid  at  perfect  rest.  Mercury,  as  the  most  reflective  fluid 
known,  is  generally  chosen  for  that  use.  As  the  surface  of  a 
fluid  at  rest  is  necessarily  horizontal,  and  as  the  angle  of 
reflection,  by  the  laws  of  optics,  is  equal  to  that  of  incidence, 
this  image  will  be  just  as  much  depressed  below  the  horizon 
as  the  star  itself  is  above  it  (allowing  for  the  difference  of 
refraction  at  the  moments  of  observation).  The  arc  inter- 
cepted on  the  limb  of  the  circle  between  the  star  and  its  re- 
flected image  thus  consecutively  observed,  when  corrected  for 
refraction,  is  the  double  altitude  of  the  star,  and  its  point  of 
bisection  the  horizontal  point.     The  reflecting  surface  of  a 


|04  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

iluid  so  used  for  tne  determination  of  the  altitudes  of  object! 
is  called  an  artificial  horizon* 

(174.)  The  mural  circle  is,  in  fact,  at  the  same  time,  a 
transit  instrument ;  and,  if  furnished  with  a  proper  system 
of  vertical  wires  in  the  focus  of  its  telescope,  may  be  used  as 
such.  As  the  axis,  however,  is  only  supported  at  one  end, 
it  has  not  the  strength  and  permanence  necessary  for  the 
more  delicate  purposes  of  a  transit ;  nor  can  it  be  verified,  as 
a  transit  may,  by  the  reversal  of  the  two  ends  of  its  axis, 
east  for  west.  Nothing,  however,  prevents  a  divided  circle 
being  permanently  fastened  on  the  axis  of  a  transit  instru- 
ment, either  near  to  one  of  its  extremities,  or  close  to  the 
telescope,  so  as  to  revolve  with  it,  the  reading  off  being  per- 
formed by  one  or  more  microscopes  fixed  on  one  of  its  piers. 
Such  an  instrument  is  called  a  transit  circle,  or  a  meri- 
dian circle,  and  serves  for  the  simultaneous  determination 
of  the  right  ascensions  and  polar  distances  of  objects  observed 
with  it ;  the  time  of  transit  being  noted  by  the  clock,  and 
the  circle  being  read  off  by  the  lateral  microscopes.  There  is 
much  advantage,  when  extensive  catalogues  of  small  stars 
have  to  be  formed,  in  this  simultaneous  determination  of  both 
their  celestial  co-ordinates :  to  which  may  be  added  the  fa- 
cility of  applying  to  the  meridian  circle  a  telescope  of  any 
length  and  optical  power.  The  construction  of  the  mural 
circle  renders  this  highly  inconvenient,  and  indeed  impracti- 
cable beyond  very  moderate  limits. 

(175.)  The  determination  of  the  horizontal  point  on  the 
limb  of  an  instrument  is  of  such  essential  importance  in 
astronomy,  that  the  student  should  be  made  acquainted  with 
every  means  employed  for  this  purpose.  These  are,  the  arti- 
ficial horizon,  the  plumb-line,  the  level,  and  the  collimator. 
The  artificial  horizon  has  been  already  explained.    The  plumb- 


*  By  a  peculiar  and  delicate  manipulation  and  management  of  the  setting, 
bisection,  and  reading  off'  of  the  circle,  aided  by  the  use  of  a  moveable  horizon- 
tal micrometic  wire  in  the  focus  of  the  object-glass,  it  is  found  practicable  to 
observe  a  slow  moving  star  (as  the  pole  star)  on  one  and  the  same  night,  both  by 
reflection  and  direct  vision,  sufficiently  near  to  either  culmination  to  give  the 
horizontal  point,  without  risking  the  change  of  refraction  in  twenty-four  hours; 
so  that  this  source  of  error  is  thus  completely  eliminated. 


DETERMINATION    OF    THE   HORIZONTAL    POINT.       105 

line  is  a  fine  thread  or  wire,  to  which  is  suspended  a  weight, 
whose  oscillations  are  impeded  and  quickly  reduced  to  rest  by 
plunging  it  in  water.  The  direction  ultimately  assumed  by 
such  a  line,  admitting  its  perfect  flexibility,  is  that  of  gravity, 
or  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  still  water.  Its  application 
to  the  purposes  of  astronomy  is,  however,  so  delicate,  and 
difficult,  and  liable  to  error,  unless  extraordinary  precautions 
are  taken  in  its  use,  that  it  is  at  present  almost  universally 
abandoned,  for  the  more  convenient,  and  equally  exact  in- 
strument the  level. 

(176.)  The  level  is  a  glass  tube  nearly  filled  with  a  liquid, 
'sulphuric  ether,  or  chloroform,  being  those  now  generally 


r« 


D 


used,  on  account  of  their  extreme  mobility \  and  not  being 
liable  to  freeze,)  the  bubble  in  which,  when  the  tube  is  placed 
horizontally,  would  rest  indifferently  in  any  part  if  the  tube 
could  be' mathematically  straight.  But  that  being  impossible 
to  execute,  and  every  tube  having  some  slight  curvature ;  if 
the  convex  side  be  placed  upwards  the  bubble  will  occupy 
the  higher  part,  as  in  the  figure  (where  the  curvature  is  pur- 
posely exaggerated).  Suppose  such  a  tube,  as  A  B,  firmly 
fastened  on  a  straight  bar,  C  D,  and  marked  at  a  b,  two 
points  distant  by  the  length  of  the  bubble  ;  then,  if  the  in- 
strument be  so  placed  that  the  bubble  shall  occupy  this  inter- 
val, it  is  clear  that  C  D  can  have  no  other  than  one  definite 
inclination  to  the  horizon ;  because,  were  it  %ever  so  little 
moved  one  way  or  other,  the  bubble  would  shift  its  place, 
and  run  towards  the  elevated  side.  Suppose,  now,  that  we 
would  ascertain  whether  any  given  line  P  Q  be  horizontal ; 
let  the  base  of  the  level  C  D  be  set  upon  it,  and  note  the 
points  a  b,  between  which  the  bubble  is  exactly  contained ; 
then  turn  the  level  end  for  end,  so  that  C  shall  rest  on  Q, 


106 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 


and  D  on  P.  If  then  the  bubble  continue  to  occupy  the 
same  place  between  a  and  b,  it  is  evident  that  P  Q  can  be 
no  otherwise  than  horizontal.  If  not,  the  side  towards  which 
the  bubble  runs  is  highest,  and  must  be  lowered.  Astrono- 
mical levels  are  furnished  with  a  divided  scale,  by  which  the 
places  of  the  ends  of  the  bubble  can  be  nicely  marked ;  and 
it  is  said  that  they  can  be  executed  with  such  delicacy,  as  to 
indicate  a  single  second  of  angular  deviation  from  exact  hori- 
zontally. In  such  levels  accident  is  not  trusted  to  to  give 
the  requisite  curvature.  They  are  ground  and  polished  in- 
ternally by  peculiar  mechanical  processes  of  great  delicacy. 

(177.)  The  mode  in  which  a  level  may  be  applied  to  find 
the  horizontal  point  on  the  limb  of  a  vertical  divided  circle 
may  be  thus  explained :  Let  A  B  be  a  telescope  firmly  fixed 
to  such  a  circle,  D  E  F,  and  moveable  in  one  with  it  on  a 
horizontal  axis  C,  which  must 
be  like  that  of  a  transit,  sus- 
ceptible of  reversal  (see  art. 
161.),  and  with  which  the 
circle  is  inseparably  connected. 
Direct  the  telescope  on  some 
distant  well-defined  object  S, 
and  bisect  it  by  its  horizontal 
wire,  and  in  this  position  clamp 
it  fast.  Let  L  be  a  level  fas- 
tened at  right  angles  to  an  arm, 
L  E  F,  furnished  with  a  micro- 
scope, or  vernier  at  F,  and,  if  we  please,  another  at  E.  Let 
this  arm  be  fitted  by  grinding  on  the  axis  C,  but  capable  of 
moving  smoothly  on  it  without  carrying  it  round,  and  also  of 
being  clamped  fast  on  it,  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  moving 
until  required.  While  the  telescope  is  kept  fixed  on  the  ob- 
ject S,  let  the  level  be  set  so  as  to  bring  its  bubble  to  the 
marks  a  b,  and  clamp  it  tiiere.  Then  will  the  arm  L  C  F 
have  some  certain  determinate  inclination  (no  matter  what) 
to  the  horizon.  In  this  position  let  the  circle  be  read  off  at 
F,  and  then  let  the  whole  apparatus  be  reversed  by  turning 
its  horizontal   axis  end  for  end,  without  unclamping  the  level 


THE    FLOATING    COLLIMATOR.  107 

arm  from  the  axis.  This  done,  by  the  motion  of  the  whole 
instrument  (level  and  all)  on  its  axis,  restore  the  level  to  its 
horizontal  position  with  the  bubble  at  a  b.  Then  we  are  sure 
that  the  telescope  has  now  the  same  inclination  to  the  horizon 
the  other  way,  that  it  had  when  pointed  to  S,  and  the  reading 
off  at  F  will  not  have  been  changed.  Now  unclamp  the  level, 
and,  keeping  it  nearly  horizontal,  turn  round  the  circle  on 
the  axis,  so  as  to  carry  back  the  telescope  throitgh  the  zenith 
to  S,  and  in  that  position  clamp  the  circle  and  telescope  fast. 
Then  it  is  evident  that  an  angle  equal  to  twice  the  zenith 
distance  of  S  has  been  moved  over  by  the  axis  of  the  tele- 
scope from  its  last  position.  Lastly,  without  unclamping  the 
telescope  and  circle,  let  the  level  be  once  more  rectified.  Then 
will  the  arm  LEF  once  more  assume  the  same  definite  po- 
sition with  respect  to  the  horizon  ;  and,  consequently,  if  the 
circle  be  again  read  off,  the  difference  between  this  and  the 
previous  reading  must  measure  the  arc  of  its  circumference 
which  has  passed  under  the  point  F,  which  may  be  considered 
as  having  all  the  while  retained  an  invariable  position.  This 
difference,  then,  will  be  the  double  zenith  distance  of  8,  and 
its  half  will  be  the  zenith  distance  simply,  the  complement  of 
which  is  its  altitude.  Thus  the  altitude  corresponding  to  a 
given  reading  of  the  limb  becomes  known,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  horizontal  point  on  the  limb  is  ascertained.  Circuitous 
as  this  process  may  appear,  there  is  no  other  mode  of  em- 
ploying the  level  for  this  purpose  which  does  not  in  the  end 
come  to  the  same  thing.  Most  commonly,  however,  the  level 
is  used  as  a  mere  fiducial  reference,  to  preserve  a  horizontal 
point  once  well  determined  by  other  means,  which  is  done  by 
adjusting  it  so  as  to  stand  level  when  the  telescope  is  truly 
horizontal,  and  thus  leaving  it,  depending  on  the  permanence 
of  its  adjustment. 

(178.)  The  last,  but  probably  not  the  least  exact,  as  it 
certainly  is,  in  innumerable  cases,  the  most  convenient  means 
of  ascertaining  the  horizontal  point,  is  that  afforded  by  the 
floating  collimator,  an  invention  of  Captain  Kater,  but  of 
which  the  optical  principle  was  first  employed  by  Ritten- 
house,  in  1785,  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  a  definite  direction 
in  space  by  the  emergence  of  parallel  rays  from  a  material 


108  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

object  placed  in  the  focus  of  a  fixed  lens.  This  elegant  in 
struraent  is  nothing  more  than  a  small  telescope  furnished 
with  a  cross-wire  in  its  focus,  and  fastened  horizontally,  or 
as  nearly  so  as  may  be,  on  a  flat  iron  float,  which  is  made  to 
swim  on  mercury,  and  which,  of  course,  will,  when  left  to 
itself,  assume  always  one  and  the  same  invariable  inclination 
to  the  horizon.     If  the  cross-wires  of  the  collimator  be  illu- 


minated by  a  lamp,  being  in  the  focus  of  its  object-glass,  the 
rays  from  them  will  issue  parallel,  and  will  therefore  be  in  a 
fit  state  to  be  brought  to  a  focus  by  the  object-glass  of  any 
other  telescope,  in  which  they  will  form  an  image  as  if  they 
came  from  a  celestial  object  in  their  direction,  i.  e.  at  an  alti- 
tude equal  to  their  inclination.  Thus  the  intersection  of  the 
cross  of  the  collimator  may  be  observed  as  if  it  were  a  star, 
and  that,  however  near  the  two  telescopes  are  to  each  other. 
By  transferring  then,  the  collimator  still  floating  on  a  vessel 
of  mercury  from  the  one  side  to  the  other  of  a  circle,  we  are 
furnished  with  two  quasi-celestial  objects,  at  precisely  equal 
altitudes,  on  opposite  sides  of  the  centre ;  and  if  these  be 
observed  in  succession  with  the  telescope  of  the  circle,  bring- 
ing its  cross  to  bisect  the  image  of  the  cross  of  the  collimator 
(for  which  end  the  wires  of  the  latter  cross  are  purposely  set 
45°  inclined  to  the  horizon),  the  difference  of  the  readings  on 
its  limb  will  be  twice  the  zenith  distance  of  either ;  whence, 
as  in  the  last  article,  the  horizontal  or  zenith  point  is  imme- 
diately determined.  Another,  and,  in  many  respects,  prefer- 
able form  of  the  floating  collimator,  in  which  the  telescope  is 
vertical,  and  whereby  the  zenith  point  is  directly  ascertained, 
is  described  in  the  Phil.  Trans.  1828,  p.  257.,  by  the  same 
author. 

(179.)  By  far  the  neatest  and  most  delicate  application  of 


COLLIMATION    BY    REFLEXION. 


I0t> 


the  principle  of  collimation  of  Rittenhouse,  however,  is  sug- 
gested by  Bohnenberger,  which  affords  at  once,  and  by  a  single 
observation,  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  nadir  point  of  an 
astronomical  circle.  In  this  combination,  the  telescope  of  the 
circle  is  its  own  collimator.  The 
object  observed  is  the  central  inter- 
actional cross  of  the  wires  in  its 
own  focus  reflected  in  mercury. 
A  strong  illumination  being  thrown 
upon  the  system  of  wires  (art.  160.) 
by  a  lateral  lamp,  the  telescope  of 
the  instrument  is  directed  vertically 
downwards  towards  the  surface  of 
the  mercury,  as  in  the  figure  an- 
nexed. The  rays  diverging  from 
the  wires  issue  in  parallel  pencils 
from  the  object-glass,  are  incident 
on  the  mercury,  and  are  thence  re- 
Oected  back  (without  losing  their 
parallel  character)  to  the  object- 
glass,  which  is  therefore  enabled  to  collect  them  again  in  its 
focus.  Thus  is  formed  a  reflected  image  of  the  system  of 
cross-wires,  which,  when  brought  by  the  slow  motion  of 
the  telescope  to  exact  coincidence  (intersection  upon  intersec- 
tion) with  the  real  system  as  seen  in  the  eye-piece  of  the 
instrument,  indicates  the  precise  and  rigorous  vertically  of 
the  optical  axis  of  the  telescope  when  directed  to  the  nadir 
point. 

(180.)  The  transit  and  mural  circle  are  essentially  meridian 
instruments,  being  used  only  to  observe  the  stars  at  the  mo- 
ment of  their  meridian  passage.  Independent  of  this  being 
the  most  favourable  moment  for  seeing  them,  it  is  that  in 
which  their  diurnal  motion  is  parallel  to  the  horizon.  It  is 
therefore  easier  at  this  time  than  it  could  be  at  any  other,  to 
place  the  telescope  exactly  in  their  true  direction ;  since  their 
apparent  course  in  the  field  of  view  being  parallel  to  the 
horizontal  thread  of  the  system  of  wires  therein,  they  may, 
by  giving  a  fine  motion  to  the  telescope,  be  brought  to  exact 


^Ef 


110  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

coincidence  with  it,  and  time  may  be  allowed  to  examine  and 
correct  this  coincidence,  if  not  at  first  accurately  hit,  which 
is  the  case  in  no  other  situation.  Generally  speaking,  all 
angular  magnitudes  which  it  is  of  importance  to  ascertain 
exactly,  should,  if  possible,  be  observed  at  their  maxima  or 
minima  of  increase  or  diminution  ;  because  at  these  points 
they  remain  not  perceptibly  changed  during  a  time  long 
enough  to  complete,  and  even,  in  many  cases,  to  repeat  and 
verify,  our  observations  in  a  careful  and  leisurely  manner. 
The  angle  which,  in  the  case  before  us,  is  in  this  predicament, 
is  the  altitude  of  the  star,  which  attains  its  maximum  or 
minimum  on  the  meridian,  and  which  is  measured  on  the  limb 
of  the  mural  circle. 

(181.)  The  purposes  of  astronomy,  however,  require  that 
an  observer  should  possess  the  means  of  observing  any  object 
not  directly  on  the  meridian,  but  at  any  point  of  its  diurnal 
course,  or  wherever  it  may  present  itself  in  the  heavens. 
Now,  a  point  in  the  sphere  is  determined  by  reference  to  two 
great  circles  at  right  angles  to  each  other ;  or  of  two  circles, 
one  of  which  passes  through  the  pole  of  the  other.  These, 
in  the  language  of  geometry,  are  co-ordinates  by  which  its 
situation  is  ascertained :  for  instance,  —  on  the  earth,  a  place 
is  known  if  we  know  its  longitude  and  latitude ;  —  in  the 
starry  heavens,  if  we  know  its  right  ascension  and  declina- 
tion ;  —  in  the  visible  hemisphere,  if  we  know  its  azimuth 
and  altitude,  &c. 

(182.)  To  observe  an  object  at  any  point  of  its  diurnal 
course,  we  must  possess  the  means  of  directing  a  telescope  to 
it ;  which,  therefore,  must  be  capable  of  motion  in  two  planes 
at  right  angles  to  each  other ;  and  the  amount  of  its  angular 
motion  in  each  must  be  measured  on  two  circles  co-ordinate 
to  each  other,  whose  planes  must  be  parallel  to  those  in  which 
the  telescope  moves.  The  practical  accomplishment  of  this 
condition  is  effected  by  making  the  axis  of  one  of  the  circles 
penetrate  that  of  the  other  at  right  angles.  The  pierced  axis 
turns  on  fixed  supports,  while  the  other  has  no  connection 
with  any  external  support,  but  is  sustained  entirely  by  that 
which  it  penetrates,  which  is  strengthened  and  enlarged  at 


INSTRUMENTS   WITH    CO-ORDINATE    CIRCLES. 


Ill 


the  point  of  penetration  to  receive  it.  The  annexed  figure 
exhibits  the  simplest  form  of  such  a  combination,  though 
very  far  indeed  from  the  best  in  point  of  mechanism.  The 
two  circles  are  read  off  by  verniers,  or  microscopes ;  the  one 
attached  to  the  fixed  support  which  carries  the  principal  axis, 
the  other  to  an  arm  projecting  from  that  axis.  Both  circles 
also  are  susceptible  of  being  clamped,  the  clamps  being  at- 
tached to  the  same  ultimate  bearing  with  which  the  apparatus 
for  reading  off  is  connected. 

(183.)  It  is  manifest  that  such  a  combination,  however  its 
principal  axis  be  pointed  (provided  that  its  direction  be  inva- 
riable), will  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  situation  of  any  object 
with  respect  to  the  observer's 
station,  by  angles  reckoned  upon 
two  great  circles  in  the  visible 
hemisphere,  one  of  which  has  for 
its  poles  the  prolongations  of 
the  principal  axis  or  the  vanish- 
ing points  of  a  system  of  lines 
parallel  to  it,  and  the  other 
passes  always  through  these 
poles :  for  the  former  great  cir- 
cle is  the  vanishing  line  of  all 
planes  parallel  to  the  circle 
A  B,  while  the  latter,  in  any 
position  of  the  instrument,  is 
the    vanishing    line  of  all    the 

planes  parallel  to  the  circle  G  H ;  and  these  two  planes  being, 
by  the  construction  of  the  instrument,  at  right  angles,  the 
great  circles,  which  are  their  vanishing  lines,  must  be  so  too. 
Now,  if  two  great  circles  of  a  sphere  be  at  right  angles  to 
each  other,  the  one  will  always  pass  through  the  other's  poles. 

(184.)  There  are,  however,  but  two  positions  in  which 
such  an  apparatus  can  be  mounted  so  as  to  be  of  any  prac- 
tical utility  in  astronomy.  The  first  is,  when  the  principal 
axis  C  D  is  parallel  to  the  earth's  axis,  and  therefore  points 
to  the  poles  of  the  heavens  which  are  the  vanishing  points  of 
all  lines  in  this  system  of  parallels;  and  when,  of  course,  the 
plane  of  the  circle  A  B  is  parallel  to  the  earth's  equator,  and 


112  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

therefore  has  the  equinoctial  for  its  vanishing  circle,  and 
neasures,  by  its  arcs  read  off,  hour  angles,  or  differences  01 
right  ascension.  In  this  case,  the  great  circles  in  the  heavens, 
corresponding  to  the  various  positions,  which  the  circle  Gr  H 
can  be  made  to  assume,  by  the  rotation  of  the  instrument 
round  its  axis  C  D,  are  all  hour-circles ;  and  the  arcs  read  off 
on  this  circle  will  be  declinations,  or  polar  distances,  or  their 
differences. 

(185.)  In  this  position  the  apparatus  assumes  the  name  of 
an  equatorial,  or,  as  it  was  formerly  called,  a  parallactic  in- 
strument. It  is  a  most  convenient  instrument  for  all  such 
observations  as  require  an  object  to  be  kept  long  in  view, 
because,  being  once  set  upon  the  object,  it  can  be  followed  H 
long  as  we  please  by  a  single  motion,  i.  e.  by  merely  turning 
the  whole  apparatus  round  on  its  polar  axis.  For  since, 
when  the  telescope  is  set  on  a  star,  the  angie  between  its 
direction  and  that  of  the  polar  axis  is  equal  to  the  poiar 
distance  of  the  star,  it  follows,  that  when  turned  about 
its  axis,  without  altering  the  position  of  the  telescope  on  the 
circle  G  H,  the  point  to  which  it  is  directed  will  always  lie 
in  the  small  circle  of  the  heavens  coincident  with  the  star's 
diurnal  path.  In  many  observations  this  is  an  inestimable 
advantage,  and  one  which  belongs  to  no  other  instrument. 
The  equatorial  is  also  used  for  determining  the  place  of  an 
unknown  by  comparison  with  that  of  a  known  object,  in  a 
manner  to  be  described  in  the  fifth  chapter.  The  adjust- 
ments of  the  equatorial  are  somewhat  complicated  and  diffi- 
cult. They  are  best  performed  in  this  manner :  —  1st,  Follow 
the  pole  star  round  its  whole  diurnal  course,  by  which  it  will 
become  evident  whether  the  polar  axis  is  directed  above  or 
below,  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  of  the  true  pole, —  and  correct 
it  accordingly  (without  any  attempt,  during  this  process,  to 
correct  the  errors,  if  any,  in  the  position  of  the  declination 
axis).  2dly,  after  the  polar  axis  is  thus  brought  into  adjust- 
ment, place  the  plane  of  the  declination  circle  in  or  near  the 
meridian ;  and,  having  there  secured  it,  observe  the  transits 
of  several  known  stars  of  widely  different  declinations.  If 
the  intervals  between  these  transits  correspond  to  the  known 


THE    EQUATORIAL    INSTRUMENT.  113 

differences  of  right  ascensions  of  the  stars,  we  may  be  sure 
that  the  telescope  describes  a  true  meridian,  and  that,  there- 
fore, the  declination  axis  is  truly  perpendicular  to  the  polar 
one ;  —  if  not,  the  deviation  of  the  intervals  from  this  law 
will  indicate  the  direction  and  amount  of  the  deviation  of  the 
axis  in  question,  and  enable  us  to  correct  it.* 

(186.)  A  very  great  improvement  has,  within  a  few  years 
from  the  present  time,  been  introduced  into  the  construction 
of  the  equatorial  instrument.  It  consists  in  applying  a  clock- 
work movement  to  turn  the  whole  instrument  round  upon  its 
polar  axis,  and  so  to  follow  the  diurnal  motion  of  any  celestial 
object,  without  the  necessity  of  the  observer's  manual  inter- 
vention. The  driving  power  is  the  descent  of  a  weight  which 
communicates  motion  to  a  train  of  wheelwork,  and  thus, 
ultimately,  to  the  polar  axis,  while,  at  the  same  time,  its  too 
swift  descent  is  controlled  and  regulated  to  the  exact  and 
uniform  rate  required  to  give  that  axis  one  turn  in  24  hours, 
by  connecting  it  with  a  regulating  clock,  or  (which  is  found 
preferable  in  practice)  by  exhausting  all  the  superfluous 
energy  of  the  driving  power,  by  causing  it  to  overcome 
a  regulated  friction.  Artists  have  thus  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing a  perfectly  smooth,  uniform,  and  regulable  motion,  which, 
when  so  applied,  serves  to  retain  any  object  on  which  the 
telescope  may  be  set,  commodiously,  in  the  centre  of  the  field 
of  view  for  whole  hours  in  succession,  leaving  the  attention 
of  the  observer  undistracted  by  having  a  mechanical  move- 
ment to  direct ;  and  with  both  his  hands  at  liberty. 

(187.)  The  other  position  in  which  such  a  compound 
apparatus  as  we  have  described  in  art.  182.  may  be  ad- 
vantageously mounted,  is  that  in  which  the  principal  axis 
occupies  a  vertical  position,  and  the  one  circle,  A  B,  con- 
sequently corresponds  to  the  celestial  horizon,  and  the  other, 
G  H,  to  a  vertical  circle  of  the  heavens.  The  angles  mea- 
sured on  the  former  are  therefore  azimuths,  or  differences 

•  See  Littrow  on  the  Adjustment  of  the  Equatorial  (Mem.  Ast.  Soc.  vol.  ii. 
p.  45.),  where  formulae  are  given  for  ascertaining  the  amount  and  direction  of 
all  the  misadjustments  simultaneously.  But  the  practical  observer,  who  wishes 
to  avoid  bewildering  himself  by  doing  two  things  at  once,  had  better  proceed  as 
recommended  in  the  text. 

I 


114  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

of  azimuth,  and  those  of  the  latter  zenith  distances,  or  alti- 
tudes, according  as  the  graduation  commences  from  the  upper 
point  of  its  limb,  or  from  one  90°  distant  from  it.  It  ia 
therefore  known  by  the  name  of  an  azimuth  and  altitude  in- 
strument. The  vertical  position  of  its  principal  axis  is  se- 
cured either  by  a  plumb-line  suspended  from  the  upper  end, 
which,  however  it  be  turned  round,  should  continue  always 
to  intersect  one  and  the  same  fiducial  mark  near  its  lower 
extremity,  or  by  a  level  fixed  directly  across  it,  whose  bubble 
ought  not  to  shift  its  place,  on  moving  the  instrument  in 
azimuth.  The  north  or  south  point  on  the  horizontal  circle 
is  ascertained  by  bringing  the  vertical  circle  to  coincide  with 
the  plane  of  the  meridian,  by  the  same  criterion  by  which 
the  azimuthal  adjustment  of  the  transit  is  performed  (art. 
162.),  and  noting,  in  this  position,  the  reading  off  of  the 
lower  circle ;  or  by  the  following  process. 

(188.)  Let  a  bright  star  be  observed  at  a  considerable 
distance  to  the  east  of  the  meridian,  by  bringing  it  on  the 
cross  wires  of  the  telescope.  In  this  position  let  the  horizon- 
tal circle  be  read  off,  and  the  telescope  securely  clamped  on 
the  vertical  one.  When  the  star  has  passed  the  meridian, 
and  is  in  the  descending  point  of  its  daily  course,  let  it  be 
followed  by  moving  the  whole  instrument  round  to  the  west, 
without,  however,  unclamping  the  telescope,  until  it  comes 
into  the  field  of  view ;  and  until,  by  continuing  the  horizon- 
tal motion,  the  star  and  the  cross  of  the  wires  come  once 
more  to  coincide.  In  this  position  it  is  evident  the  star  must 
have  the  same  precise  altitude  above  the  western  horizon,  that 
it  had  at  the  moment  of  the  first  observation  above  the 
eastern.  At  this  point  let  the  motion  be  arrested,  and  the 
horizontal  circle  be  again  read  off.  The  difference  of  the 
readings  will  be  the  azimuthal  arc  described  in  the  interval. 
Now,  it  is  evident  that  when  the  altitudes  of  any  star  are 
equal  on  either  side  of  the  meridian,  its  azimuths,  whether 
reckoned  both  from  the  north  or  both  from  the  south  point  of 
the  horizon,  must  also  be  equal,  —  consequently  the  north  or 
south  point  of  the  horizon  must  bisect  the  azimuthal  arc  thus 
determined,  and  will  therefore  become  known. 


HOW   TO    DRAW    A   MERIDIAN   LINE.  115 

(189.)  This  method  of  determining  the  north  and  south 
points  of  a  horizontal  circle  is  called  the  "  method  of  equal 
altitudes,"  and  is  of  great  and  constant  use  in  practical  astro- 
nomy. If  we  note,  at  the  moments  of  the  two  observations,  the 
time,  by  a  clock  or  chronometer,  the  instant  halfway  between 
them  will  be  the  moment  of  the  star's  meridian  passage,  which 
may  thus  be  determined  without  a  transit;  and,  vice  versa, 
the  error  of  a  clock  or  chronometer  may  by  this  process  be 
discovered.  For  this  last  purpose,  it  is  not  necessary  that  our 
instrument  should  be  provided  with  a  horizontal  circle  at  all. 
Any  means  by  which  altitudes  can  be  measured  will  enable 
us  to  determine  the  moments  when  the  same  star  arrives  at 
equal  altitudes  in  the  eastern  and  western  halves  of  its  diurnal 
course;  and,  these  once  known,  the  instant  of  meridian 
passage  and  the  error  of  the  clock  become  also  known. 

(190.^1  Thus  also  a  meridian  line  may  be  drawn  and  a  meridian 
mark  erected.  For  the  readings  of  the  north  and  south  points 
on  the  limb  of  the  horizontal  circle  being  known,  the  vertical 
circle  may  be  brought  exactly  into  the  plane  of  the  meridian, 
by  setting  it  to  that  precise  reading.  This  done,  let  the 
telescope  be  depressed  to  the  north  horizon,  and  let  the  point 
intersected  there  by  its  cross-wires  be  noted,  and  a  mark 
erected  there,  and  let  the  same  be  done  for  the  south  horizon. 
The  line  joining  these  points  is  a  meridian  line,  passing 
through  the  centre  of  the  horizontal  circle.  The  marks  may 
be  made  secure  and  permanent  if  required. 

(191.)  One  of  the  chief  purposes  to  which  the  altitude  and 
azimuth  circle  is  applicable  is  the  investigation  of  the  amount 
and  laws  of  refraction.  For,  by  following  with  it  a  circum- 
polar  star  which  passes  the  zenith,  and  another  which  grazes 
the  horizon,  through  their  whole  diurnal  course,  the  exact 
apparent  form  of  their  diurnal  orbits,  or  the  ovals  into  which 
their  circles  are  distorted  by  refraction,  can  be  traced ;  and 
their  deviation  from  circles,  being  at  every  moment  given  by 
the  nature  of  the  observation  in  the  direction  in  tohich  the 
refraction  itself  takes  place  (i.  e.  in  altitude),  is  made  a  matter 
of  direct  observation. 

(192.)   The  zenith  sector  and   the  theodolite  are  peculiar 

I  2 


lib  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

modifications  of  the  altitude  and  azimuth  instrument.  The 
former  is  adapted  for  the  very  exact  observation  of  stars  in 
or  near  the  zenith,  by  giving  a  great  length  to  the  vertical 
axis,  and  suppressing  all  the  circumference  of  the  vertical 
circle,  except  a  few  degrees  of  its  lower  part,  by  which  a 
great  length  of  radius,  and  a  consequent  proportional  enlarge- 
ment of  the  divisions  of  its  arc,  is  obtained.  The  latter  is 
especially  devoted  to  the  measures  of  horizontal  angles  be- 
tween terrestrial  objects,  in  which  the  telescope  never  requires 
to  be  elevated  more  than  a  few  degrees,  and  in  which,  there- 
fore, the  vertical  circle  is  either  dispensed  with,  or  executed 
on  a  smaller  scale,  and  with  less  delicacy ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  great  care  is  bestowed  on  securing  the  exact  perpendi 
cularity  of  the  plane  of  the  telescope's  motion,  by  resting  its 
horizontal  axis  on  two  supports  like  the  piers  of  a  transit- 
instrument,  which  themselves  are  firmly  bedded  on  the  spokes 
of  the  horizontal  circle,  and  turn  with  it. 

(193.)  The  next  instrument  we  shall  describe  is  one  by 
whose  aid  the  angular  distance  of  any  two  objects  may  be 
measured,  or  the  altitude  of  a  single  one  determined,  either 
by  measuring  its  distance  from  the  visible  horizon  (such  as 
the  sea-offing,  allowing  for  its  dip),  or  from  its  own  reflection 
on  the  surface  of  mercury.  It  is  the  sextant,  or  quadrant, 
commonly  called  Hadley^B,  from  its  reputed  inventor,  though 
the  priority  of  invention  belongs  undoubtedly  to  Newton, 
whose  claims  to  the  gratitude  of  the  navigator  are  thus 
doubled,  by  his  having  furnished  at  once  the  only  theory  by 
which  his  vessel  can  be  securely  guided,  and  the  only  instru- 
ment which  has  ever  been  found  to  avail,  in  applying  that 
theory  to  its  nautical  uses.* 

(194.)  The  principle  of  this  instrument  is  the  optical  pro- 
perty of  reflected  rays,  thus  announced :  —  "  The  angle  be- 

*  Newton  communicated  it  to  Dr.  Halley,  who  suppressed  it.  The  descrip- 
tion of  the  instrument  was  found,  after  the  death  of  Halley,  among  his  papers, 
in  Newton's  own  handwriting,  by  his  executor,  who  communicated  the  papers 
to  the  Royal  Society,  twenty-five  years  after  Newton's  death,  and  eleven  after 
the  publication  of  Hadley's  invention,  which  might  be,  and  probably  was, 
independent  of  any  knowledge  of  Newton's,  though  Hutton  insinuates  the 
contrary 


THE    SEXTANT.  117 

tween  the  first  and  last  directions  of  a  ray  which  has  suffered 
two  reflections  in  one  plane  is  equal  to  twice  the  inclination 
of  the  reflecting  surfaces  to  each  other."  Let  A  B  be  the 
limb,  or  graduated  #rc,  of  a  por- 
tion  of  a  aircle  60°  in  extent, 
but  divided  into  120  equal  parts. 
On  the  radius  C  B  let  a  sil- 
vered plane  glass  D  be  fixed,  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle,  and  on  the  moveable  ra- 
dius C  E  let  another  such  sil- 
vered glass,  C,  be  fixed.  The 
glass  D  is  permanently  fixed 
parallel  to  A  C,  and  only  one  half  of  it  is  silvered,  the  other 
half  allowing  objects  to  be  seen  through  it.  The  glass  C  is 
wholly  silvered,  and  its  plane  is  parallel  to  the  length  of  the 
moveable  radius  C  E,  at  the  extremity  E  of  which  a  vernier 
is  placed  to  read  off  the  divisions  of  the  limb.  On  the  radius 
A  C  is  set  a  telescope  F,  through  which  any  object,  Q,  may 
he  seen  by  direct  rays  which  pass  through  the  unsilvered  por- 
tion of  the  glass  D,  while  another  object,  P,  is  seen  through 
the  same  telescope  by  rays,  which,  after  reflection  at  C,  have 
been  thrown  upon  the  silvered  part  of  D,  and  are  thence 
directed  by  a  second  reflection  into  the  telescope.  The  two 
images  so  formed  will  both  be  seen  in  the  field  of  view  at 
once,  and  by  moving  the  radius  C  E  will  (if  the  reflectors  be 
truly  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  circle)  meet  and  pass 
over,  without  obliterating  each  other.  The  motion,  however, 
is  arrested  when  they  meet,  and  at  this  point  the  angle  in- 
cluded between  the  direction  C  P  of  one  object,  and  F  Q  of 
the  other,  is  twice  the  angle  E  C  A  included  between  the 
fixed  and  moveable  radii  C  A,  C  E.  Now,  the  graduations 
of  the  limb  being  purposely  made  only  half  as  distant  as  would 
correspond  to  degrees,  the  arc  A  E,  when  read  off,  as  if  the 
graduations  were  whole  degrees,  will,  in  fact,  read  double  its 
real  amount,  and  therefore  the  numbers  so  read  off  will  ex- 
press not  the  angle  EGA,  but  its  double,  the  angle  sul> 
tended  by  the  objects. 


118  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(195.)  To  determine  the  exact  distances  between  the  stars 
by  direct  observation  is  comparatively  of  little  service ;  but 
in  nautical  astronomy  the  measurement  of  their  distances 
from  the  moon,  and  of  their  altitudes,  is  of  essential  import- 
ance; and  as  the  sextant  requires  no  fixed  support,  but 
can  be  held  in  the  hand,  and  used  on  ship-board,  the  utility 
of  the  instrument  becomes  at  once  obvious.  For  altitudes 
at  sea,  as  no  level,  plumb-line,  or  artificial  horizon  can  be 
used,  the  sea-offing  affords  the  only  resource ;  and  the  image 
of  the  star  observed,  seen  by  reflection,  is  brought  to  coin- 
cide with  the  boundary  of  the  sea  seen  by  direct  rays.  Thus 
the  altitude  above  the  sea-line  is  found ;  and  this  corrected 
for  the  dip  of  the  horizon  (art.  23.)  gives  the  true  altitude  of 
the  star.  On  land,  an  artificial  horizon  may  be  used  (art.  173.), 
and  the  consideration  of  dip  is  rendered  unnecessary. 

(196.)  The  adjustments  of  the  sextant  are  simple.  They 
consist  in  fixing  the  two  reflectors,  the  one  on  the  revolving 
radius  C  E,  the  other  on  the  fixed  one  C  B,  so  as  to  have  their 
planes  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  circle,  and  parallel  to 
each  other,  when  the  reading  of  the  instrument  is  zero.  This 
adjustment  in  the  latter  respect  is  of  little  moment,  as  its 
effect  is  to  produce  a  constant  error,  whose  amount  is  readily 
ascertained  by  bringing  the  two  images  of  one  and  the  same 
star  or  other  distant  object  to  coincidence ;  when  the  instru- 
ment ought  to  read  zero,  and  if  it  does  not,  the  angle  which 
it  does  read  is  the  zero  correction  and  must  be  subtracted 
from  all  angles  measured  with  the  sextant.  The  former  ad- 
justments are  essential  to  be  maintained,  and  are  performed 
by  small  screws,  by  whose  aid  either  or  both  the  glasses  may 
be  tilted  a  little  one  way  or  another  until  the  direct  and  re- 
flected images  of  a  vertical  line  (a  plumb-line)  can  be  brought 
to  coincidence  over  their  whole  extent,  so  as  to  form  a  single 
unbroken  straight  line,  whatever  be  the  position  of  the  move- 
able arm,  in  the  middle  of  the  field  of  view  of  the  telescope, 
whose  axis  is  carefully  adjusted  by  the  optician  to  parallelism 
with  the  plane  of  the  limb.  In  practice  it  is  usual  to  leave 
only  the  reflector  D  on  the  fixed  radius  adjustable,  that  on 


PRINCIPLE   OF   REPETITION.  119 

the  moveable  being  set  to  great  nicety  by  the  maker.  In 
this  case  the  best  way  of  making  the  adjustment  is  to  view 
a  pair  of  lines  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles  (one 
being  horizontal  the  other  vertical)  through  the  telescope  of 
the  instrument,  holding  the  plane  of  its  limb  vertical,  —  then 
having  brought  the  horizontal  line  and  its  reflected  image  to 
coincidence  by  the  motion  of  the  radius,  the  two  images  of 
the  vertical  arm  must  be  brought  to  coincidence  by  tilting 
one  way  or  other  the  fixed  reflector  D  by  means  of  an 
adjusting  screw,  with  which  every  sextant  is  provided  for  that 
purpose.  When  both  lines  coincide  in  the  centre  of  the  field 
the  adjustment  is  correct. 

(197.)  The  reflecting  circle  is  an  instrument  destined  for 
the  same  uses  as  the  sextant,  but  more  complete,  the  circle 
being  entire,  and  the  divisions  carried  all  round.  It  is  usually 
furnished  with  three  verniers,  so  as  to  admit  of  three  distinct 
readings  off,  by  the  average  of  which  the  error  of  graduation 
and  of  reading  is  reduced.  This  is  altogether  a  very  refined 
and  elegant  instrument. 

(198.)  We  must  not  conclude  this  part  of  our  subject 
without  mention  of  the  "  principle 
of  repetition ; "  an  invention  of 
Borda,  by  which  the  error  of  gra- 
duation may  be  diminished  to  any 
degree,  and,  practically  speaking, 
annihilated.  Let  P  Q  be  two  ob- 
jects which  we  may  suppose  fixed, 
for  purposes  of  mere  explanation, 
and  let  K  L  be  a  telescope  moveable 
on  O,  the  common  axis  of  two 
circles,  A  M  L  and  a  be,  of  which 
the  former,  A  M  L,  is  absolutely  fixed  in  the  plane  of  the 
objects,  and  carries  the  graduations,  and  the  latter  is  freely 
moveable  on  the  axis.  The  telescope  is  attached  per- 
manently to  the  latter  circle,  and  moves  with  it.  An  arm 
0  a  A  carries  the  index,  or  vernier,  which  reads  off  the  gra- 
duated limb  of  the  fixed  circle.  This  arm  is  provided  with 
two   clamps,   by    which    it  can    be    temporarily    connected 


120  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

with  either  circle,  and  detached  at  pleasure.  Suppose,  now, 
the  telescope  directed  to  P.  Clamp  the  index  arm  O  A  to 
the  inner  circle,  and  unclamp  it  from  the  outer,  and  read  off. 
Then  carry  the  telescope  round  to  the  other  object  Q.  In  so 
doing,  the  inner  circle,  and  the  index-arm  which  is  clamped 
to  it,  will  also  be  carried  round,  over  an  arc  A  B,  on  the 
graduated  limb  of  the  outer,  equal  to  the  angle  POQ.  Now 
clamp  the  index  to  the  outer  circle,  and  unclamp  the  inner, 
and  read  off:  the  difference  of  readings  will  of  course  measure 
the  angle  POQ;  but  the  result  will  be  liable  to  two  sources 
of  error  —  that  of  graduation  and  that  of  observation,  both 
which  it  is  our  object  to  get  rid  of.  To  this  end  transfer  the 
telescope  back  to  P,  without  unclamping  the  arm  from  the 
outer  circle ;  then,  having  made  the  bisection  of  P,  clamp  the 
arm  to  b,  and  unclamp  it  from  B,  and  again  transfer  the 
telescope  to  Q,  by  which  the  arm  will  now  be  carried  with 
it  to  C,  over  a  second  arc,  B  C,  equal  to  the  angle  POQ. 
Now  again  read  off;  then  will  the  difference  between  this 
reading  and  the  original  one  measure  twice  the  angle  POQ, 
affected  with  both  errors  of  observation,  but  only  with  the 
same  error  of  graduation  as  before.  Let  this  process  be  re- 
peated as  often  as  we  please  (suppoae  ten  times) ;  then  will 
the  final  arc  A  B  C  D  read  off  on  the  circle  be  ten  times  the 
required  angle,  affected  by  the  joint  errors  of  all  the  ten  ob- 
servations, but  only  by  the  same  constant  error  of  graduation, 
which  depends  on  the  initial  and  final  readings  off  alone. 
Now  the  errors  of  observation,  when  numerous,  tend  to 
balance  and  destroy  one  another ;  so  that,  if  sufficiently  mul- 
tiplied, their  influence  will  disappear  from  the  result.  There 
remains,  then,  only  the  constant  error  of  graduation,  which 
comes  to  be  divided  in  the  final  result  by  the  number  of  ob- 
servations, and  is  therefore  diminished  in  its  influence  to  one 
tenth  of  its  possible  amount,  or  to  less  if  need  be.  The 
abstract  beauty  and  advantage  of  this  principle  seem  to  be 
counterbalanced  in  practice  by  some  unknown  cause,  which, 
probably,  must  be  sought  for  in  imperfect  clamping. 

(199  )  Micrometers   are   instruments   (as   the   name   im- 


MICROMETERS. 


121 


ports*)  for  measuring,  with  great  precision,  small  angles,  not 
exceeding  a  few  minutes,  or  at  most  a  whole  degree.  They 
are  very  various  in  construction  and  principle,  nearly  all, 
however,  depending  on  the  exceeding  delicacy  with  which 
space  can  be  subdivided  by  the  turns  and  parts  of  a  turn  of 
fine  screws.  Thus  —  in  the  parallel  wire  micrometer,  two 
parallel  threads  (spider's  lines  are  generally  used)  stretched 
on  sliding  frames,  one  or  both  moveable  by  screws  in  a  di- 
rection perpendicular  to 
that  of  the  threads,  are 
placed  in  the  common 
focus  of  the  object  and 
eye-glasses  of  a  tele- 
scope, and  brought  by 
the  motion  of  the  screws 

exactly  to  cover  the  two  extremities  of  the  image  of  any  small 
object  seen  in  the  telescope,  as  the  diameter  of  a  planet^&c.,  the 
angular  distance  between  which  it  is  required  to  measure.  This 
done,  the  threads  are  closed  up  by  turning  one  of  the  screws  till 
they  exactly  cover  each  other,  and  the  number  of  turns  and 
parts  of  a  turn  required  gives  the  interval  of  the  threads, 
which  must  be  converted  into  angular  measure,  either  by  ac- 
tual calculation  from  the  linear  measure  of  the  threads  of  the 
screw  and  the  focal  length  of  the  object-glass,  or  experiment- 
ally, by  measuring  the  image  of  a  known  object  placed  at  a 
known  distance  (as  a  foot-rule  at  a  hundred  yards,  &c)  and 
therefore  subtending  a  known  angle. 

(200.)  The  duplication  of  the  image  of  an  object  by  optical 
means  furnishes  a  valuable  and  fertile  resource  in  micrometry. 
Suppose  by  any  optical  contrivance  the  single  image  A  of 
any  object  can  be  converted  into  two,  exactly  equal  and 
similar,  A  B,  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  dependent  (by 


A  C 

*  Mtxpof,  small ;  nrrpiw,  to  measure. 


122  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

some  mechanical  movement)  on  the  will  of  the  observer,  and 
in  any  required  direction  from  one  another.  As  these  can, 
therefore,  be  made  to  approach  to  or  recede  from  each  other 
at  pleasure,  they  may  be  brought  in  the  first  place  to  ap- 
proach till  they  touch  one  another  on  one  side,  as  at  A  C,  and 
then  being  made  by  continuing  the  motion  to  cross  and  touch 
on  the  opposite  side,  as  A  D,  it  is  evident  that  the  quantity 
of  movement  required  to  produce  the  change  from  one  con- 
tact to  the  other,  if  uniform,  will  measure  the  double  diametei 
of  the  object  A. 

(201.)  Innumerable  optical  combinations  may  be  devised  to 
operate  such  duplication.  The  chief  and  most  important 
(from  its  recent  applications),  is  the  heliometer,  in  which  the 
image  is  divided  by  bisecting  the  object-glass  of  the  telescope, 
and  making  its  two  halves,  set  in  separate  brass  frames,  slide 
laterally  on  each  other,  as  A  B,  the  motion  being  produced 
and    measured    bv    a    screw. 


Each  finf,  by  the  laws  of 
optics,  forms  its  own  image 
(somewhat  blurred,  it  is  true, 
by  diffraction  *),  in  its  own 
axis ;  and  thus  two  equal  and 
similar  images  are  formed  side 
by  side  in  the  focus  of  the 
eye-piece,  which  may  be  made 
to  approach  and  recede  by  the 
motion  of  the  screw,  and  thus  afford  the  means  of  measure- 
ment as  above  described. 

(202.)  Double  refraction  through  crystallized  media  affords 
another  means  of  accomplishing  the  same  end.  Without 
going  into  the  intricacies  of  this  difficult  branch  of  optics,  it 
will  suffice  to  state  that  objects  viewed  through  certain  crys- 
tals (as  Iceland  spar,  or  quartz)  appear  double,  two  images 
equally  distinct  being  formed,  whose  angular  distance  from 
each  other  varies  from  nothing  (or  perfect  coincidence),  up  to 


•    This  nvght  be  cured,  though  at  an  expense  of  light,  by  limiting  each  hal/ 
to  a  circular  space  by  diaphragms,  as  represented  by  the  dotted  lines. 


MICROMETERS.  123 

a  certain  limit,  according  to  the  direction  with  respect  to  a 
certain  fixed  line  in  the  crystal,  called  its  optical  axis.  Sup- 
pose,  then,  to  take  the  simplest  case,  that  the  eye-lens  of  a 
telescope,  instead  of  glass,  were  formed  of  such  a  crystal  (say 
of  quartz,  which  may  be  worked  as  well  or  better  than  glass), 
and  of  a  spherical  form,  so  as  to  offer  no  difference  when 
turned  about  on  its  centre,  other  than  the  inclination  of  its 
optical  axis  to  the  visual  ray.  Then  when  that  axis  coincides 
with  the  line  of  collimation  of  the  object-glass,  one  image 
only  will  be  seen,  but  when  made  to  revolve  on  an  axis 
perpendicular  to  that  line,  two  will  arise,  opening  gradually 
out  from  each  other,  and  thus  originating  the  desired  dupli- 
cation. In  this  contrivance,  the  angular  amount  of  the 
rotation  of  the  sphere  affords  the  necessary  datum  for 
determining  the  separation  of  the  images. 

(203.)  Of  all  methods  which  have  been  proposed,  however, 
the  simplest  and  most  unobjectionable  would  appear  to  be 
the  following.  It  is  well  known  to  every  optical  student, 
that  two  prisms  of  glass,  a  flint  and  a  crown,  may  be  opposed 
to  each  other,  so  as  to  produce  a  colourless  deflection  of  paral- 
lel rays.  An  object  seen  through  such  a  compound  or 
achromatic  prism,  will  be  seen  simply  deviated  in  direction, 
but  in  no  way  otherwise  altered  or  distorted.  Let  such  a 
prism  be  constructed  with  its  surfaces  so  nearly  parallel  that 
the  total  deviation  produced  in  traversing  them  shall  not  ex- 
ceed a  small  amount  (say  5').  Let  this  be  cut  in  half,  and 
from  each  half  let  a  circular  disc 
be  formed,  and  cemented  on  a 
circular  plate  of  parallel  glass,  or 
otherwise  sustained,  close  to  and 
concentric  with  the  other  by  a 
framework  of  metal  so  light  as  to 
intercept  but  a  small  portion  of  the 
light  which  passes  on  the  outside 
(as  in  the  annexed  figure),  where 
the  dotted  lines  represent  the 
radii  sustaining  one,  and  the  un- 


124  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

dotted  those  carrying  the  other  disc.  The  whole  must  Le 
bo  mounted  as  to  allow  one  disc  to  revolve  in  its  own  plane 
behind  the  other,  fixed,  and  to  allow  the  amount  of  rotation 
to  be  read  off.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  when  the  deviations 
produced  by  the  two  discs  conspire,  a  total  deviation  of  10' 
will  be  effected  on  all  the  light  which  has  passed  through 
them ;  that  when  they  oppose  each  other,  the  rays  will 
emerge  undeviated,  and  that  in  intermediate  positions  a  de- 
viation varying  from  0  to  10',  and  calculable  from  the  angu- 
lar rotation  of  the  one  disc  on  the  other,  will  arise.  Now, 
let  this  combination  be  applied  at  such  a  point  of  the  cone 
of  rays,  between  the  object-glass  and  its  focus,  that  the  discs 
shall  occupy  exactly  half  the  area  of  its  section.  Then  will 
half  the  light  of  the  object  lens  pass  undeviated — the  other 
half  deviated,  as  above  described ;  and  thus  a  duplication  of 
image,  variable  and  measureable  (as  required  for  micrometric 
measurement)  will  occur.  If  the  object-glass  be  not  very 
large,  the  most  convenient  point  of  its  application  will  be  ex- 
ternally before  it,  in  which  case  the  diameter  of  the  discs 
will  be  to  that  of  the  object-glass  as  707  :  1000;  or  (allow- 
ing for  the  spokes)  about  as  7  to  10. 

(204.)  The  Position  Micrometer  is  simply  a  straight  thread 
or  wire,  which  is  carried  round  by  a  smooth  revolving  motion, 
in  the  common  focus  of  the  object  and  eye-glasses,  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  telescope.  It  serves  to  de- 
termine the  situation  with  respect  to  some  fixed  line  in  the 
field  of  view,  of  the  line  joining  any  two  objects  or  points  ot 
an  object  seen  in  that  field  —  as  two  stars,  for  instance,  near 
enough  to  be  seen  at  once.  For  this  purpose  the  moveable 
thread  is  placed  so  as  to  cover  both  of  them,  or  stand,  as  may 
best  be  judged,  parallel  to  their  line  of  junction.  And  its 
angle,  with  the  fixed  one,  is  then  read  off  upon  a  small 
divided  circle  exterior  to  the  instrument.  When  such  a 
micrometer  is  applied  (as  it  most  commonly  is)  to  an  equa- 
torially  mounted  telescope,  the  zero  of  its  position  corresponds 
to  a  direction  of  the  wire,  such  as,  prolonged,  will  represent 
a  circle  of  declination  in  the  heavens  —  and  the  "  angles 
of  position"   so  read  off  are  reckoned  invariably    from  one 


MICROMETERS.  125 

point,  and  in  one  direction,  viz.,  north,  following,  south,  pre- 
ceding ;  so  that  0°  position  corresponds  to  the  situation  of*  an 
object  exactly  north  of  that  assumed  as  a  centre  of  reference, 
—  90°  to  a  situation  exactly  eastward,  or  following ;  180° 
exactly  south  ;  and  270°  exactly  west,  or  preceding  in  the 
order  of  diurnal  movement.  When  the  relative  position  of 
two  stars,  very  near  to  each  other,  so  as  to  be  seen  at  once 
in  the  same  field  of  view,  is  to  be  determined  in  this  way, 
especially  if  they  be  of  unequal  magnitudes,  the  best  form  of 
the  instrument  consists,  not  in  a  single  thin  wire  to  be  placed 
centrally  across  both  the  stars,  but  in  two  thick  parallel 
wires,  between  which  both  stars  are  brought  under  inspection 
in  a  symmetrical  situation,  by  which  arrangement  the  paral- 
lelism of  the  line  joining  their  centers  with  the  direction  of 
the  wires  can  be  very  much  more  accurately  judged  of.  It 
gives  great  advantage,  moreover,  to  the  precision  of  such  a 
judgment,  if  the  position  of  the  observer  be  such  as  to  bring 
the  principal  section  of  his  eye  (that  which  in  his  upright 
position  is  vertical)  into  parallelism  with  the  wires. 

(204  a.)  To  see  the  fiducial  threads  or  wires  of  an  eye- 
piece or  micrometer  in  a  dark  night  is  impossible  without 
introducing  some  artificial  light  into  the  telescope,  so  as 
either  to  illuminate  the  field  of  view,  leaving  the  threads 
dark,  or  vice  versa.  To  illuminate  the  field,  the  light  of  a 
lamp  is  introduced  by  a  lateral  opening  into  the  tube  of  the 
telescope,  and  dispersed  by  reflexion  on  a  white  unpolished 
surface,  so  arranged  as  not  to  intercept  any  part  of  the  cone 
of  rays  going  to  form  the  image.  For  illuminating  the  wires, 
direct  lamp  light  is  thrown  on  them  from  the  side  towards 
the  eye ;  the  superfluous  rays  being  stifled  by  falling  on  a 
black  internal  coating,  or  suffered  to  pass  out  to  the  tube 
through  an  opposite  aperture  opening  into  a  dark  chamber. 

(204  b.)  When  the  wires  are  seen  dark  on  an  illuminated 
field,  the  colour  of  the  illuminating  light  is  of  great  import- 
ance. As  a  matter  of  experience,  it  is  certain  that  a  red  illu- 
mination affords  a  far  sharper  and  clearer  view  of  the  wires 
than  any  other. 

(204  c.)  For  observing  the  sun,  darkening  glasses  are  neces- 


126  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

sary.  In  this  case  red  glasses  are  inappropriate,  because 
they  transmit  the  solar  heat  freely,  by  which  the  eye  would 
be  seriously  injured,  and  even  when  very  deep  tinted,  render 
prolonged  inspection  intolerably  painful.  Green  glasses 
are  free  from  this  objection.  The  best  darkening  glass, 
however,  is  a  combination  of  a  cobalt  blue  with  a  green 
glass,  which  if  the  components  are  properly  selected,  trans- 
mits an  almost  homogeneous  yellow  light,  and  no  sensible 
amount  of  heat.  Both  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun, 
however,  may  be  subdued  by  reflexion  at  glass  surfaces,  the 
light  returned  by  regular  reflexion  on  glass  being  only  about 
2\  per  cent,  of  that  incident  on  it.  A  reflecting  telescope 
specifically  adapted  for  viewing  the  sun  may  be  constructed 
by  making  the  specula  of  glass,  the  object  mirror  having  the 
form  of  a  double  concave  lens,  whose  anterior  surface  (that 
producing  the  image)  is  worked  into  a  paraboloid  of  the 
proper  focal  length,  and  the  posterior  to  a  sphere  of  consi- 
derably greater  curvature  to  transmit  and  disperse  out- 
wards the  refracted  rays  into  the  open  air  behind  (for  which 
purpose  the  telescope  should  be  open  at  both  ends)  and  to  so 
weaken  those  reflected  by  dispersing  them  as  not  to  in- 
terfere with  the  distinctness  of  the  image.  Neither  the 
quality  of  the  glass,  nor  accuracy  of  figure  in  the  posterior 
surface  is  of  any  importance  to  the  good  performance  of  such 
a  reflector.*  Should  the  light  be  not  sufficiently  enfeebled 
by  the  first  reflexion,  it  may  be  still  further  reduced  fto 
about  1  —  900th  part  of  its  original  intensity)  by  making  the 
small  speculum  of  glass  also  in  the  form  of  a  prism  ;  the  re- 
flection being  performed  on  one  of  its  exterior  surfaces,  and 
the  refracted  portion  being  turned  away  and  thrown  out  at 
the  other. 

(204  d.)  Advantage  may  be  also  taken  (as  in  Sir  D. 
Brewster's  polarizing  eye-piece)  of  the  properties  of  polarized 
light,  which  may  be  diminished  in  any  required  degree 
by  partial  reflexion  in  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  that  of  its 

*  I  would  take  this  opportunity  earnestly  to  recommend  the  construction  of  a 
kfJioacnpe  on  this  principle,  first  propounded  and  more  fully  described  in  ray 
Cap?  observations  (p.  4S6)  to  the  attention  of  the  practical  optician. 


COLLIMATION  OP  REFLECTING  TELESCOPES.   127 

first  oblique  reflexion.  Or  without  polarization,  the  light 
may  be  enfeebled  by  successive  reflexions  between  parallel 
surfaces  to  any  extent. 

(204  e.)  When  the  object  in  view  is  to  scrutinize,  under 
high  magnifying  powers,  minute  portions  of  the  solar  disc ; 
the  light  and  heat  of  the  general  surface  may  be  intercepted 
by  a  metallic  screen  placed  in  the  focus  where  the  image  is 
formed,  and  pierced  with  a  very  small  hole,  allowing  that 
minute  portion  only  to  pass  through  and  be  examined  with 
the  eye-piece ;  the  observer  being  thus  defended  from  the 
glare.  By  this  arrangement,  Mr.  Dawes,  to  whom  the 
idea  is  due,  has  been  enabled  to  observe  some  very  extra- 
ordinary peculiarities  in  the  constitution  of  the  sun's  sur- 
face, discernible  in  no  other  way,  an  account  of  which  will 
be  found  in  their  proper  place. 

(204/.)  Since  the  use  of  large  reflectors  has  become 
common  among  astronomers,  the  necessity  of  supporting 
the  ponderous  masses  of  their  specula  without  constraint  or 
undue  pressure  in  any  direction  (which  would  distort  the 
figure  of  their  polished  surfaces),  renders  the  use  of  some 
ready  method  of  verifying,  from  instant  to  instant,  the  ad- 
justment of  their  lines  of  collimation  (or  the  optical  axis  of 
the  reflectors),  and  of  readjusting  it,  when  shifted,  indis- 
pensable. For  this  purpose,  a  small  collimating  telescope 
(Art.  178.),  illuminated  by  reflexion  from  a  lamp  outside,  is 
fixed  within  the  tube  of  the  reflector,  its  object-end  being 
turned  towards  the  speculum.  Upon  the  image  of  the  cross- 
wires  of  this  telescope  formed  in  the  focus  of  the  reflector, 
and  seen  through  its  eye-piece  as  a  real  object,  the  transits 
and  altitudes  of  celestial  objects  may  be  observed  as  if  it 
consisted  of  actual  wires ;  for  these,  it  is  manifest,  if  once 
placed  so  as  to  bisect  a  star,  will  continue  to  do  so,  whatever 
amount  of  tilting  the  reflector  might  be  subjected  to,  either 
in  a  lateral  or  vertical  plane.  The  rays  from  the  star  and  the 
axis  of  the  collimator  remaining  parallel,  the  latter  axis, 
and  not  that  of  the  reflector,  becomes  in  fact  the  real  line  ot 
collimation  or  optic  axis  of  the  instrument,  when  objects  are 
thus  directly  referred  to  it.     Should  convenience  of  micro- 


128  .  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

metric  measurement,  or  the  observation  of  faint  objects  in  a 
very  feebly  illuminated  field,  preclude  such  direct  reference, 
the  position  of  the  speculum  must  from  time  to  time  be  ex- 
amined, and  if  faulty,  readjusted  by  bringing  the  micrometer 
wires  to  coincidence  with  the  image  of  those  of  the  collima- 
tor by  an  appropriate  mechanism  communicating  the  requisite 
small  amount  of  movement  to  the  speculum  in  its  cell.* 

•  See  Phil.  Trans.  1833,  pp.  448-9,  where  this  application  of  the  collimating 
principle  used  by  the  author  since  1833,  is  first  described.  See  also  "  Results 
of  astronomical  observation  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,"  preface,  p.  xiv 


OP    GEOGRAPHY.  129 

CHAPTER  IV. 

OP  GEOGRAPHY. 

OF    TIIE    FIGURE    OF    THE    EARTH. ITS    EXACT    DIMENSIONS. ITS 

FORM  THAT  OF  EQUILIBRIUM    MODIFIED  BY  CENTRIFUGAL   FORCE. 

VARIATION    OF    GRAVITY    ON    ITS     SURFACE. STATICAL    AND 

DYNAMICAL  MEASURES  OF  GRAVITY. — THE  PENDULUM. GRAVITY 

TO  A   SPHEROID. OTHER   EFFECTS   OF   THE   EARTH'S   ROTATION. 

TRADE    WINDS. — VEERING  OF    THE   WINDS. — CYCLONES. —  FOU- 

CAULT'S     PENDULUM. — THE     GYROSCOPE. DETERMINATION     OF 

GEOGRAPHICAL  POSITIONS. — OF  LATITUDES. — OF  LONGITUDES. — 
CONDUCT  OF  A  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. — OF  MAPS. — PRO- 
JECTIONS OF  THE  SPHERE. — MEASUREMENT  OF  HEIGHTS  BY  THE 
BAROMETER. 

(205.)  Geography  is  not  only  the  most  Important  of  the 
practical  branches  of  knowledge  to  which  astronomy  is 
applied,  but  it  is  also,  theoretically  speaking,  an  essential 
pai-t  of  the  latter  science.  The  earth  being  the  general  station 
from  which  we  view  the  heavens,  a  knowledge  of  the  local 
situation  of  particular  stations  on  its  surface  is  of  great  con- 
sequence, when  we  come  to  inquire  the  distances  of  the  nearer 
heavenly  bodies  from  us,  as  concluded  from  observations  of 
their  parallax  as  well  as  on  all  other  occasions,  where  a 
difference  of  locality  can  be  supposed  to  influence  astronomical 
results.  We  propose,  therefore,  in  this  chapter,  to  explain 
the  principles,  by  which  astronomical  observation  is  applied 
to  geographical  determinations,  and  to  give  at  the  same  time 
an  outline  of  geography  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  considered  a  part 
of  astronomy. 

(206.)  Geography,  as  the  word  imports,  is  a  delineation  or 
description  of  the  earth.  In  its  widest  sense,  this  compre- 
hends not  only  the  delineation  of  the  form  of  its  continents 
and  seas,  its  rivers  and  mountains,  but  their  physical  condition, 
climates,  and  products,  and  their  appropriation  by  communi- 
ties of  men.  With  physical  and  political  geography,  however, 
we  have  no  concern  here.     Astronomical  geography  has  for 

K 


130  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

its  objects  the  exact  knowledge  of  the  form  and  dimensions 
of  the  earth,  the  parts  of  its  surface  occupied  by  sea  and  land, 
and  the  configuration  of  the  surface  of  the  latter,  regarded  as 
protuberant  above  the  ocean,  and  broken  into  the  various 
forms  of  mountain,  table  land,  and  valley ;  neither  should  the 
form  of  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  regarded  as  a  continuation  of 
the  surface  of  the  land  beneath  the  water,  be  left  out  of  con- 
sideration :  we  know,  it  is  true,  very  little  of  it ;  but  this  is 
an  ignorance  rather  to  be  lamented,  and,  if  possible,  remedied, 
than  acquiesced  in,  inasmuch  as  there  are  many  very  im- 
portant branches  of  inquiry  which  would  be  greatly  advanced 
by  a  better  acquaintance  with  it. 

(207.)  With  regard  to  the  figure  of  the  earth  as  a  whole, 
we  have  already  shown  that,  speaking  loosely,  it  may  be 
regarded  as  spherical ;  but  the  reader  who  has  duly  appreciated 
the  remarks  in  art.  22.  will  not  be  at  a  loss  to  perceive  that 
this  result,  concluded  from  observations  not  susceptible  of 
much  exactness,  and  embracing  very  small  portions  of  the 
surface  at  once,  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  first  approximation, 
and  may  require  to  be  materially  modified  by  entering  into 
minutiae  before  neglected,  or  by  increasing  the  delicacy  of  our 
observations,  or  by  including  in  their  extent  larger  areas  of 
its  surface.  For  instance,  if  it  should  turn  out  (as  it  will), 
on  minuter  inquiry,  that  the  true  figure  is  somewhat  ellip- 
tical, or  flattened,  in  the  manner  of  an  orange,  having  the 
diameter  which  coincides  with  the  axis  about  y,1,  <yth  part  shorter 
than  the  diameter  of  its  equatorial  circle ;  —  this  is  so  trifling 
a  deviation  from  the  spherical  form  that,  if  a  model  of  such 
proportions  were  turned  in  wood,  and  laid  before  us  on  a 
table,  the  nicest  eye  or  hand  would  not  detect  the  flattening, 
since  the  difference  of  diameters,  in  a  globe  of  fifteen  inches, 
would  amount  only  to  aV^h  of  an  inch.  In  all  common 
parlance,  and  for  all  ordinary  purposes,  then,  it  would  still  be 
called  a  globe ;  while,  nevertheless,  by  careful  measurement, 
the  difference  would  not  fail  to  be  noticed ;  and,  speaking 
strictly,  it  would  be  termed,  not  a  globe,  but  an  oblate 
ellipsoid,  or  spheroid,  which  is  the  name  appropriated  by 
geometers  to  the  form  above  described. 


FIGURE    OP    THE    EARTH.  131 

(208.)  The  sections  of  such  a  figure  by  a  plane  are  not 
circles,  but  ellipses ;  so  that,  on  such  a  shaped  earth,  the 
horizon  of  a  spectator  would  nowhere  (except  at  the  poles^ 
be  exactly  circular,  but  somewhat  elliptical.  It  is  easy  to 
demonstrate,  however,  that  its  deviation  from  the  circular 
form,  arising  from  so  very  slight  an  "  ellipticity"  as  above 
supposed,  would  be  quite  imperceptible,  not  only  to  our  eye- 
sight, but  to  the  test  of  the  dip-sector ;  so  that  by  that  mode 
of  observation  we  should  never  be  led  to  notice  so  small  a 
deviation  from  perfect  sphericity.  How  we  are  led  to  this 
conclusion,  as  a  practical  result,  will  appear,  when  we  have 
explained  the  means  of  determining  with  accuracy  the  di- 
mensions of  the  whole,  or  any  part  of  the  earth. 

(209.)  As  we  cannot  grasp  the  earth,  nor  recede  from  it 
far  enough  to  view  it  at  once  as  a  whole,  and  compare  it  with 
a  known  standard  of  measure  in  any  degree  commensurate 
<o  its  own  size,  but  can  only  creep  about  upon  it,  and  apply 
our  diminutive  measures  to  comparatively  small  parts  of  its 
vast  surface  in  succession,  it  becomes  necessary  to  supply,  by 
geometrical  reasoning,  the  defect  of  our  physical  powers,  and 
from  a  delicate  and  careful  measurement  of  such  small  parts 
to  conclude  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  whole  mass. 
This  would  present  little  difficulty,  if  we  were  sure  the  earth 
were  strictly  a  sphere,  for  the  proportion  of  the  circumfer- 
ence of  a  circle  to  its  diameter  being  known  (viz.  that  of 
3-1415026  to  1-0000000),  we  have  only  to  ascertain  the 
length  of  the  entire  circumference  of  any  great  circle,  such 
as  a  meridian,  in  miles,  feet,  or  any  other  standard  units,  to 
know  the  diameter  in  units  of  the  same  kind.  Now,  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  whole  circle  is  known  as  soon  as  we  know 
the  exact  length  of  any  aliquot  part  of  it,  such  as  1°  or  y^^th 
part ;  and  this,  being  not  more  than  about  seventy  miles  in 
length,  is  not  beyond  the  limits  of  very  exact  measurement, 
and  could,  in  fact,  be  measured  (if  we  knew  its  exact  termi- 
nation at  each  extremity)  within  a  very  few  feet,  or,  indeed, 
inches,  by  methods  presently  to  be  particularized. 

(210.)  Supposing,  then,  we  were  to  begin  measuring  with 
nil  due  nicety  from  any  station,  in  the  exact  direction  of  a 

K    2 


J  32  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

meridian,  and  go  measuring  on,  till  by  some  indication  we 
were  informed  that  we  had  accomplished  an  exact  degree  from 
the  point  we  set  out  from,  our  problem  would  then  be  at  onco 
resolved.  It  only  remains,  therefore,  to  inquire  by  what 
indications  we  can  be  sure,  1st,  that  we  have  advanced  an 
exact  degree ;  and,  2dly,  that  we  have  been  measuring  in  the 
exact  direction  of  a  great  circle. 

(211.)  Now,  the  earth  has  no  landmarks  on  it  to  indicate 
degrees,  nor  traces  inscribed  on  its  surface  to  guide  us  in  such 
a  course.  The  compass,  though  it  affords  a  tolerable  guide 
to  the  mariner  or  the  traveller,  is  far  too  uncertain  in  its 
indications,  and  too  little  known  in  its  laws,  to  be  of  any  use 
in  such  an  operation.  We  must,  therefore,  look  outwards, 
and  refer  our  situation  on  the  surface  of  our  globe  to  natural 
marks,  external  to  it,  and  which  are  of  equal  permanence  and 
stability  with  the  earth  itself.  Such  marks  are  afforded  by 
the  stars.  By  observations  of  their  meridian  altitudes,  per- 
formed at  any  station,  and  from  their  known  polar  distances, 
we  conclude  the  height  of  the  pole ;  and  since  the  altitude  of 
the  pole  is  equal  to  the  latitude  of  the  place  (art.  119.),  the 
same  observations  give  the  latitudes  of  any  stations  where  we 
may  establish  the  requisite  instruments.  When  our  latitude, 
then,  is  found  to  have  diminished  a  degree,  we  know  that, 
provided  we  have  kept  to  the  meridian,  we  have  described  one 
three  hundred  and  sixtieth  part  of  the  earth's  circumference. 

(212.)  The  direction  of  the  meridian  may  be  secured  at 
every  instant  by  the  observations  described  in  art.  162.  188. ; 
and  although  local  difficulties  may  oblige  us  to  deviate  in  our 
measurement  from  this  exact  direction,  yet  if  we  keep  a  strict 
account  of  the  amount  of  this  deviation,  a  very  simple  calcu- 
lation will  enable  us  to  reduce  our  observed  measure  to  its 
meridional  value. 

(213.)  Such  is  the  principle  of  that  most  important  geo- 
graphical operation,  the  measurement  of  an  arc  of  the  meri- 
dian. In  its  detail,  however,  a  somewhat  modified  course 
must  be  followed.  An  observatory  cannot  be  mounted  and 
dismounted  at  every  step  ;  so  that  we  cannot  identify  and 
measure  an  exact  degree  neither  more  nor  less.     But  this  is 


FIGURE   OF   THE    EARTH.  133 

of  no  consequence,  provided  we  know  with  equal  precision 
how  much,  more  or  less,  we  have  measured.  In  place,  then, 
of  measuring  this  precise  aliquot  part,  we  take  the  more 
convenient  method  of  measuring  from  one  good  observing 
station  to  another,  about  a  degree,  or  two  or  three  degrees, 
as  the  case  may  be,  or  indeed  any  determinate  angular 
interval  apart,  and  determining  by  astronomical  observation 
the  precise  difference  of  latitudes  between  the  stations. 

(214.)  Again,  it  is  of  great  consequence  to  avoid  in  this 
operation  every  source  of  uncertainty,  because  an  error  com- 
mitted in  the  length  of  a  single  degree  will  be  multiplied 
360  times  in  the  circumference,  and  nearly  115  times  in  the 
diameter  of  the  earth  concluded  from  it.  Any  error  which 
may  affect  the  astronomical  determination  of  a  star's  altitude 
will  be  especially  influential.  Now,  there  is  still  too  much 
uncertainty  and  fluctuation  in  the  amount  of  refraction  at 
moderate  altitudes,  not  to  make  it  especially  desirable  to 
avoid  this  source  of  error.  To  effect  this,  we  take  care 
to  select  for  observation,  at  the  extreme  stations,  some  star 
which  passes  through  or  near  the  zeniths  of  both.  The 
amount  of  refraction,  within  a  few  degrees  of  the  zenith,  is 
very  small,  and  its  fluctuations  and  uncertainty,  in  point  of 
quantity,  so  excessively  minute  as  to  be  utterly  inappretiable. 
Now,  it  is  the  same  thing  whether  we  observe  the  pole  to  be 
raised  or  depressed  a  degree,  or  the  zenith  distance  of  a  star 
when  on  the  meridian  to  have  changed  by  the  same  quantity 
(fig.  art.  128.).  If  at  one  station  we  observe  any  star  to  pass 
through  the  zenith,  and  at  the  other  to  pass  one  degree 
south  or  nortli  of  the  zenith,  we  are  sure  that  the  geographical 
latitudes,  or  the  altitudes  of  the  pole  at  the  two  stations, 
must  differ  by  the  same  amount. 

(215.)  Granting  that  the  terminal  points  of  one  degree 
can  be  ascertained,  its  length  may  be  measured  by  the 
methods  which  will  be  presently  described,  as  we  have  before 
remarked,  to  within  a  very  few  feet.  Now,  the  error  which 
may  be  committed  in  fixing  each  of  these  terminal  points 
cannot  exceed  that  which  may  be  committed  in  the  observa- 
tion of  the  zenith  distance  of  a  star  properly  situated  for  tb« 


Iu4  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

purpose  in  question.  This  error,  with  proper  care,  can 
hardly  exceed  half  a  second.  Supposing  we  grant  the  possi- 
bility of  ten  feet  of  error  in  the  length  of  each  degree  in  a 
measured  arc  of  five  degrees,  and  of  half  a  second  in  each 
of  the  zenith  distances  of  one  star,  observed  at  the  northern 
and  southern  stations,  and,  lastly,  suppose  all  these  errors  to 
conspire,  so  as  to  tend  all  of  them  to  give  a  result  greater,  or 
all  less,  than  the  truth,  it  will  appear,  by  a  very  easy  pro- 
portion, that  the  whole  amount  of  error  which  would  be  thus 
entailed  on  an  estimate  of  the  earth's  diameter,  as  concluded 
from  such  a  measure,  would  not  exceed  1 147  yards,  or  about 
two  thirds  of  a  mile,  and  this  is  ample  allowance. 

(216.)  This,  however,  supposes  that  the  form  of  the  earth 
is  that  of  a  perfect  sphere,  and,  in  consequence,  the  lengths 
of  its  degrees  in  all  parts  precisely  equal.  But,  when  we 
come  to  compare  the  measures  of  meridional  arcs  made  in 
various  parts  of  the  globe,  the  results  obtained,  although 
thsy  agree  sufficiently  to  show  that  the  supposition  of  a 
spherical  figure  is  not  very  remote  from  the  truth,  yet  exhibit 
discordances  far  greater  than  what  we  have  shown  to  be 
attributable  to  error  of  observation,  and  which  render  it 
evident  that  the  hypothesis,  in  strictness  of  its  wording,  is 
untenable.  The  following  table  exhibits  the  lengths  of  arcs 
of  the  meridian  (astronomically  determined  as  above  de- 
scribed), expressed  in  British  standard  feet,  as  resulting  from 
actual  measurement  made  with  all  possible  care  and  precision, 
by  commissioners  of  various  nations,  men  of  the  first  emi- 
nence, supplied  by  their  respective  governments  with  the  best 
instruments,  and  furnished  with  every  facility  which  could 
tend  to  ensure  a  successful  result  of  their  important  labours. 
The  lengths  of  the  degrees  in  the  last  column  are  derived 
from  the  numbers  set  down  in  the  two  preceding  ones  by 
simple  proportion,  a  method  not  quite  exact  when  the  area 
are  large,  but  sufficiently  so  for  our  purpose. 


FIGURE    OF    THE    EARTII. 


136 


Country. 

Latitude  of 
Middle  of  Are. 

Arc 
measured. 

Measured 

Length  in 

Feet. 

Moan 
Length  of 
the  Degree 
at  the  Mid- 
dle Lati- 
tude in 
Feet. 

Sweden*,  A  B  - 

+  66°2(y  io"-o 

1°  37'  19" -6 

593277 

365744 

Sweden,  A 

+  66 

19  37 

0 

57  SO  4 

351832 

367086 

Russia,  A 

+  58 

17  37 

3 

35     5  2 

1309742 

365368  ' 

Russia,  B 

+  56 

3  55-5 

8 

2  28-9 

2937439 

365291 

Prussia,  B 

+  54 

58  26-0 

1 

SO  29  0 

551073 

365420 

Denmark,  B 

+  54 

8   13-7 

1 

31    53-3 

559121 

S65087 

Hanover,  A  B  - 

+  52 

32  166 

2 

0  57-4 

736425 

365300 

England,  A 

+  52 

35  45 

3 

57   13-1 

1442953 

364971 

England,  B 

+  52 

2  19-4 

2 

50  23-5 

1036409 

364951 

France,  A 

+  46 

52     2 

8 

20     0-3 

3040605 

364872 

France,  A  B 

+  44 

51     2-5 

12 

22  12-7 

4509832 

364572 

Rome,  A            - 

+  42 

59     — 

2 

9  47 

787919 

364262 

America,  A       - 

+  39 

12     — 

1 

28  45-0 

538100 

363786 

India,  A  B 

+  16 

8  21-5 

15 

57  40-7 

5794598 

363044 

India,  A  B 

+  12 

32  208 

1 

34  56  4 

574:318 

362956 

Peru,  A  B 

-    1 

31      0-4 

3 

7     3-5 

1131050 

362790 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  A 

-33 

18  30 

1 

13  17-5 

445506 

364713 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  B 

-35 

43  200 

3 

34  34-7 

1301993 

364060 

It  is  evident  from  a  mere  inspection  of  the  second  and  fifth 
columns  of  this  table,  that  the  measured  length  of  a  degree  in" 
creases  with  the  latitude,  being  greatest  near  the  poles,  and 
least  near  the  equator.  Let  us  now  consider  what  inter- 
pretation is  to  be  put  upon  tliis  conclusion,  as  regards  the 
form  of  the  earth. 

(217.)  Suppose  we  held  in  our  hands  a  model  of  the  earth 
smoothly  turned  in  wood,  it  would  be,  as  already  observed,  so 
nearly  spherical,  that  neither  by  the  eye  nor  the  touch,  un- 
assisted by  instruments,  could  we  detect  any  deviation  from 
that  form.  Suppose,  too,  we  were  debarred  from  measuring 
directly  across  from  surface  to  surface  in  different  directions 


•   The  astronomers  by  whom   these  measurements  were  executed  were  as 
follows :  — 


Sweden,  A  B  —  Svanberg. 
Sweden,  A  —  Maupertuis. 
Russia,  A  —  Struve. 
Russia,  B* — Struve,  Tenner, 
l'russia — Bessel,  Bayer. 
Denmark —  Schumacher. 
Hanover —  Gauss. 
England — Roy,  Kater. 
France,  A — Lacaille,  Cassini. 


France,  A  B — Delambrc,  Mecbain. 
Rome —  Boscovich. 
America — Mason  and  Dixon. 
India,  1st —  Lambton,  Everest. 
India,  2d  —  Lambton. 
Peru — Lacondamine,  Bouguer. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  A  —  Lacaille. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  B — Maclear. 
—  Aitr.  Nachr.  574. 


136  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

with  any  instrument,  by  which  we  might  at  once  ascertain 
whether  one  diameter  were  longer  than  another ;  how,  then, 
we  may  ask,  are  we  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  a  true  sphere  or 
not  ?  It  is  clear  that  we  have  no  resource,  but  to  endeavour 
to  discover,  by  some  nicer  means  than  simple  inspection  or 
feeling,  whether  the  convexity  of  its  surface  is  the  same  in 
every  part ;  and  if  not,  where  it  is  greatest,  and  where  least. 
Suppose,  then,  a  thin  plate  of 
metal  to  be  cut  into  a  con- 
cavity at  its  edge,  so  as  ex- 
actly to  fit  the  surface  at  A : 
let  this  now  be  removed  from 
A,  and  applied  successively 
to  several  other  parts  of  the 
surface,  taking  care  to  keep  its 
plane  always  on  a  great  circle 

of  the  globe,  as  here  represented.  If,  then,  we  find  any 
position,  B,  in  which  the  light  can  enter  in  the  middle  be- 
tween the  globe  and  plate,  or  any  other,  C,  where  the  latter 
tilts  by  pressure,  or  admits  the  light  under  its  edges,  we 
are  sure  that  the  curvature  of  the  surface  at  B  is  less,  and 
at  C  greater,  than  at  A. 

(218.)  What  we  here  do  by  the  application  of  a  metal  plate 
of  determinate  length  and  curvature,  we  do  on  the  earth  by 
the  measurement  of  a  degree  of  variation  in  the  altitude  of 
the  pole.  Curvature  of  a  surface  is  nothing  but  the  continual 
deflection  of  its  tangent  from  one  fixed  direction  as  we  ad- 
vance along  it.  When,  in  the  same  measured  distance  of 
advance  we  find  the  tangent  (which  answers  to  our  horizon) 
to  have  shifted  its  position  with  respect  to  a  fixed  direction 
in  space,  (such  as  the  axis  of  the  heavens,  or  the  line  joining 
the  earth's  centre  and  some  given  star,)  more  in  one  part  of 
the  earth's  meridian  than  in  another,  we  conclude,  of  necessity, 
that  the  curvature  of  the  surface  at  the  former  spot  is  greater 
than  at  the  latter ;  and  vice  versa,  when,  in  order  to  produce 
the  same  change  of  horizon  with  respect  to  the  pole  (sup- 
pose 1°)  we  require  to  travel  over  a  longer  measured  space  at 
one  point  than  at  another,  we  assign  to  that  point  a  less  cur- 


FIGURE   OF   THE   E ART II. 


137 


vature.  Hence  we  conclude  that  the  curvature  of  a  meridional 
section  of  the  earth  is  sensibly  greater  at  the  equator  than  to- 
wards the  poles;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  earth  is  not 
spherical,  but  flattened  at  the  poles,  or,  which  comes  to  the 
same,  protuberant  at  the  equator. 

(219.)  Let  N  A  B  D  E  F  represent  a  meridional  section  of  trie 
earth,  C  its  centre,  and  N  A,  B  D,  G  E,  arcs  of  a  meridian, 


n 

a 

hi  I 

B 

A. 

"""\. 

c 

fv 

X 

~'m       "a 

0 

each  corresponding  to  one  degree  of  difference  of  latitude,  or 
to  one  degree  of  variation  in  the  meridian  altitude  of  a  star, 
as  referred  to  the  horizon  of  a  spectator  travelling  along  the 
meridian.  Let  «N,  a  A,  b  B,  d  D,  g  G,  e  E,  be  the  respective 
directions  of  the  plumb-line  at  the  stations  N,  A,  B,  D,  G,  E, 
of  which  we  will  suppose  N  to  be  at  the  pole  and  E  at  the 
equator ;  then  will  the  tangents  to  the  surface  at  these  points 
respectively  be  perpendicular  to  these  directions ;  and,  con- 
sequently, if  each  pair,  viz.  n  N  and  a  A,  b  B  and  d  D,  g  G 
and  e  E,  be  prolonged  till  they  intersect  each  other  (at  the 
points  x,  y,  z),  the  angles  N x  A,  B y D,  GrE,  will  each  be 
one  degree,  and,  therefore,  all  equal ;  so  that  the  small  cur- 
vilinear arcs  N  A,  B  D,  G  E,  may  be  regarded  as  arcs  of 
circles  of  one  degree  each,  described  about  x,  y,  z,  as  centres. 
These  are  what  in  geometry  are  called  centres  of  curvature, 
and  the  radii  x  N  or  x  A,  y  B  or  y  D,  z  G  or  z  E,  represent 
radii  of  curvature,  by  which  the  curvatures  at  those  points 


138  OUTLINES  OP    ASTRONOMY. 

are  determined  and  measured.  Now,  as  the  arcs  of  different 
circles,  which  subtend  equal  angles  at  their  respective  cen- 
tres, are  in  the  direct  proportion  of  their  radii,  and  as  the  arc 
N  A  is  greater  than  B  D,  and  that  again  than  G  E,  it  follows 
that  the  radius  Nx  must  be  greater  than  By,  and  By  than 
E  z.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  mutual  intersections  of  the 
plumb-lines  will  not,  as  in  the  sphere,  all  coincide  in  one 
point  C,  the  center,  but  will  bo  arranged  along  a  certain 
curve,  x  y  z  (which  will  be  rendered  more  evident  by  con- 
sidering a  number  of  intermediate  stations).  To  this  curve 
geometers  have  given  the  name  of  the  evolute  of  the  curve 
N  A  B  D  G  E,  from  whose  centers  of  curvature  it  is  con- 
structed. 

(220).  In  the  flattening  of  a  round  figure  at  two  opposite 
points,  and  its  protuberance  at  points  rectangularly  situated 
to  the  former,  we  recognize  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the 
elliptic  form.  Accordingly,  the  next  and  simplest  supposition 
that  we  can  make  respecting  the  nature  of  the  meridian, 
since  it  is  proved  not  to  be  a  circle,  is,  that  it  is  an  ellipse,  or 
nearly  so,  having  N  S,  the  axis  of  the  earth,  for  its  shorter, 
and  EF,  the  equatorial  diameter,  for  its  longer  axis;  and 
that  the  form  of  the  earth's  surface  is  that  which  would  arise 
from  making  such  a  curve  revolve  about  its  shorter  axis  N  S. 
This  agrees  well  with  the  general  course  of  the  increase  of 
the  degree  in  going  from  the  equator  to  the  pole.  In  the 
ellipse,  the  radius  of  curvature  at  E,  the  extremity  of  the 
longer  axis  is  the  least,  and  at  that  of  the  shorter  axis,  the 
greatest  it  admits,  and  the  form  of  its  evolute  agrees  with  that 
here  represented.*  Assuming,  then,  that  it  is  an  ellipse,  the 
geometrical  properties  of  that  curve  enable  us  to  assign  the 
proportion  between  the  lengths  of  its  axes  which  shall  cor- 
respond to  any  proposed  rate  of  variation  in  its  curvature,  as 
well  as  to  fix  upon  their  absolute  lengths,  corresponding  to 
any  assigned  length  of  the  degree  in  a  given  latitude.  With- 
out troubling  the  reader  with  the  investigation,  (which  may 
be  found  in  any  work  on  the  conic  sections,)  it  will  be  sut- 

•  The  clotted  lines  are  the  portions  of  the  evolute  belonging  to  the  other 
quadrants. 


DIMENSIONS   OP   THE   EARTI1.  139 

ficient  to  state  the  results  which  have  been  arrived  at  by  the 
most  systematic  combinations  of  the  measured  arcs  which 
have  hitherto  been  made  by  geometers.  The  most  recent  is 
that  of  Bessel  *,  who  by  a  combination  of  the  ten  arcs,  marked 
B  in  our  table,  has  concluded  the  dimensions  of  the  terrestrial 
spheroid  to  be  as  follows :  — 

Feet.  Milei. 

Greater  or  equatorial  diameter     -  =41,847,192  =  7925*604 

Lesser  or  polar  diameter  =  41,707,314  =  7899114 

Difference  of  diameters,  or  polar  compression  =  139,768  =  26-471 
Proportion  of  diameters  as  299-15  to  298-15. 

The  other  combination  whose  results  we  shall  state,  is  that 
of  Mr.  Airy  f,  who  concludes  as  follows :  — 

Feet.  Miles. 

Equatorial  diameter  -----=  41,847,426  =  7925*648 
Polar  diameter  -.----=  41,707,620  =  7899-170 
Polar  compression  .----=  139,806  =•  26 '478 
Proportion  of  diameters  as  299*33  to  298-33. 

These  conclusions  are  based  on  the  consideration  of  those 
13  arcs,  to  which  the  letter  A  is  annexed  $,  and  of  one  other 
arc  of  1°  7'  Si"*!,  measured  in  Piedmont  by  Plana  and 
Carlini,  whose  discordance  with  the  rest,  owing  to  local 
causes  hereafter  to  be  explained,  arising  from  the  exceedingly 
mountainous  nature  of  the  country,  render  the  propriety  of  so 
employing  it  very  doubtful.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  strikingly 
near  accordance  of  the  two  sets  of  dimensions  is  such  as  to 
inspire  the  greatest  confidence  in  both.  The  measurement  at 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  by  Lacaille,  also  used  in  this  deter- 
mination, has  always  been  regarded  as  unsatisfactory,  and 
has  recently  been  demonstrated  by  Mr,  Th.  Maclear  to  be 
erroneous  to  a  considerable  extent.  The  omission  of  the 
former,  and  the  substitution  for  the  latter,  of  the  far  pre- 
ferable result  of  Maclear's  second  measurement  would  in- 
duce, however,  but  a  trifling  change  in  the  final  result. 

(221.)  Thus  we  see  that  the  rough  diameter  of  8000  miles 
we  have  hitherto  used,  is  rather  too  great,  the  excess  being 

*   Schumacher's  Astronomische  Nachrichtcn,  Nos.  833,  334,  335.  438.(1841). 
f   Encyclopaedia  Metropolitana,  "  Figure  of  the  Earth"  (1831). 
|    In  those  which   have  both   A  and   IJ,  the  numbers  used  by  Mr.  Airy  differ 
•.lightly  from  Bessd's,  wh'cli  are  those  we  have  preferred. 


140  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

about  100  miles,  or  -^6ih  part.  As  convenient  numbers  to 
remember,  the  reader  may  bear  in  mind,  that  in  our  latitude 
there  are  just  as  many  thousands  of  feet  in  a  degree  of  the 
meridian  as  there  are  days  in  the  year  (365) :  that,  speaking 
loosely,  a  degree  is  about  70  British  statute  miles,  and  a 
second  about  100  feet ;  that  the  equatorial  circumference  of 
the  earth  is  a  little  less  than  25,000  miles  (24,899),  and  the 
ellipticity  or  polar  flattening  amounts  to  one  300th  part  of 
the  diameter. 

(222.)  The  two  sets  of  results  above  stated  are  placed  in 
juxtaposition,  and  the  particulars  given  more  in  detail  than 
may  at  first  sight  appear  consonant,  either  with  the  general 
plan  of  this  work,  or  the  state  of  the  reader's  presumed  ac- 
quaintance with  the  subject.  But  it  is  of  importance  that  he 
should  early  be  made  to  see  how,  in  astronomy,  results  in  ad- 
mirable concordance  emerge  from  data  accumulated  from 
totally  different  quarters,  and  how  local  and  accidental  ir- 
regularities in  the  data  themselves  become  neutralized  and 
obliterated  by  their  impartial  geometrical  treatment.  In  the 
cases  before  us,  the  modes  of  calculation  followed  are  widely 
different,  and  in  each  the  mass  of  figures  to  be  gone  through 
to  arrive  at  the  result,  enormous. 

(223.)  The  supposition  of  an  elliptic  form  of  the  earth's 
section  through  the  axis  is  recommended  by  its  simplicity, 
and  confirmed  by  comparing  the  numerical  results  we  have 
just  set  down  with  those  of  actual  measurement.  When  this 
comparison  is  executed,  discordances,  it  is  true,  are  observed, 
which,  although  still  too  great  to  be  referred  to  error  of  mea- 
surement, are  yet  so  small,  compared  to  the  errors  which 
would  result  from  the  spherical  hypothesis,  as  completely  to 
justify  our  regarding  the  earth  as  an  ellipsoid,  and  referring 
the  observed  deviations  to  either  local  or,  if  general,  to  com- 
paratively small  causes.      [For  §  (223  a)  see  Note  D]. 

(224.)  Now,  it  is  highly  satisfactory  to  find  that  the  gene- 
ral elliptical  figure  thus  practically  proved  to  exist,  is  precisely 
what  ought  theoretically  to  result  from  the  rotation  of  the 
earth  on  its  axis.  For,  let  us  suppose  the  earth  a  sphere,  at 
rest,  of  uniform  materials  throughout,  and  externally  covered 


FIGURE    OF    THE    EARTH.  141 

with  an  ocean  of  equal  depth  in  every  part.  Under  such 
circumstances  it  would  obviously  be  in  a  state  of  equilibrium  ; 
and  the  water  on  its  surface  would  have  no  tendency  to  run 
one  way  or  the  other.  Suppose,  now,  a  quantity  of  its  ma- 
terials were  taken  from  the  polar  regions,  and  piled  up  all 
around  the  equator,  so  as  to  produce  that  difference  of  the 
polar  and  equatorial  diameters  of  26  miles  which  we  know  to 
exist.  It  is  not  less  evident  that  a  mountain  ridge  or  equa- 
torial continent,  only,  would  be  thus  formed,  down  which  the 
water  would  run  into  the  excavated  part  at  the  poles. 
However  solid  matter  might  rest  where  it  was  placed,  the 
liquid  part,  at  least,  would  not  remain  there,  any  more  than 
if  it  were  thrown  on  the  side  of  a  hill.  The  consequence 
therefore,  would  be  the  formation  of  two  great  polar  seas, 
hemmed  in  all  round  by  equatorial  land.  Now,  this  is  by  no 
means  the  case  in  nature.  The  ocean  occupies,  indifferently, 
all  latitudes,  with  no  more  partiality  to  the  polar  than  to  the 
equatorial.  Since,  then,  as  we  see,  the  water  occupies  an 
elevation  above  the  centre  no  less  than  13  miles  greater  at 
the  equator  than  at  the  poles,  and  yet  manifests  no  tendency 
to  leave  the  former  and  run  towards  the  latter,  it  is  evident 
that  it  must  be  retained  in  that  situation  by  some  adequate 
power,  No  such  power,  however,  would  exist  in  the  case  we 
have  supposed,  which  is  therefore  not  conformable  to  nature. 
In  other  words,  the  spherical  form  is  not  the  Jigure  of  equi- 
librium ;  and  therefore  the  earth  is  either  not  at  rest,  or  is  so 
internally  constituted  as  to  attract  the  water  to  its  equatorial 
regions,  and  retain  it  there.  For  the  latter  supposition  there 
is  no  prima  facie  probability,  nor  any  analogy  to  lead  us  to 
such  an  idea.  The  former  is  in  accordance  with  all  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  apparent  diurnal  motion  of  the  heavens ;  and 
therefore,  if  it  will  furnish  us  with  the  power  in  question,  we 
can  have  no  hesitation  in  adopting  it  as  the  true  one. 

(225.)  Now,  every  body  knows  that  when  a  weight  is 
whirled  round,  it  acquires  thereby  a  tendency  to  recede  from 
the  centre  of  its  motion ;  which  is  called  the  centrifugal  force. 
A  stone  whirled  round  in  a  sling  is  a  common  illustration ; 
but  a  better,  for  our  present  purpose,  will  be  a  pail  of  water, 


142 


OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 


sT 


suspended  by  a  cord,  and  made  to  spin  round,  while  the  cord 
hangs  perpendicularly.  The  surface  of  the  water,  instead  of 
remaining  horizontal,  will  become  concave, 
as  in  the  figure.  The  centrifugal  force  ge- 
nerates a  tendency  in  all  the  water  to  leave 
the  axis,  and  press  towards  the  circum- 
ference ;  it  is,  therefore,  urged  against  the 
pail,  and  forced  up  its  sides,  till  the  excess 
of  height,  and  consequent  increase  of  pre- 
sure  downwards,  just  counterbalances  its 
centrifugal  force,  and  a  state  of  equilibrium 
is  attained.  The  experiment  is  a  very  easy 
and  instructive  one,  and  is  admirably  cal- 
calculated  to  show  how  the  form  of  equili- 
brium accommodates  itself  to  varying  cir- 
cumstances. If,  for  example,  we  allow  the 
rotation  to  cease  by  degrees,  as  it  becomes 
slower  we  shall  see  the  concavity  of  the 
water  regularly  diminish ;  the  elevated  out- 
ward portion  will  descend,  and  the  depressed  central  rise, 
while  all  the  time  a  perfectly  smooth  surface  is  maintained, 
till  the  rotation  is  exhausted,  when  the  water  resumes  its 
horizontal  state. 

(226.)  Suppose,  then,  a  globe,  of  the  size  of  the  earth,  at 
rest,  and  covered  with  a  uniform  ocean,  were  to  be  set  in  ro- 
tation about  a  certain  axis,  at  first  very  slowly,  but  by  degrees 
more  rapidly,  till  it  turned  round  once  in  twenty-four  hours ; 
a  centrifugal  force  would  be  thus  generated,  whose  general 
tendency  would  be  to  urge  the  water  at  every  point  of  the 
surface  to  recede  from  the  axis.  A  rotation  might,  indeed, 
be  conceived  so  swift  as  to  flirt  the  whole  ocean  from  the 
surface,  like  water  from  a  mop.  But  this  would  require  a 
far  greater  velocity  than  what  we  now  speak  of.  In  the  case 
supposed,  the  weight  of  the  water  would  still  keep  it  on  the 
earth ;  and  the  tendency  to  recede  from  the  axis  could  only 
be  satisfied,  therefore,  by  the  water  leaving  the  poles,  and 
flowing  towards  the  equator ;  there  heaping  itself  up  in  a 
ridge,  just  as  the  water  in  our  pail  accumulates  against  the 


FIGURE    OF    THE    EARTH.  143 

oide ;  and  being  retained  in  opposition  to  its  weight,  or  natural 
tendency  towards  the  centre,  by  the  pressure  thus  caused. 
This,  however,  could  not  take  place  without  laying  dry  the 
polar  portions  of  the  land  in  the  form  of  immensely  protube- 
rant continents;  and  the  difference  of  our  supposed  cases, 
therefore,  is  this: — in  the  former,  a  great  equatorial  conti- 
nent and  polar  seas  would  be  formed ;  in  the  latter,  protube- 
rant land  would  appear  at  the  poles,  and  a  zone  of  ocean  be 
disposed  around  the  equator.  This  would  be  the  first  or 
immediate  effect.  Let  us  now  see  what  would  afterwards 
happen,  in  the  two  cases,  if  things  were  allowed  to  take  their 
natural  course. 

(227.)  The  sea  is  constantly  beating  on  the  land,  grinding 
it  down,  and  scattering  its  worn  off  particles  and  fragments, 
in  the  state  of  mud  and  pebbles,  over  its  bed.  Geological 
facts  afford  abundant  proof  that  the  existing  continents  have 
all  of  them  undergone  this  process,  even  more  than  once,  and 
been  entirely  torn  in  fragments,  or  reduced  to  powder,  and 
submerged  and  reconstructed.  Land,  in  this  view  of  the 
subject,  loses  its  attribute  of  fixity.  As  a  mass  it  might  hold 
together  in  opposition  to  forces  which  the  water  freely  obeys ; 
but  in  its  state  of  successive  or  simultaneous  degradation, 
when  disseminated  through  the  water,  in  the  state  of  sand  or 
mud,  it  is  subject  to  all  the  impulses  of  that  fluid.  In  the 
lapse  of  time,  then,  the  protuberant  land  in  both  cases  would 
be  destroyed,  and  spread  over  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  filling 
up  the  lower  parts,  and  tending  continually  to  remodel  the 
tmrface  of  the  solid  nucleus,  in  correspondence  with  the  form 
of  equilibrium  in  both  cases.  Thus,  after  a  sufficient  lapse 
of  time,  in  the  case  of  an  earth  at  rest,  the  equatorial  con- 
tinent, thus  forcibly  constructed,  would  again  be  levelled  and 
transferred  to  the  polar  excavations,  and  the  spherical  figure 
be  so  at  length  restored.  In  that  of  an  earth  in  rotation,  the 
polar  protuberances  would  gradually  be  cut  down  and  dis- 
appear, being  transferred  to  the  equator  (as  being  then  the 
deepest  sea),  till  the  earth  would  assume  by  degrees  the  form 
we  observe  it  to  have  —  that  of  a  flattened  or  oblate  ellipsoid. 

(228.)  We  are  far  from  meaning  here  to  trace  the  pro- 


144  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

cess  by  which  the  earth  really  assumed  its  actual  form ;  all 
we  intend  is,  to  show  that  this  is  the  form  to  which,  under 
the  conditions  of  a  rotation  on  its  axis,  it  must  tend;  and 
which  it  would  attain,  even  if  originally  and  (so  to  speak) 
perversely  constituted  otherwise. 

(229.)  But,  further,  the  dimensions  of  the  earth  and  trie 
time  of  its  rotation  being  known,  it  is  easy  thence  to  calculate 
the  exact  amount  of  the  centrifugal  force  *,  which,  at  the 
equator,  appears  to  be  2^th  part  of  the  force  or  weight  by 
which  all  bodies,  whether  solid  or  liquid,  tend  to  fall  towards 
the  earth.  By  this  fraction  of  its  weight,  then,  the  sea  at  the 
equator  is  lightened,  and  thereby  rendered  susceptible  of  being 
supported  on  a  higher  level,  or  more  remote  from  the  centre 
than  at  the  poles,  where  no  such  counteracting  force  exists ; 
and  where,  in  consequence,  the  water  may  be  considered  as 
specifically  heavier.  Taking  this  principle  as  a  guide,  and 
combining  it  with  the  laws  of  gravity  (as  developed  by 
Newton,  and  as  hereafter  to  be  more  fully  explained),  mathe- 
maticians have  been  enabled  to  investigate,  a  priori,  what 
would  be  the  figure  of  equilibrium  of  such  a  body,  constituted 
internally  as  we  have  reason  to  believe  the  earth  to  be; 
covered  wholly  or  partially  with  a  fluid ;  and  revolving  uni- 
formly in  twenty-four  hours ;  and  the  result  of  this  inquiry 
is  found  to  agree  very  satisfactorily  with  what  experience 
shows  to  be  the  case.  From  their  investigations  it  appears  that 
the  form  of  equilibrium  is,  in  fact,  no  other  than  an  oblate 
ellipsoid,  of  a  degree  of  ellipticity  very  nearly  identical  with 
what  is  observed,  and  which  would  be  no  doubt  accurately  so, 
did  we  know,  with  precision,  the  internal  constitution  and 
materials  of  the  earth. 

(230.)  The  confirmation  thus  incidentally  furnished,  of  the 
hypothesis  of  the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis,  cannot  fail  to 
strike  the  reader.  A  deviation  of  its  figure  from  that  of  a 
sphere  was  not  contemplated  among  the  original  reasons  for 
adopting  that  hypothesis,  which  was  assumed  solely  on  ac- 
count of  the  easy  explanation  it  offers  of  the  apparent  diurnal 
motion  of  the  heavens.     Yet    we  see  that,  once   admitted, 

•   Newton3*  Principia,  iii.   Prop.  19. 


VARIATION   OF    TERRESTRIAL    GRAVITY.  145 

it  draws  with  it,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  this  other  re- 
markable phenomenon,  of  which  no  other  satisfactory  account 
could  be  rendered.  Indeed,  so  direct  is  their  connection,  that 
the  ellipticity  of  the  earth's  figure  was  discovered  and  demon- 
strated by  Newton  to  be  a  consequence  of  its  rotation,  and  its 
amount  actually  calculated  by  him,  long  before  any  measure- 
ment had  suggested  such  a  conclusion.  As  we  advance  with 
our  subject,  we  shall  find  the  same  simple  principle  branch- 
ing out  into  a  whole  train  of  singular  and  important  con- 
sequences, some  obvious  enough,  others  which  at  first  seem 
entirely  unconnected  with  it,  and  which,  until  traced  by 
Newton  up  to  this  their  origin,  had  ranked  among  the  most 
inscrutable  arcana  of  astronomy,  as  well  as  among  its  grandest 
phenomena. 

(231.)  Of  its  more  obvious  consequences,  we  may  here 
mention  one  which  falls  naturally  within  our  present  sub- 
ject. If  the  earth  really  revolve  on  its  axis,  this  rotation 
must  generate  a  centrifugal  force  (see  art.  225.),  the  effect  of 
which  must  of  course  be  to  counteract  a  certain  portion  of 
the  weight  of  every  body  situated  at  the  equator,  as  compared 
with  its  weight  at  the  poles,  or  in  any  intermediate  latitudes. 
Now,  this  is  fully  confirmed  by  experience.  There  is  ac- 
tually observed  to  exist  a  difference  in  the  gravity,  or  down- 
ward tendency,  of  on*»  and  the  same  body,  when  conveyed 
successively  to  stations  in  different  latitudes.  Experiments 
made  with  the  greatest  care,  and  in  every  accessible  part  of 
the  globe,  have  fully  demonstrated  the  fact  of  a  regular  and 
progressive  increase  in  the  weights  of  bodies  corresponding  to 
the  increase  of  latitude,  and  fixed  its  amount  and  the  law  of 
its  progression.  From  these  it  appears,  that  the  extreme 
amount  of  this  variation  of  gravity,  or  the  difference  between 
the  equatorial  and  polar  weights  of  one  and  the  same  mass  of 
matter,  is  1  part  in  194  of  its  whole  weight,  the  rate  of  in- 
crease in  travelling  from  the  equator  to  the  pole  being  as  the 
square  of  the  sine  of  the  latitude. 

(232.)  The  reader  will  here  naturally  inquire,  what  is  meant 
by  speaking  of  the  same  body  as  having  different  weights  at 
different  stations ;  and,  how  such  a  fact,  if  true,  can  be  a&- 

L 


116  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

certained.  When  we  weigh  a  body  by  a  balance  or  a  steel' 
yard  we  do  but  counteract  its  weight  by  the  equal  weight  of 
another  body  under  the  very  same  circumstances ;  and  if  both 
the  body  weighed  and  its  counterpoise  be  removed  to  another 
station,  their  gravity,  if  changed  at  all,  will  be  changed 
equally,  so  that  they  will  still  continue  to  counterbalance 
each  other.  A  difference  in  the  intensity  of  gravity  could, 
therefore,  never  be  detected  by  these  means ;  nor  is  it  in  this 
sense  that  we  assert  that  a  body  weighing  194  pounds  at  the 
equator  will  weigh  195  at  the  pole.  If  counterbalanced  in  a 
scale  or  steelyard  at  the  former  station,  an  additional  pound 
placed  in  one  or  other  scale  at  the  latter  would  inevitably 
sink  the  beam. 

(233.)  The  meaning  of  the  proposition  may  be  thus  ex- 
plained :  —  Conceive  a  weight  x  suspended  at  the  equator  by 
a  string  without  weight  passing  over  a 
pulley,  A,  and  conducted  (supposing 
such  a  thing  possible)  over  other  pul- 
leys, such  as  B,  round  the  earth's  con- 
vexity, till  the  other  end  hung  down 
at  the  pole,  and  there  sustained  the 
weight  y.  If,  then,  the  weights  x  and 
y  were  such  as,  at  any  one  station, 
equatorial  or  polar,  would  exactly  counterpoise  each  other  on 
a  balance,  or  when  suspended  side  by  side  over  a  single 
pulley,  they  would  not  counterbalance  each  other  in  tliis 
supposed  situation,  but  the  polar  weight  y  would  prepon- 
derate ;  and  to  restore  the  equipoise  the  weight  .r  must  be 
increased  by  r^th  part  of  its  quantity. 

(234.)  The  means  by  which  this  variation  of  gravity  may 
be  shown  to  exist,  and  its  amount  measured,  are  twofold  (like 
all  estimations  of  mechanical  power),  statical  and  dynamical. 
The  former  consists  in  putting  the  gravity  of  a  weight  in 
equilibrium,  not  with  that  of  another  weight,  but  with  a 
natural  power  of  a  different  kind  not  liable  to  be  affected  by 
local  situation.  Such  a  power  is  the  elastic  force  of  a  spring. 
Let  A  B  C  be  a  strong  support  of  brass  standing  on  the  foot 
A  E  D  cast  in  one  piece  with  it,  into  which  is  let  a  smooth 


VARIATION   OP    TERRESTRIAL    GRAVITY. 


147 


plate  of  agate,  D,  which  can  be  adjusted  to  perfect  horizon- 
tal ity  by  a  level.  At  C  let  a  spiral  spring  G  be  attached, 
which  carries  at  its  lower  end  a  weight  F, 
polished  and  convex  below.  The  length 
and  strength  of  the  spring  must  be  so 
adjusted  that  the  weight  F  shall  be  sus- 
tained by  it  just  to  swing  clear  of  contact 
with  the  agate  plate  in  the  highest  lati- 
tude at  which  it  is  intended  to  use  the 
instrument.  Then,  if  small  weights  be 
added  cautiously,  it  may  be  made  to  de- 
scend till  it  just  grazes  the  agate,  a  con- 
tact which  can  be  made  with  the  utmost 
imaginable  delicacy.  Let  these  weights 
be  noted;  the  weight  F  detached;  the 
spring  G  carefully  lifted  off  its  hook,  and 
secured,  for  travelling,  from  rust,  strain,  or  disturbance,  and 
the  whole  apparatus  conveyed  to  a  station  in  a  lower  latitude. 
It  will  then  be  found,  on  remounting  it,  that,  although  loaded 
with  the  same  additional  weights  as  before,  the  weight  F  will  no 
longer  have  power  enough  to  stretch  the  spring  to  the  extent 
required  for  producing  a  similar  contact.  More  weights  will 
require  to  be  added ;  and  the  additional  quantity  necessary 
will,  it  is  evident,  measure  the  difference  of  gravity  between 
the  two  stations,  as  exerted  on  the  whole  quantity  of  pendent 
matter,  i.  e.  the  sum  of  the  weight  of  F  and  half  that  of  the 
spiral  spring  itself.  Granting  that  a  spiral  spring  can  be  con- 
structed of  such  strength  and  dimensions  that  a  weight  of 
]  0,000  grains,  including  its  own,  shall  produce  an  elongation 
of  10  inches  without  permanently  straining  it*,  one  additional 
grain  will  produce  a  further  extension  of  y^^  th  of  an  inch, 
a  quantity  which  cannot  possibly  be  mistaken  in  such  a  con- 
tact as  that  in  question.     Thus  we  should  be  provided  with 

*  Whether  the  process  above  described  could  ever  be  so  far  perfected  and  re- 
fined as  to  become  a  substitute  for  the  use  of  the  pendulum  must  depend  on  the 
degree  of  permanence  and  uniformity  of  action  of  springs,  on  the  constancy  or  va- 
riability of  the  effect  of  temperature  on  their  elastic  force,  on  the  possibility  of  trans- 
porting  them,  absolutely  unaltered,  from  place  to  place,  &c.  The  great  advantages 
however,  which  such  an  apparatus  and  mode  of  observation  would  possess,  in 
point  of  convenience,  cheapness,  portability,  and  expedition,  over  the  present 
laborious,  tedious,  and  expensive  process,  render  the  attempt  well  worth  making 
'See  Note  E.] 

l  2 


!48  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  means  of  measuring  the  power  of  gravity  at  any  station 
to  within  TjjnoOin  °f  its  whole  quantity. 

(235.)  The  other,  or  dynamical  process,  by  which  the  force 
urging  any  given  weight  to  the  earth  may  be  determined, 
consists  in  ascertaining  the  velocity  imparted  by  it  to  the 
weight  when  suffered  to  fall  freely  in  a  given  time,  as  one 
second.  This  velocity  cannot,  indeed,  be  directly  measured  ; 
but  indirectly,  the  principles  of  mechanics  furnish  an  easy 
and  certain  means  of  deducing  it,  and,  consequently,  the  in- 
tensity of  gravity,  by  observing  the  oscillations  of  a  pendulum. 
It  is  proved  from  mechanical  principles*,  that,  if  one  and  the 
same  pendulum  be  made  to  oscillate  at  different  stations,  or 
under  the  influence  of  different  forces,  and  the  numbers  of  oscil- 
lations made  in  the  same  time  in  each  case  be  counted,  the  inten- 
sities of  the  forces  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the 
numbers  of  oscillations  made,  and  thus  their  proportion  becomes 
known.  For  instance,  it  is  found  that,  under  the  equator,  a 
pendulum  of  a  certain  form  and  length  makes  86,4u0  vibrations 
in  a  mean  solar  day  ;  and  that,  when  transported  to  London, 
the  same  pendulum  makes  86,535  vibrations  in  the  same  time. 
Hence  we  conclude,  that  the  intensity  of  the  force  urging  the 
pendulum  downwards  at  the  equator  is  to  that  at  London  as 
(86,400)-  to  (86,535 )2,  or  as  1  to  1-00315;  or,  in  other 
words,  that  a  mass  of  matter  weighing  in  London  100,000 
pounds,  exerts  the  same  pressure  on  the  ground,  or  the  same 
effort  to  crush  a  body  placed  below  it,  that  100,315  of  the 
same  pounds  transported  to  the  equator  would  exert  there. 

(236.)  Experiments  of  this  kind  have  been  made,  as  above 
stated,  with  the  utmost  care  and  minutest  precaution  to  en- 
sure exactness  in  all  accessible  latitudes ;  and  their  general 
and  final  result  has  been,  to  give  T^T  for  the  fraction  express- 
ing the  difference  of  gravity  at  the  equator  and  poles.  Now, 
it  will  not  fail  to  be  noticed  by  the  reader,  and  will,  proba- 
bly, occur  to  him  as  an  objection  against  the  explanation  here 
given  of  the  fact  by  the  earth's  rotation,  that  this  differs 
materially  from  the  fraction  ^^  expressing  the  centrifugal 
force  at  the  equator.  The  difference  by  which  the  former 
fraction  exceeds  the  latter  is  j^,  a  small  quantity  in  itself, 

•    Newton's  Principia,  ii.  Prop.  24.  Cor.  3. 


GRAVITY   ON   A    SPHEROID.  149 

but  still  far  too  large,  compared  with  the  others  in  question, 
not  to  be  distinctly  accounted  for,  and  not  to  prove  fatal  to 
this  explanation  if  it  will  not  render  a  strict  account  of  it. 

(237.)  The  mode  in  which  this  difference  arises  affords  & 
curious  and  instructive  example  of  the  indirect  influence 
which  mechanical  causes  often  exercise,  and  of  which  astro- 
nomy furnishes  innumerable  instances.  The  rotation  of  the 
earth  gives  rise  to  the  centrifugal  force ;  the  centrifugal  force 
produces  an  ellipticity  in  the  form  of  the  earth  itself;  and 
this  very  ellipticity  of  form  modifies  its  power  of  attraction 
on  bodies  placed  at  its  surface,  and  thus  gives  rise  to  the  dif- 
ference in  question.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  same  cause 
exercising  at  once  a  direct  and  an  indirect  influence.  The 
amount  of  the  former  is  easily  calculated,  that  of  the  latter 
with  far  more  difficulty,  by  an  intricate  and  profound  appli- 
cation of  geometry,  whose  steps  we  cannot  pretend  to  trace 
in  a  work  like  the  present,  and  can  only  state  its  natui'e  and 
result. 

(238.)  The  weight  of  a  body  (considered  as  undiminished 
by  a  centrifugal  force)  is  the  effect  of  the  earth's  attraction  on 
it.  This  attraction,  as  Newton  has  demonstrated,  consists, 
not  in  a  tendency  of  all  matter  to  any  one  particular  centre, 
but  in  a  disposition  of  every  particle  of  matter  in  the  universe 
to  press  towards,  and  if  not  opposed  to  approach  to,  every 
other.  The  attraction  of  the  earth,  then,  on  a  body  placed 
on  its  surface,  is  not  a  simple  but  a  complex  force,  resulting 
from  the  separate  attractions  of  all  its  parts.  Now,  it  is 
evident,  that  if  the  earth  were  a  perfect  sphere,  the  attraction 
exerted  by  it  on  a  body  any  where  placed  on  its  surface, 
whether  at  its  equator  or  pole,  must  be  exactly  alike,  —  for 
the  simple  reason  of  the  exact  symmetry  of  the  sphere  in 
every  direction.  It  is  not  less  evident  that,  the  earth  being 
elliptical,  and  this  symmetry  or  similitude  of  all  ita  parts  not 
existing,  the  same  result  cannot  be  expected.  A  body  placed 
at  the  equator,  and  a  similar  one  at  the  pole  of  a  flattened 
ellipsoid,  stand  in  a  different  geometrical  relation  to  the  mass 
as  a  whole.  Tms  difference,  without  entering  further  into 
particulars,  may  be  expected  to  draw  with  it  a  difference  io 


150  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

its  forces  of  attraction  on  the  two  bodies.  Calculation  con- 
firms this  idea.  It  is  a  question  of  purely  mathematical  in- 
vestigation, and  has  been  treated  with  perfect  clearness  and 
precision  by  Newton,  Maclaurin,  Clairaut,  and  many  other 
eminent  geometers ;  and  the  result  of  their  investigations  is 
to  show  that,  owing  to  the  elliptic  form  of  the  earth  alone, 
and  independent  of  the  centrifugal  force,  its  attraction  ought 
to  increase  the  weight  of  a  1  tody  in  going  from  the  equator  to 
the  pole  by  almost  exactly  j|(jth  part ;  which,  together  with 
j^gth  due  to  the  centrifugal  force,  make  up  the  whole 
quantity,  xi^h,  observed. 

(239.)  Another  great  geographical  phenomenon,  which 
owes  its  existence  to  the  earth's  rotation,  is  that  of  the  trade- 
winds.  These  mighty  currents  in  our  atmosphere,  on  which 
eo  important  a  part  of  navigation  depends,  arise  from,  1st, 
the  unequal  exposure  of  the  earth's  surface  to  the  sun's  rays, 
by  which  it  is  unequally  heated  in  different  latitudes ;  and, 
2dly,  from  that  general  law  in  the  constitution  of  all  fluids,  in 
virtue  of  which  they  occupy  a  larger  bulk,  and  become  spe- 
cifically lighter  when  hot  than  when  cold.  These  causes, 
combined  with  the  earth's  rotation  from  west  to  east,  afford  an 
easy  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  magnificent  pheno- 
mena in  question. 

(240.)  It  is  a  matter  of  observed  fact,  of  which  we  shall 
give  the  explanation  farther  on,  that  the  sun  is  constantly 
vertical  over  some  one  or  other  part  of  the  earth  between 
two  parallels  of  latitude,  called  the  tropics,  respectively  23  g° 
north,  and  as  much  south  of  the  equator ;  and  that  the  whole 
of  that  zone  or  belt  of  the  earth's  surface  included  between 
the  tropics,  and  equally  divided  by  the  equator,  is,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  great  altitude  attained  by  the  sun  in  its 
diurnal  course,  maintained  at  a  much  higher  temperature  than 
those  regions  to  the  north  and  south  which  lie  nearer  the 
poles.*  Now,  the  heat  thus  acquired  by  the  earth's  surface 

*  First  distinctly  delivered  by  Hadley,  though  often  enoneously  attributed 
to  Edmund  Halley,  whose  theory  of  the  trade  winds  is  altogether  erroneous. 
(See  Dove,  Meteorol.  Untersuchungen,  p   237.) 


TRADE   WINDS.  151 

*6  communicated  to  the  incumbent  air,  which  is  thereby 
expanded,  and  rendered  specifically  lighter  than  the  air  in- 
cumbent on  the  rest  of  the  globe.  It  is  therefore,  in  obedience 
to  the  general  laws  of  hydrostatics,  displaced  and  buoyed  up 
from  the  surface,  and  its  place  occupied  by  colder,  and  there- 
fore heavier  air,  which  glides  in,  on  both  sides,  along  the 
surface,  from  the  regions  beyond  the  tropics ;  while  the  dis 
placed  air,  thus  raised  above  its  due  level,  and  unsustained  by 
any  lateral  pressure,  flows  over,  as  it  were,  and  forms  an  upper 
current  in  the  contrary  direction,  or  towards  the  poles;  which, 
being  cooled  in  its  course,  and  also  sucked  down  to  supply  the 
deficiency  in  the  extra-tropical  regions,  keeps  up  thus  a 
continual  circulation.  That  this  is  a  real  cause  (vera  causa) 
is  placed  in  complete  evidence  by  the  general  fact  that  the 
atmospheric  pressure  at  the  surface  of  the  sea  diminishes 
regularly  from  either  tropic  to  the  equator,  where  the  baro- 
meter stands  habitually  about  0in.2  lower  than  in  the  tem- 
perate zones. 

(241.)  Since  the  earth  revolves  about  an  axis  passing 
through  the  poles,  the  equatorial  portion  of  its  surface  has 
the  greatest  velocity  of  rotation,  and  all  other  parts  less  in 
the  proportion  of  the  radii  of  the  circles  of  latitude  to  which 
they  correspond.  But  as  the  air,  when  relatively  and  ap- 
parently at  rest  on  any  part  of  the  earth's  surface,  is  only  so 
because  in  reality  it  participates  in  the  motion  of  rotation 
proper  to  that  part,  it  follows  that  when  a  mass  of  air  near 
the  poles  is  transferred  to  the  region  near  the  equator  by  any 
impulse  urging  it  directly  towards  that  circle,  in  every  point 
of  its  progress  towards  its  new  situation  it  must  be  found 
deficient  in  rotatory  velocity,  and  therefore  unable  to  keep 
up  with  the  speed  of  the  new  surface  over  which  it  is  brought. 
Hence,  the  currents  of  air  which  set  in  towards  the  equator 
from  the  north  and  south  must,  as  they  glide  along  the  sur- 
face, at  the  same  time  lag,  or  hang  back,  and  drag  upon  it  in 
the  direction  opposite  to  the  earth's  rotation,  i.  e.  from  east  to 
west.  Thus  these  currents,  which  but  for  the  rotation  would 
be  simply  northerly  and  southerly  winds,  acquire,  from  this 
cause,  a  relative  direction  towards  the  west,  and  assume  the 


152  OUTLINES  OF    ASTRONOMT. 

character  of  permanent  north-easterly  and  south-easterly 
winds. 

(242.)  Were  any  considerable  mass  of  air  to  be  suddenly 
transferred  from  beyond  the  tropics  to  the  equator,  the  dif- 
ference of  the  rotatory  velocities  proper  to  the  two  situations 
would  be  so  great  as  to  produce  not  merely  a  wind,  but  a 
tempest  of  the  most  destructive  violence.  But  this  is  not 
the  case :  the  advance  of  the  air  from  the  north  and  south  is 
gradual,  and  all  the  while  the  earth  is  continually  acting  on, 
and  by  the  friction  of  its  surface  accelerating  its  rotatory 
velocity.  Supposing  its  progress  towards  the  equator  to  cease 
at  any  point,  this  cause  would  almost  immediately  commu- 
nicate to  it  the  deficient  motion  of  rotation,  after  which  it 
would  revolve  quietly  with  the  earth,  and  be  at  relative  rest. 
We  have  only  to  call  to  mind  the  comparative  thinness  of  the 
coating  which  the  atmosphere  forms  around  the  globe  (art. 
35.),  and  the  immense  mass  of  the  latter,  compared  with  the 
former  (which  it  exceeds  at  least  1,200,000  times),  to  ap- 
pretiate  fully  the  influence  of  any  extensive  territory  of  the 
earth  over  the  atmosphere  immediately  incumbent  on  it,  in 
destroying  any  impulse  once  given  to  it,  and  which  is  not 
continually  renewed. 

(243.)  It  follows  from  this,  then,  that  as  the  winds  on 
both  sides  approach  the  equator,  their  easterly  tendency  must 
diminish.*  The  lengths  of  the  diurnal  circles  increase  very 
6lowly  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  equator,  and  for 
several  degrees  on  either  side  of  it  hardly  change  at  all. 
Thus  the  friction  of  the  surface  has  more  time  to  act  in  ac- 
celerating the  velocity  of  the  air,  bringing  it  towards  a  state 
of  relative  rest,  and  diminishing  thereby  the  relative  set  of 
the  currents  from  east  to  west,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
feebly,  and,  at  length,  not  at  all,  reinforced  by  the  cause  which 
originally  produced  it.  Arrived,  then,  at  the  equator,  the 
trades  must  be  expected  to  lose  their  easterly  character  alto- 
gether.    But  not  only  this,  but  the  northern  and  southern 

*  See  Captain  Hall's  "  Fragments  of  Voyages  and  Travels,"  2nd  series,  vol.  i., 
p.  162.,  where  this  is  very  distinctly,  and,  so  far  as  I  am  aware  for  the  first 
time,  reasoned  out. 


TRADE    WINDS.  153 

currents  here  meeting  and  opposing,  will  mutually  destroy 
each  other,  leaving  only  such  preponderancy  as  may  be  due 
to  a  difference  of  local  causes  acting  in  the  two  hemispheres 
— which  in  some  regions  around  the  equator  may  lie  one 
way,  in  some  another. 

(244.)  The  result,  then,  must  be  the  production  of  two 
great  tropical  belts,  in  the  northern  of  which  a  constant 
north-easterly,  and  in  the  southern  a  south-easterly,  wind 
must  prevail,  while  the  winds  in  the  equatorial  belt,  which 
separates  the  two  former,  should  be  comparatively  calm  and 
free  from  any  steady  prevalence  of  easterly  character.  All 
these  consequences  are  agreeable  to  observed  fact,  and  the 
system  of  aerial  currents  above  described  constitutes  in 
reality  what  is  understood  by  the  regular  trade  winds. 

(245.)  The  constant  friction  thus  produced  between  the 
earth  and  atmosphere  in  the  regions  near  the  equator  must 
(it  may  be  objected)  by  degrees  reduce  and  at  length  destroy 
the  rotation  of  the  whole  mass.  The  laws  of  dynamics,  how- 
ever, render  such  a  consequence,  generally,  impossible  ;  and 
it  is  easy  to  see,  in  the  present  case,  where  and  how  the  com- 
pensation takes  place.  The  heated  equatorial  air,  while  it 
rises  and  flows  over  towards  the  poles,  carries  with  it  the 
rotatory  velocity  due  to  its  equatorial  situation  into  a  higher 
latitude,  where  the  earth's  surface  has  less  motion.  Hence, 
as  it  travels  northward  or  southward,  it  will  gain  continually 
more  and  more  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  in  its  diurnal 
motion,  and  assume  constantly  more  and  more  a  westerly 
relative  direction ;  and  when  at  length  it  returns  to  the 
surface,  in  its  circulation,  which  it  must  do  more  or  less  in 
all  the  interval  between  the  tropics  and  the  poles,  it  will  act- 
on it  by  its  friction  as  a  powerful  south-west  wind  in  the 
northern  hemisphere,  and  a  north-west  in  the  southern,  and 
restore  to  it  the  impulse  taken  up  from  it  at  the  equator. 
We  have  here  the  origin  of  the  south-west  and  westerly 
gales  so  prevalent  in  our  latitudes,  and  of  the  almost  uni- 
versal westerly  winds  in  the  North  Atlantic,  which  are,  in 
fact,  nothing  else  than  a  part  of  the  general  system  of  the 
re-action  of  the  trades,  and  of  the  process  by  which  the  equili- 
brium of  the  earth's  motion  is  maintained  under  their  action. 


154  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(245  a.)  If  in  any  region  of  the  earth's  surface,  where  the 
latitude  is  considerable,  and  where,  in  consequence  the  cir- 
cumferences of  the  diurnal  circles  described  by  points  on  the 
same  meridian  a  few  degrees  asunder  differ  considerably,  an 
impulse  (from  whatever  cause  arising)  from  the  pole  towards 
the  equator  be  communicated  to  a  portion  of  the  atmosphere 
covering  several  square  degrees ;  an  observer  situated  on  the 
equatorial  limit  of  the  area  so  disturbed  will,  in  the  first  in- 
stant of  the  disturbance,  experience  a  wind  blowing  directly 
from  the  pole,  i.  e.,  a  north  wind  in  the  northern  hemisphere 
and  a  south  in  the  southern.  To  fix  our  ideas,  suppose  him 
situate  in  north  latitude  and  beyond  the  tropic.  The  air 
which  reaches  him  in  the  first  instant,  arising  from  a  place 
in  his  immediate  vicinity,  has  the  same  diurnal  rotatory 
velocity  with  himself,  and  will  therefore  have  no  relative 
movement  westward.  But  the  southward  movement  of  the 
whole  mass  of  air  continuing,  the  wind  which  subsequently 
reaches  his  station  arriving  from  latitudes  continually  more 
and  more  north,  and  therefore  setting  out  with  a  rotatory 
velocity  continually  more  and  more  inferior  to  that  of  the 
observer,  will  lag  more  and  more  behind  the  easterly  motion 
of  the  earth's  surface  at  his  station,  and  will  therefore  become, 
relatively  to  him,  more  and  more  of  an  east  wind.  In  other 
words,  a  wind  commencing  to  blow  from  the  north  will  not 
continue  long  to  do  so,  but  will  "  draw  towards  the  east," 
veering  gradually  round  to  N.N.E.  and  N.E. ;  vice  versa  if 
the  impulse  of  the  mass  of  air  be  from  south  to  north.  The 
first  impression  on  the  observer  will  be  that  of  a  south  wind, 
which  in  the  progress  of  time  will  veer  round  through  S.S.W. 
to  S.W.,  and  so  mutatis  mutandis  in  the  other  hemisphere; 
and  thus  arises  a  general  tendency  of  the  wind  in  extra-tropi- 
cal latitudes  to  veer  in  a  fixed  direction,  or  "  to  follow  the 
sun,"  which  meteorological  observation  very  decisively  con- 
firms as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  is  therefore  pro  tanto  a  proof  of 
the  reality  of  the  assigned  cause.* 

(245  b.)  It  is,  however,  in  these  tremendous  visitations) 

*  Sec  Article  Meteorology,  Encyc.  Brit.    $  70. 


TRADE   WINDS  AND   CYCLONES.  1 55 

called  "  hurricanes,"  which  sweep  across  land  and  sea  with  a 
devastating  power  exceeded  only  by  the  earthquake,  that  we 
find  the  most  striking;  verification  of  the  principle  above 
stated.  Suppose  that  in  any  locality  in  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere some  considerable  portion  of  the  surface,  whether  of 
sea  or  land,  should  become  so  much  more  heated  by  the  sun's 
rays  than  that  surrounding  it,  as  to  determine  an  upward 
movement  in  the  air  above  it  in  the  nature  of  an  ascending 
column,  thereby  giving  rise  to  a  diminished  barometric  pres- 
sure, and  as  a  necessary  consequence  to  an  indraught  of  air 
from  all  quarters  towards  the  heated  area.  Those  portions 
which  arrive  from  the  east  and  west,  participating  in  the 
entire  diurnal  movement  corresponding  to  the  latitude,  will 
6imply  meet  and  be  hurried  upwards,  without  any  tendency 
to  gyrate  round  a  center.  But  the  portions  which  arrive 
from  the  northward  will  all  reach  the  heated  region  or  its 
immediate  confines  with  a  modified  power.  Those  which 
come  from  the  north-easterly  quadrant  will  have  their  wes- 
terly force  increased,  and  those  from  the  north-west  quadrant, 
their  easterly-force  diminished,  so  that  in  arriving  from  the 
northward,  the  general  current  setting  to  the  heated  region 
will  have  assumed  a  tendency  from  east  to  west,  and  in  arriv- 
ing from  the  southward  from  west  to  east,  and  these  portions 
being  drawn  up  together  into  the  ascending  column,  will 
necessarily  assume  a  rotation  round  its  general  axis  in  the 
direction  N.W.S.E.*,  whereas,  were  the  earth  at  rest,  the  air 
coming  in  from  all  quarters  with  equal  force,  each  particle 
would  make  direct  for  the  center,  and  simply  be  thrown  up 
vertically  without  any  gyration. 

(245  c.)  The  rotation  thus  given  to  the  ascending  column 
in  the  northern  hemisphere  is  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that 
of  the  hands  of  a  watch  face  upwards,  which  we  may  term 
retrograde.  And  by  a  similar  reasoning,  in  the  southern  it 
will  be  seen  that  a  contrary,  or  direct  rotation  ought  to  arise 
from  the  operation  of  the  same  causes.  It  is,  moreover, 
obvious,  that  the  energy  of  the  vortex  so  produced  must  be, 
Tteteris  paribus,  proportional  to  that  of  its  efficient  causes.  In 

*  See  Encyclop.  Brit.,  Mttcorol»tjv,i  7:5.,  for  the  complete  reasoning  out  of  this 
proves*. 


156  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

high  latitudes  there  is  a  deficiency  of  solar  heat  to  produce  a 
powerful  ascensional  current.  On  and  about  the  equator,  on 
the  other  hand,  though  heat  be  abundant,  the  other  efficient 
cause,  viz.  a  considerable  difference  of  diurnal  rotatory  velo- 
city, is  absent.  Such  movements,  therefore,  cannot  exist  on 
the  equator,  and  their  intensity  will  chiefly  be  confined  to 
regions  in  moderate  latitudes. 

(245  d.)  Now  every  one  of  these  particulars  is  in  exact 
conformity  with  the  history  of  those  hurricanes,  or  cyclones, 
as  they  have  been  called,  from  their  revolving  character, 
which  infest  the  Atlantic  along  the  east  coasts  of  the  United 
States  and  the  West  Indies,  the  Indian  Ocean,  and  (under 
the  name  of  typhoons)  the  China  seas.  Their  extent  and 
violence  are  frightful ;  their  rotation  in  the  same  hemisphere 
is  invariably  the  same,  and  in  each,  that  which  theory  in- 
dicates ;  and  they  are  utterly  wanting  on  the  equator.  This 
grand  result,  the  establishment  of  which  we  owe  to  the 
labours  of  Mr.  Redfield,  Sir  W.  Reid,  and  Mr.  Piddington, 
forms  a  capital  feature  in  the  array  of  evidence  by  which 
the  rotation  of  the  earth,  as  a  physical  fact,  is  demonstrated. 

(245  e.)  Another  class  of  phaenomena,  inexplicable  except 
on  the  hypothesis  of  the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis,  but 
flowing  easily  and  naturally  from  the  admission  of  that 
principle,  has,  within  a  few  years  from  the  present  time, 
been  brought  under  our  inspection  by  M.  Foucault.  If  a 
heavy  mass  of  metal  (a  globe  of  lead,  for  example)  be  sus- 
pended by  a  long  wire  from  a  solid  and  perfectly  fixed  sup- 
port, over  the  center  of  a  plane  table  of  a  circular  form, 
and,  being  drawn  aside  from  the  perpendicular  (suppose 
in  the  direction  of  the  meridian),  be  then  allowed  to  os- 
cillate, taking  extreme  care  to  avoid  giving  it  any  lateral 
motion  (which  may  be  accomplished  by  drawing  it  aside  by 
a  fine  thread,  and,  when  quite  at  rest,  burning  off  the 
thread),  it  will  of  course  commence  its  oscillations  in  the 
plane  of  the  meridian.  But  when  watched  attentively, 
marking  on  the  table  the  points  of  its  circumference,  from 
time  to  time,  opposite  to  its  points  of  extreme  excursion, 
it  will  in  a  few  minutes  be  seen  to  have  (apparently)  shifted 


foucault's  pendulum. 


157 


its  plane  of  motion  ;  the  northern  extremity  of  its  excursions 
to  and  fro  having  invariably  gone  round  in  azimuth  towards 
the  east,  and  the  southern  towards  the  west  (supposing  the 
experiment  made  in  the  northern  hemisphere — vice  versa  in 
the  southern).  Although  in  a  few  oscillations  the  deviation 
is  too  small  to  be  readily  perceived,  it  at  length  becomes 
apparent  that  the  path  traced  on  the  table  by  the  projection 
of  the  center  of  the  globe,  instead  of  being  a  rigorous  straight 
line,  as  it  must  be  according  to  the  laws  of  dynamics,  were 
the  table  at  rest,  is,  in  reality,  a  looped  curve  of  the  form 
here  shown  (Jig-  «.)  (the  intervals  of  the  loops  being  much 


exaggerated) ;   all  of  them  passing  through  the  center  of  the 
table. 

(245/.)  It  is  evident  that  such  a  motion  is  quite  different 
from  that  which  a  small  lateral  motion  accidentally  com- 
municated to  the  pendulous  body  would  produce.  The 
effect  of  such  an  impulse  would  be  to  make  the  central 
mass  desoribe  a  series  of  elongated  ovals,  a  kind  of  elliptic 
spiral,  the  convolutions  of  which  would  pass,  not  through, 
but  round  the  center,  as  here  represented  {fig.  b.);  and  that 
indifferently  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  according  to  the 


158  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

accident  of  the  lateral  impulse.     On  the  other  hand,  the 
observed  effect  is  precisely  such  as  would  take  place,  sup- 

Fig.  b. 


posing  the  plane  of  oscillation  to  remain  invariable,  and  the 
table  to  revolve  beneath  it  in  its  own  plane  in  a  contrary 
direction  (from  north  to  west),  with  an  angular  motion  duly 
adjusted.  Supposing  the  oscillating  ball  to  leave  a  trace  on 
the  table  so  turning,  that  trace  would  evidently  be  such  a 
one  as  described  in  the  preceding  article  :  and  if  we  admit 
the  rotation  of  the  earth,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  table,  though 
unperceived  by  us,  does  so  turn.  It  is  not  transferred  by 
the  earth's  rotation  bodily  to  the  eastward  by  a  parallel 
movement  of  all  its  parts.  The  southern  extremity  of  its 
meridional  diameter  S  is  carried  in  a  given  time  (suppose  one 
minute)  more  to  the  eastward  than  the  northern ;  so  that 
it  has  virtually  rotated  in  its  own  plane  through  an  angle 
corresponding  to  the  difference  of  these  two  movements  of 
transference. 

(245  <?.)  This  difference  is  a  maximum  at  the  pole  (where 
it  is  obvious  that  the  table  turns  entirely  in  its  own  plane,  as 
the  earth's  surface  there  does) ;  and  it  is  nil  at  the  equator, 
where,  in  consequence,  the  experiment,  would  be  made  in 
vain  (the  entire  rotation  of  the  table  there  being  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  its  own) ;  and  generally  the  effect  will  be 


THE   GYROSCOPE. 


l59 


more  strikingly  developed  in  high  than  in  low  latitudes.  To 
show  this  more  clearly,  suppose  P  the  north  pole,  C  the  center 
of  the  earth,  CPQ  its  axis  pro- 
longed, AB  two  successive  posi- 
tions of  the  table  at  an  interval  of 
one  minute  of  time,  during  which 
the  meridian  AP  has  rotated 
through  an  angle  of  0°  15'  round 
P  to  the  position  BP.  The  plane 
of  the  table,  being  a  tangent  to  the 
earth's  surface,  will,  if  produced 
(whether  it  be  at  A  or  B),  meet  the 
axis  at  Q,  the  vertex  of  a  cone  hav- 
ing for  its  base  the  diurnal  circle  of 
the  place  of  observation.  During 
the  small  interval  in  question,  the 

portion  AQB  of  this  conical  surface  may  be  regarded  as 
plane,  and  the  motion  of  the  table  will  be  the  same  as  if  it 
formed  a  part  of  that  plane,  and  revolved  round  a  pivot  at 
Q,  the  meridional  diameter  a  a  being  transferred  into  the 
position  b  b,  making  with  a  a  an  angle  equal  to  AQB.  Now 
this  angle  at  the  equator  is  nil,  the  summit  of  the  cone  being 
there  infinitely  remote ;  whereas,  on  the  pole  it  is  identical 
with  the  spherical  angle  A  P  B,  the  table  there  rotating  about 
its  own  center. 

(245  h.)  The  gyroscope  is  an  instrument  devised  by  M. 
Foucault  to  exhibit  the  same  sort  of  effect  in  another  man- 
ner. It  depends  on  the  very  obvious  principle  that  a  body 
revolving  round  one  of  its  axes  of  permanent  rotation, 
and  free  from  any  disturbing  attachment  to  surrounding 
objects,  will  preserve  its  plane  of  rotation  unaltered.  Imagine 
a  metallic  disc,  thin  in  the  center  but  very  thick  at  the  cir- 
cumference so  as  to  present  in  section  the  figure  A  B,  to  be 
fixed  on  an  axis  C  D,  perpendicular  to  its  plane  which  turns 
in  pivot-holes  C  D,  on  opposite  ends  of  the  diameter  of  a 
ring  of  metal,  which  is  itself  provided  with  exterior  pivots  on 
the  extremities  of  a  diameter  at  right  angles  to  the  former, 


160 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


and  let  these  rest  in  pivot  holes  E  F,  at  the  lower  ends  of  a 
semicircular  metallic  arc  EGrF,  supported  from  its  middle 
G  by  a  torsionless  suspension,  such  as  may  be  formed  by 
attaching  a  thread  to  a  hook  at  the  lower  end  of  a  steel  arm, 
terminating  in  an  inverted  conical  point  resting  in  a  polished 
agate  cup  as  at  H.  The  whole  of  this  apparatus  is  to  be 
executed  with  extreme  delicacy,  and  with  every  precaution 
to  secure  perfect  equilibrium  and  freedom  from  friction  in 
the  pivots.  Suppose  now  that  by  some  sufficient  mechanical 
means  an  exceedingly  rapid  rotation  is  communicated  to  the 
disc  which  is  then  abandoned  to  itself.  It  is  evident  then, 
1st,  that  it  may  be  set  in  rotation  originally  in  any  given  plane, 
and  2ndly,  that  however  that  initial  pl?ne  be  situated,  it  will 
thenceforward  continue  to  rotate  in  that  plane,  since  the 
mode  of  suspension  is  such  as  to  exercise  no  control  over  it, 
in  that  respect.     If  the  disc  be  heavy,  the  initial  rotation 


TIIE    GYROSCOPE.  161 

very  rapid  (and  especially  if  suspended  in  vacuo)  the  motion 
will  be  kept  up  for  a  considerable  time  —  quite  long  enough 
to  exhibit  the  phenomena  due  to  the  earth's  rotation. 

(245  i.)  There  being  no  action  exerted  by  either  the  pivots 
or  the  suspension  which  can  affect  the  plane  of  rotation,  this 
will  necessarily  continue  unchanged,  so  that  the  axis  C  D 
about  which  it  spins  will  remain  parallel  to  itself,  however 
the  point  of  suspension  may  be  varied  in  place  by  bodily 
transfer  of  the  whole  apparatus,  or  in  relative  position  by 
change  in  the  absolute  direction  of  gravity  consequent  on 
the  earth's  diurnal  rotation.  Suppose  then  the  axis  C  D  to 
point  at  any  instant  to  a  given  fixed  star,  then  if  the  earth 
were  at  rest  and  the  diurnal  movement  of  the  starry  heavens 
real,  it  could  not  continue  so  to  point,  since  the  star  would 
move  away  out  of  its  line  of  direction,  and  would  appear  to 
leave  it  behind.  The  contrary  however  is  the  case.  The 
axis  of  the  disc  continues  to  point  to  the  star  so  long  as  the 
disc  itself  continues  to  revolve,  and,  could  its  rotation  be  kept 
up  for  twenty -four  hours,  would  doubtless  continue  to  follow 
it  through  its  whole  diurnal  circle  both  above  and  below  the 
horizon,  affording  thus  a  clear  ocular  demonstration  of  the 
earth's  rotation,  since  if  a  line,  of  whose  fixity  of  direction 
we  are  a  priori  sure,  appear  to  vary  in  position  with  respect 
to  the  visible  horizon  and  surrounding  objects  it  cannot  be 
but  that  that  horizon  and  those  terrestrial  points  of  reference 
have,  themselves,  shifted  in  position  by  a  corresponding  oppo- 
site movement. 

(245/)  If  the  conditions  of  suspension  be  such  as  to  limit 
the  axis  of  rotation  of  the  disc  to  a  plane  holding  a  deter- 
minate position  with  respect  to  the  horizon,  as,  for  instance, 
that  of  the  horizon  itself,  or  of  the  meridian  of  the  place,  its 
movements  are  in  conformity  with  what  the  principle  of  dy- 
namics indicate  as  the  result  of  a  composition  of  the  free 
rotation  of  the  disc  and  that  of  the  earth  so  partially  com- 
municated to  it.  We  shall  not  however  pursue  the  subject 
into  these  details.  The  student  will  find  them  lucidly  ex- 
plained by  Professor  Powell,  in  the  monthly  notices  of  the 


\C)2  OUTLINES   OF    ASTKONOMY. 

Astronomical  Society  for  April,  1855.  The  mechanical  fact 
on  which  the  whole  theory  turns  (the  powerful  resistance 
opposed  by  a  rapidly  revolving  heavy  body  to  a  change  of 
position  in  its  axis  of  rotation)  may  be  brought  under  the 
evidence  of  the  senses  by  the  following  simple  and  elegant 
experiment.  Let  any  one  detach  an  18-inch  terrestrial 
globe  from  its  wooden  frame,  and,  holding  it  by  the  brass 
meridian  with  the  plane  of  that  circle  horizontal,  let  a  rapid 
rotation  be  given  to  the  globe  by  an  assistant.  So  long  as 
no  attempt  is  made  to  alter  the  position  of  the  axis,  the  only 
sensation  experienced  by  the  holder  will  be  the  effort  of  sus- 
taining the  weight  of  the  globe,  just  as  if  it  were  at  rest. 
But  so  soon  as  he  attempts  to  shift  the  direction  of  the  axis, 
whether  in  a  horizontal,  a  vertical,  or  any  other  plane,  he 
will  at  once  become  aware  of  a  resistance  in  the  revolving 
globe  to  such  a  change,  quite  different  from  the  simple  in- 
ertia of  a  globe  at  rest  —  a  kind  of  internal  struggle  —  an 
effort  to  twist  the  globe  in  his  hands,  as  if  some  animal  were 
inclosed  within  its  hollow,  or  as  if  it  were  no  longer  equally 
balanced  on  its  center.  If  he  endeavour  to  roll  the  globe  on 
its  brass  meridian  in  a  right  line  along  the  floor  (which  with 
a  non-rotating  globe  would  be  easy)  he  will  find  it  impracti- 
cable without  perpetually  and  forcibly  interfering,  not  merely 
to  keep  the  meridian  upright  but  to  prevent  its  running  out 
of  the  right  line.  Suppose,  for  instance,  the  brass  meridian 
to  be  vertical  and  its  plane  coincident  with  that  of  the  true 
meridian,  the  axis  horizontal,  and  the  globe  to  rotate  in  the 
direction  in  which  the  heavens  appear  to  revolve,^,  e.from  the 
east  vpwards  ;  to  the  west  downwards,  and  let  him  attempt  to 
roll  it  (lightly  held  by  the  finger  and  thumb  by  the  highest 
point  of  the  circle)  in  a  northerly  direction.  He  will  find  it 
run  round  to  the  eastward,  causing  the  plane  of  the  brass 
meridian  to  shift  in  azimuth  in  a  direction  similar  to  that 
of  the  hands  of  a  watch,  and  vice  versa  if  he  try  to  make  it 
roll  southward-'.  That  end  of  the  axis  which  rises  appears 
to  be  swept  along  with  the  revolving  motion  of  the  globe  as 
seen  from  above. 


GEOGRAPHICAL    POSITIONS.  163 

^246.)  In  order  to  construct  a  map  or  model  of  the  earth, 
and  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  sea  and  land 
over  its  surface,  the  forms  of  the  outlines  of  its  continents 
and  islands,  the  courses  of  its  rivers  and  mountain  chains, 
and  the  relative  situations,  with  respect  to  each  other,  of 
those  points  which  chiefly  interest  us,  as  centres  of  human 
habitation,  or  from  other  causes,  it  is  necessary  to  possess  the 
means  of  determining  correctly  the  situation  of  any  proposed 
station  on  its  surface.  For  this  two  elements  require  to  be 
known,  the  latitude  and  longitude,  the  former  assigning  its 
distance  from  the  poles  or  the  equator,  the  latter,  the  me- 
ridian on  which  that  distance  is  to  be  reckoned.  To  these, 
in  strictness,  should  be  added,  its  height  above  the  sea  level ; 
but  the  consideration  of  this  had  better  be  deferred,  to  avoid 
complicating  the  subject. 

(247.)  The  latitude  of  a  station  on  a  sphere  would  be 
merely  the  length  of  an  arc  of  the  meridian,  intercepted 
between  the  station  and  the  nearest  point  of  the  equator, 
reduced  into  degrees.  (See  art.  88.)  But  as  the  earth  is 
elliptic,  this  mode  of  conceiving  latitudes  becomes  inapplicable, 
and  we  are  compelled  to  resort  for  our  definition  of  latitude 
to  a  generalization  of  that  property  (art.  119.),  which  affords 
the  readiest  means  of  determining  it  by  observation,  and 
which  has  the  advantage  of  being  independent  of  the  figure 
of  the  earth,  which,  after  all,  is  not  exactly  an  ellipsoid,  or 
any  known  geometrical  solid.  The  latitude  of  a  station,  then, 
is  the  altitude  of  the  elevated  pole,  and  is,  therefore,  astro- 
nomically determined  by  those  methods  already  explained  for 
ascertaining  that  important  element.  In  consequence,  it  will 
be  remembered  that,  to  make  a  perfectly  correct  map  of  the 
whole,  or  any  part  of  the  earth's  surface,  equal  differences  of 
latitude  are  not  represented  by  exactly  equal  intervals  of 
surface. 

(248.)  For  the  purposes  of  geodesical *  measurements  and 
trigonometrical  surveys,  an  exceedingly  correct  determination 
of  the  latitudes  of  the  most  important  stations  is  required. 


•  r»i,  t<i«  earth  ;  Stats  (from  5t»,  to  bind),  a  joining  or  connexion  (of  narta). 

M  2 


lf>4 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


For  this  purpose,  therefore,  the  zenith  sector  (an  instrument 
capable  of  great  precision)  is  most  commonly  used  to  observe 
stars  passing  the  meridian  near  the  zenith,  whose  declinations 
have  become  known  by  previous  long  series  of  observations  at 
fixed  observatories,  and  which  are  therefore  called  standard  or 
fundamental  stars.     Recently  a  method  *  has  been  employed 


with  great  success,  which  consists  in  the  use  of  an  instrument 
similar  in  every  respect  to  the  transit  instrument,  but  having 
the  plane  of  motion  of  the  telescope  not  coincident  with  the 
meridian,  but  with  the  prime  vertical,  so  that  its  axis  of 
rotation  prolonged  passes  through  the  north  and  south  points 
of  the  horizon.  Let  ABCD  be  the  celestial  hemisphere 
projected  on  the  horizon,  P  the  pole,  Z  the  zenith,  A  B  the 
meridian,  C  D  the  prime  vertical,  Q  R  S  part  of  the  diurnal 
circle  of  a  star  passing  near  the  zenith,  whose  polar  distance 
P  R  is  but  little  greater  than  the  co-latitude  of  the  place,  or 
the  arc  PZ,  between  the  zenith  and  pole  (art.  112.).  Then 
the  moments  of  this  star's  arrival  on  the  prime  vertical  at  Q 
and  S  will,  if  the  instrument  be  correctly  adjusted,  be  those 
of  its  crossing  the  middle  wire  in  the  field  of  view  of  the 


•   Devised  originally  by  Romer. 
Nachr.  No.  40. 


Revived  or  re-invented  by  Besscl  —  Aitr 


DETERMINATION    OF    LATITUDES.  165 

telescope  (art.  160.).  Consequently  the  interval  between 
these  moments  will  be  the  time  of  the  star  passing  from  Q 
to  S,  or  the  measure  of  the  diurnal  arc  Q  R  S,  which  corre- 
sponds to  the  angle  Q  P  S  at  the  pole.  This  angle,  there- 
fore, becomes  known  by  the  mere  observation  of  an  interval  of 
time,  in  which  it  is  not  even  necessary  to  know  the  error  of 
the  clock,  and  in  which,  when  the  star  passes  near  the  zenith, 
bo  that  the  interval  in  question  is  small,  even  the  rate  of  the 
clock,  or  its  gain  or  loss  on  true  sidereal  time,  may  be 
neglected.  Now  the  angle  Q  P  S,  or  its  half  Q  P  R,  and 
P  Q  the  polar  distance  of  the  star,  being  known,  P  Z  the 
zenith  distance  of  the  pole  can  be  calculated  by  the  resolution 
of  the  right-angled  spherical  triangle  P  Z  Q,  and  thus  the 
co-latitude  (and  of  course  the  latitude)  of  the  place  of  obser- 
vation becomes  known.  The  advantages  gained  by  this  mode 
of  observation  are,  1st,  that  no  readings  of  a  divided  arc  are 
needed,  so  that  errors  of  graduation  and  reading  are  avoided : 
2dly,  that  the  arc  Q  R  S  is  very  much  greater  than  its  versed 
sine  R  Z,  so  that  the  difference  R  Z  between  the  latitude  of 
the  place  and  the  declination  of  the  star  is  given  by  the 
observation  of  a  magnitude  very  much  greater  than  itself,  or 
is,  as  it  were,  observed  on  a  greatly  enlarged  scale.  In  con- 
sequence, a  very  minute  error  is  entailed  on  RZ  by  the 
commission  of  even  a  considerable  one  in  Q  R  S  :  3dly,  that 
in  this  mode  of  observation  all  the  merely  instrumental  errors 
which  affect  the  ordinary  use  of  the  transit  instrument  are 
either  uninfluential  or  eliminated  by  simply  reversing  the 
axis. 

(249.)  To  determine  the  latitude  of  a  station,  then,  is  easy. 
It  is  otherwise  with  its  longitude,  whose  exact  determination 
is  a  matter  of  more  difficulty.  The  reason  is  this :  —  as  there 
are  no  meridians  marked  upon  the  earth,  any  more  than 
parallels  of  latitude,  we  are  obliged  in  this  case,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  latitude,  to  resort  to  marks  external  to  the  earth, 
i.  e.  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  for  the  objects  of  our  measure- 
ment ;  but  with  this  difference  in  the  two  cases — to  observers 
situated  at  stations  on  the  same  meridian  (i.  e.  differing  in 
latitude)  the  heavens  present  different  aspects  at  all  moments. 


166  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

The  portions  of  them  which  become  visible  in  a,  complete 
diurnal  rotation  are  not  the  same,  and  stars  which  are  common 
to  both  describe  circles  differently  inclined  to  their  horizons, 
and  differently  divided  by  them,  and  attain  different  altitudes. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  observers  situated  on  the  same  parallel 
(i.  e.  differing  only  in  longitude)  the  heavens  present  the  same 
aspects.  Their  visible  portions  are  the  same ;  and  the  same 
stars  describe  circles  equally  inclined,  and  similarly  divided 
by  their  horizons,  and  attain  the  same  altitudes.  In  the 
former  case  there  is,  in  the  latter  there  is  not,  any  thing  in 
the  appearance  of  the  heavens,  watched  through  a  whole 
diurnal  rotation,  which  indicates  a  difference  of  locality  in  the 
observer. 

(250.)  But  no  two  observers,  at  different  points  of  the 
earth's  surface,  can  have  at  the  same  instant  the  same  celestial 
hemisphere  visible.  Suppose,  to  fix  our  ideas,  an  observer 
stationed  at  a  given  point  of  the  equator,  and  that  at  the 
moment  when  he  noticed  some  bright  star  to  be  in  his  zenith, 
and  therefore  on  his  meridian,  he  should  be  suddenly  trans- 
ported, in  an  instant  of  time,  round  one  quarter  of  the  globe 
in  a  westerly  direction,  it  is  evident  that  he  will  no  longer 
have  the  same  star  vertically  above  him :  it  will  now  appear 
to  him  to  be  just  rising,  and  he  will  have  to  wait  six  hours 
before  it  again  comes  to  his  zenith,  i.  e.  before  the  earth's 
rotation  from  west  to  east  carries  him  back  again  to  the  line 
joining  the  star  and  the  earth's  centre  from  which  he  set  out. 

(251.)  The  difference  of  the  cases,  then,  may  be  thus 
stated,  so  as  to  afford  a  key  to  the  astronomical  solution  of 
the  problem  of  the  longitude.  In  the  case  of  stations  differing 
only  in  latitude,  the  same  star  comes  to  the  meridian  at  the 
same  time,  but  at  different  altitudes.  In  that  of  stations 
differing  only  in  longitude,  it  comes  to  the  meridian  at  the 
same  altitude,  but  at  different  times.  Supposing,  then,  that 
an  observer  is  in  possession  of  any  means  by  which  he  can 
certainly  ascertain  the  time  of  a  known  star's  transit  across 
his  meridian,  he  knows  his  longitude;  or  if  he  knows  the 
difference  between  its  time  of  transit  across  his  meridian  and 
across  that  of  any  other  station,  he  knows  their  difference  of 


DETERMINATION   OF    LONGITUDES.  167 

longitudes.  For  instance,  if  the  same  star  puss  the  meridian 
of  a  place  A  at  a  certain  moment,  and  that  of  B  exactly  one 
hour  of  sidereal  time,  or  one  twenty-fourth  part  of  the  earth's 
diurnal  period,  later,  then  the  difference  of  longitude  between 
A  and  B  is  one  hour  of  time  or  15°  of  arc,  and  B  is  so 
much  west  of  A. 

(252.)  In  order  to  a  perfectly  clear  understanding  of  the 
principle  on  which  the  problem  of  finding  the  longitude  by 
astronomical  observations  is  resolved,  the  reader  must  learn 
to  distinguish  between  time,  in  the  abstract,  as  common  to 
the  whole  universe,  and  therefore  reckoned  from  an  epoch  in- 
dependent of  local  situation,  and  local  time,  which  reckons,  at 
each  particular  place,  from  an  epoch,  or  initial  instant,  deter- 
mined by  local  convenience.  Of  time  reckoned  in  the  former, 
or  abstract  manner,  we  have  an  example  in  what  we  have 
before  defined  as  equinoctial  time,  which  dates  from  an  epoch 
determined  by  the  sun's  motion  among  the  stars.  Of  the 
latter,  or  local  reckoning,  we  have  instances  in  every  sidereal 
clock  in  an  observatory,  and  in  every  town  clock  for  common 
use.  Every  astronomer  regulates,  or  aims  at  regulating,  his 
sidereal  clock,  so  that  it  shall  indicate  0h  0m  0*,  when  a  cer- 
tain point  in  the  heavens,  called  the  equinox,  is  on  the  me- 
ridian of  his  station.  This  is  the  epoch  of  his  sidereal  time : 
which  is,  therefore,  entirely  a  local  reckoning.  It  gives  no 
information  to  say  that  an  event  happened  at  such  and  such 
an  hour  of  sidereal  time,  unless  we  particularize  the  station  to 
which  the  sidereal  time  meant  appertains.  Just  so  it  is  with 
mean  or  common  time.  This  is  also  a  local  reckoning,  having 
for  its  epoch  mean  noon,  or  the  average  of  all  the  times 
throughout  the  year,  when  the  sun  is  on  the  meridian  of  that 
particular  place  to  which  it  belongs ;  and,  therefore,  in  like 
manner,  when  we  date  any  event  by  mean  time,  it  is  nece&- 
sary  to  name  the  place,  or  particularize  what  mean  time  we 
intend.  On  the  other  hand,  a  date  by  equinoctial  time  is 
absolute,  and  requires  no  such  explanatory  addition. 

(253.)  The  astronomer  sets  and  regulates  his  sidereal  clock 
by  observing  the  meridian  passages  of  the  more  conspicuous 
and  well-known  stars.     Each  of  these  holds  in  the  heaven*  a 


168  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

certain  determinate  and  known  place  with  respect  to  that 
imaginary  point  called  the  equinox,  and  by  noting  the  times 
of  their  passage  in  succession  by  his  clock  he  knows  when  the 
equinox  passed.  At  that  moment  his  clock  ought  to  have 
marked  0h  0m  0";  and  if  it  did  not,  he  knows  and  can  correct 
its  error,  and  by  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  the  errors 
assigned  by  each  star  he  can  ascertain  whether  his  clock  is 
correctly  regulated  to  go  twenty-four  hours  in  one  diurnal 
period,  and  if  not,  can  ascertain  and  allow  for  its  rate.  Thus, 
although  his  clock  may  not,  and  indeed  cannot,  either  be  set 
correctly,  or  go  truly,  yet  by  applying  its  error  and  rate  (as 
they  are  technically  termed),  he  can  correct  its  indications, 
and  ascertain  the  exact  sidereal  times  corresponding  to  them, 
and  proper  to  his  locality.  This  indispensable  operation  is 
called  getting  his  local  time.  For  simplicity  of  explanation, 
however,  we  shall  suppose  the  clock  a  perfect  instrument ;  or, 
which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  its  error  and  rate  applied  at 
every  moment  it  is  consulted,  and  included  in  its  indications. 

(254.)  Suppose,  now,  of  two  observers,  at  distant  stations, 
A  and  B,  each,  independently  of  the  other,  to  set  and  regulate 
his  clock  to  the  true  sidereal  time  of  his  station.  It  is  evident 
that  if  one  of  these  clocks  could  be  taken  up  without  derang- 
ing its  going,  and  set  down  by  the  side  of  the  other,  they 
would  be  found,  on  comparison,  to  differ  by  the  exact  differ- 
ence of  their  local  epochs ;  that  is,  by  the  time  occupied  by 
the  equinox,  or  by  any  star,  in  passing  from  the  meridian  of 
A  to  that  of  B ;  in  other  words,  by  their  difference  of  longi- 
tude, expressed  in  sidereal  hours,  minutes,  and  seconds. 

(255.)  A  pendulum  clock  cannot  be  thus  taken  up  and 
transported  from  place  to  place  without  derangement,  but  a 
ohi'onometer  may.  Suppose,  then,  the  observer  at  B  to  use 
a  chronometer  instead  of  a  clock,  he  may,  by  bodily  transfer 
of  the  instrument  to  the  other  station,  procure  a  direct  com- 
parison of  sidereal  times,  and  thus  obtain  his  longitude  from 
A.  And  even  if  he  employ  a  clock,  yet  by  comparing  it  first 
with  a  good  chronometer,  and  then  transferring  the  latter 
instrument  for  comparison  with  the  other  clock,  the  same 
end  will  be  accomplished,  provided  the  going  of  the  chro- 
nometer can  be  depended  on. 


DETERMINATION   OF    LONGITUDES.  169 

(256.)  Were  chronometers  perfect,  nothing  more  complete 
and  convenient  than  this  mode  of  ascertaining  differences  of 
longitude  could  be  desired.  An  observer,  provided  with  such 
an  instrument,  and  with  a  portable  transit,  or  some  equivalent 
method  of  determining  the  local  time  at  any  given  station, 
might,  by  journeying  from  place  to  place,  and  observing  the 
meridian  passages  of  stars  at  each,  (taking  care  not  to  alter 
his  chronometer,  or  let  it  run  down,)  ascertain  their  dif- 
ferences of  longitude  with  any  required  precision.  In  this 
ease,  the  same  time-keeper  being  used  at  every  station,  if,  at 
one  of  them,  A,  it  mark  true  sidereal  time,  at  any  other,  B, 
it  will  be  just  so  much  sidereal  time  in  error  as  the  difference 
of  longitudes  of  A  and  B  is  equivalent  to :  in  other  words, 
the  longitude  of  B  from  A  will  appear  as  the  error  of  the 
time -keeper  on  the  local  time  of  B.  If  he  travel  westward, 
then  his  chronometer  will  appear  continually  to  gain,  although 
it  really  goes  correctly.  Suppose,  for  instance,  he  set  out 
from  A,  when  the  equinox  was  on  the  meridian,  or  his  chro- 
nometer at  0h,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  (sid.  time)  had 
travelled  15°  westward  to  B.  At  the  moment  of  arrival  there, 
his  chronometer  will  again  point  to  0h ;  but  the  equinox  will 
be,  not  on  his  new  meridian,  but  on  that  of  A,  and  he  must 
wait  one  hour  more  for  its  arrival  at  that  of  B.  When  it 
does  arrive  there,  then  his  watch  will  point  not  to  0h  but  to 
lh,  and  will  therefore  be  lh  fast  on  the  local  time  of  B.  If 
he  travel  eastward,  the  reverse  will  happen. 

(257.)  Suppose  an  observer  now  to  set  out  from  any 
station  as  above  described,  and  constantly  travelling  westward 
to  make  the  tour  of  the  globe,  and  return  to  the  point  he  set 
out  from.  A  singular  consequence  will  happen :  he  will 
have  lost  a  day  in  his  reckoning  of  time.  He  will  enter  the 
day  of  his  arrival  in  his  diary,  as  Monday,  for  instance,  when, 
in  fact,  it  is  Tuesday.  The  reason  is  obvious.  Days  and 
nights  are  caused  by  the  alternate  appearance  of  the  sun  and 
stars,  as  the  rotation  of  the  earth  carries  the  spectator  round 
to  view  them  in  succession.  So  many  turns  as  he  makes  ab- 
solutely round  the  centre,  so  often  will  he  pass  through  the 
earth's  shadow,  and  emerge  into  light,  and  so  many  nights 


170  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

and  days  will  he  experience.  But  if  he  travel  once  round  the 
globe  in  the  direction  of  its  motion,  he  will,  on  his  arrival, 
have  really  made  one  turn  more  round  its  centre;  and  if  in  the 
opposite  direction,  one  turn  less  than  if  he  had  remained  upon 
one  point  of  its  surface:  in  the  former  case,  then,  he  will  have 
witnessed  one  alternation  of  day  and  night  more,  in  the  latter 
one  less,  than  if  he  had  trusted  to  the  rotation  of  the  earth 
alone  to  carry  him  round.  As  the  earth  revolves  from  west  to 
east,  it  follows  that  a  westward  direction  of  his  journey,  by 
which  he  counteracts  its  rotation,  will  cause  him  to  lose  a  day, 
and  an  eastward  direction,  by  which  he  conspires  with  it,  to 
gain  one.  In  the  former  case,  all  his  days  will  be  longer ;  in 
the  latter,  shorter  than  those  of  a  stationary  observer.  This 
contingency  has  actually  happened  to  circumnavigators. 
Hence,  also,  it  must  necessarily  happen  that  distant  settle- 
ments, on  the  same  meridian,  will  differ  a  day  in  their  usual 
reckoning  of  time,  according  as  they  have  been  colonized  by 
settlers  arriving  in  an  eastward  or  in  a  westward  direction, 
—  a  circumstance  which  may  produce  strange  confusion  when 
they  come  to  communicate  with  each  other.  The  only  mode 
of  correcting  the  ambiguity,  and  settling  the  disputes  which 
such  a  difference  may  give  rise  to,  consists  in  having  recourse 
to  the  equinoctial  date,  which  can  never  be  ambiguous. 

(258.)  Unfortunately  for  geography  and  navigation,  the 
chronometer,  though  greatly  and  indeed  wonderfully  im- 
proved by  the  skill  of  modern  artists,  is  yet  far  too  imperfect 
an  instrument  to  be  relied  on  implicitly.  However  such  an  in- 
strument may  preserve  its  uniformity  of  rate  for  a  few  hours, 
or  even  days,  yet  in  long  absences  from  home  the  chances  of 
error  and  accident  become  so  multiplied,  as  to  destroy  all 
security  of  reliance  on  even  the  best.  To  a  certain  extent 
this  may,  indeed,  be  remedied  by  carrying  out  several,  and  using 
them  as  checks  on  each  other ;  but,  besides  the  expense  and 
trouble,  this  is  only  a  palliation  of  the  evil  —  the  great  and 
fundamental,  —  as  it  is  the  only  one  to  which  the  determina- 
tion of  longitudes  by  time-keepers  is  liable.  It  becomes  ne- 
cessarv,  therefore,  to  resort  to  other  means  of  communicating 
from  one  station  to  another  a  knowledge  of  its  local  time,  or 


DETERMINATION    OF    LONGITUDES.  171 

of  propagating  from  some  principal  station,  as  a  centre,  its 
local  time  as  a  universal  standard  with  which  the  local  time 
at  any  other,  however  situated,  may  be  at  once  compared, 
and  thus  the  longitudes  of  all  places  be  referred  to  the  me- 
ridian of  such  central  point. 

(259.)  The  simplest  and  most  accurate  method  by  which 
this  object  can  be  accomplished,  when  circumstances  admit  of 
its  adoption,  is  that  by  telegraphic  signal.  Let  A  and  B  be 
two  observatories,  or  other  stations,  provided  with  accurate 
means  of  determining  their  respective  local  times,  and  let  us 
first  suppose  them  visible  from  each  other.  Their  clocks 
being  regulated,  and  their  errors  and  rates  ascertained  and 
applied,  let  a  signal  be  made  at  A,  of  some  sudden  and  de- 
finite kind,  such  as  the  flash  of  gunpowder,  the  explosion  of  a 
rocket,  the  sudden  extinction  of  a  bright  light,  or  any  other 
which  admits  of  no  mistake,  and  can  be  seen  at  great  dis- 
tances. The  moment  of  the  signal  being  made  must  be  noted 
by  each  observer  at  his  respective  clock  or  watch,  as  if  it  were 
the  transit  of  a  star,  or  any  astronomical  phenomenon,  and  the 
error  and  rate  of  the  clock  at  each  station  being  applied,  the 
local  time  of  the  signal  at  each  is  determined.  Consequently, 
when  the  observers  communicate  their  observations  of  the 
signal  to  each  other,  since  (owing  to  the  almost  instantaneous 
transmission  of  light)  it  must  have  been  seen  at  the  same 
absolute  instant  by  both,  the  difference  of  their  local  times, 
and  therefore  of  their  longitudes,  becomes  known.  For 
example,  at  A  the  signal  is  observed  to  happen  at  5h  0m  0" 
sid.  time  at  A,  as  obtained  by  applying  the  error  and  rate  to 
the  time  shown  by  the  clock  at  A,  when  the  signal  was  seen 
there.  At  B  the  same  signal  was  seen  at  5h  4m  0",  sid.  time 
at  B,  similarly  deduced  from  the  time  noted  by  the  clock  at 
B,  by  applying  its  error  and  rate.  Consequently,  the  differ- 
ence of  their  local  epochs  is  4™  0s,  which  is  also  their  differ- 
ence of  longitudes  in  time,  or  1°  0'  0"  in  hour  angle. 

(260  )  The  accuracy  of  the  final  determination  may  be 
increased  by  making  and  observing  several  signals  at  stated 
intervals,  each  of  which  affords  a  comparison  of  times,  and 
the  mean  of  all  which  is,  of  course,  more  to  be  depended 


172  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ou  than  the  result  of  any  single  comparison.  By  this  means, 
the  error  introduced  by  the  comparison  of  clocks  may  bo 
regarded  as  altogether  destroyed. 

(261.)  The  distances  at  which  signals  can  be  rendered 
visible  must  of  course  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  interposed 
country.  Over  sea  the  explosion  of  rockets  may  easily  be 
seen  at  fifty  or  sixty  miles ;  and  in  mountainous  countries  the 
flash  of  gunpowder  in  an  open  spoon  may  be  seen,  if  a  proper 
station  be  chosen  for  its  exhibition,  at  much  greater  distances. 

(262.)  When  the  direct  light  of  the  flash  can  no  longer  be 
perceived,  either  owing  to  the  convexity  of  the  interposed 
segment  of  the  earth,  or  to  intervening  obstacles,  the  sudden 
illumination  cast  on  the  under  surface  of  the  clouds  by  the 
explosion  of  considerable  quantities  of  powder  may  often  be 
observed  with  success ;  and  in  this  way  signals  have  been 
made  at  very  much  greater  distances.  Whatever  means  can 
be  devised  of  exciting  in  two  distant  observers  the  same  sen- 
sation, whether  of  sound,  light,  or  visible  motion,  at  precisely 
the  same  instant  of  time,  may  be  employed  as  a  longitude 
signal.  Wherever,  for  instance,  an  unbroken  line  of  electro- 
telegraphic  connection  has  been,  or  hereafter  may  be,  estab- 
lished, the  means  exist  of  making  as  complete  a  comparison 
of  clocks  or  watches  as  if  they  stood  side  by  side,  so  that  no 
method  more  complete  for  the  determination  of  differences  of 
longitude  can  be  desired.  Thus,  the  difference  of  longitude 
between  the  observatories  of  Greenwich  and  Paris  was  ascer- 
tained in  1854.  The  extreme  deviation  of  the  most  discor- 
dant result  from  the  mean  of  29  single  determinations  (0  h. 
9  m.  20*64  sec),  amounted  barely  to  a  quarter  of  a  second. 

(263.)  Where  no  such  electric  communication  exists, 
however,  the  interval  between  observing  stations  may  be 
increased  by  causing  the  signals  to  be  made  not  at  one 
of  them,  but  at  an  intermediate  point ;  for,  provided  they  are 
seen  by  both  parties,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  where  they 
are  exhibited.  Still  the  interval  which  could  be  thus  em- 
braced would  be  very  limited,  and  the  method  in  consequence 
of  little  use,  but  for  the  following  ingenious  contrivance,  by 
which  it  can  be  extended  to  any  distance,  and  carried  over 
*nv  tract  of  country,  however  difficult. 


DETERMINATION    OF    LONGITUDES.  173 

(264.)  This  contrivance  consists  in  establishing,  between 
the  extreme  stations,  whose  difference  of  longitude  is  to  be  as- 
certained, and  at  which  the  local  times  are  observed,  a  chain  of 
intermediate  stations,  alternately  destined  for  signals  and  for 
observers.  Thus,  let  A  and  Z  be  the  extreme  stations.  At  B 
let  a  signal  station  be  established,  at  which  rockets,  &c.  are 
fired  at  stated  intervals.  At  C  let  an  observer  be  placed, 
provided  with  a  chronometer;  at  D,  another  signal  station; 
at  E,  another  observer  and  chronometer ;  till  the  whole 
line  is  occupied  by  stations  so  arranged,  that  the  signal  at 
B  can  be  seen  from  A  and  C ;  those  at  D,  from  C  and  E ; 
and  so  on.  Matters  being  thus  arranged,  and  the  errors  and 
rates  of  the  clocks  at  A  and  Z  ascertained  by  astronomical 
observation,  let  a  signal  be  made  at  B,  and  observed  at  A  and 
C,  and  the  times  noted.  Thus  the  difference  between  A's 
clock  and  C's  chronometer  becomes  known.  After  a  short 
interval  (five  minutes  for  instance)  let  a  signal  be  made  at  D, 
and  observed  by  C  and  E.  Then  will  the  difference  between 
their  respective  chronometers  be  determined  ;  and  the  differ- 
ence between  the  former  and  the  clock  at  A  being  already 
ascertained,  the  difference  between  the  clock  A  and  chrono- 
meter E  is  therefore  known.  This,  however,  supposes  that 
the  intermediate  chronometer  C  has  kept  true  sidereal  time, 
or  at  least  a  known  rate,  in  the  interval  between  the  signals. 

*■  \*  !  4 

:  I 

:  I 

;  • 

:  :  i 


I.      ,1 I I I i » 

A        8  C  D I F  Z 

Now  this  interval  is  purposely  made  so  very  short,  that  no 
instrument  of  any  pretensions  to  character  can  possibly 
produce  an  appretiable  amount  of  error  in  its  lapse  by 
deviations  from  its  usual  rate.  Thus  the  time  propagated 
from  A  to  C  may  be  considered  as  handed  over,  without 
gain  or  loss  (save  from  error  of  observation),  to  E.  Simi- 
larly, by  the  signal  made  at  F,  and  observed  at  E  and  Z, 
the  time  so  transmitted  to  E  is  forwarded  on  to  Z  ,  and  thns 
at  length  the  clocks  at  A  and  Z  are  compared.      The  proceed 


174  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY 

may  be  repeated  as  often  as  is  necessary  to  destroy  error  by  a 
inean  of  results ;  and  when  the  line  of  stations  is  numerous, 
by  keeping  up  a  succession  of  signals,  so  as  to  allow  each  ob- 
server to  note  alternately  those  on  either  side,  which  is  easily 
pre-arranged,  many  comparisons  may  be  kept  running  along 
the  line  at  once,  by  which  time  is  saved,  and  other  advantages 
obtained.*  In  important  cases  the  process  is  usually  re- 
peated on  several  nights  in  succession. 

(265.)  In  place  of  artificial  signals,  natural  ones,  when  they 
occur  sufficiently  definite  for  observation,  may  be  equally  em- 
ployed. In  a  clear  night  the  number  of  those  singular  me- 
teors, called  shooting  stars,  which  may  be  observed,  is  often 
very  great,  especially  on  the  9th  and  10th  of  August,  and 
some  other  days,  as  November  12  and  13  ;  and  as  they  are 
sudden  in  their  appearance  and  disappearance,  and  from  the 
great  height  at  which  they  have  been  ascertained  to  take 
place  are  visible  over  extensive  regions  of  the  earth's  surface, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  they  may  be  resorted  to  with  advan 
tage,  by  previous  concert  and  agreement  between  distant 
observers  to  watch  and  note  them,  f  Those  sudden  disturb- 
ances of  the  magnetic  needle,  to  which  the  name  of  magnetic 
shocks  has  been  given,  have  been  satisfactorily  ascertained  to 
be,  very  often  at  least,  simultaneous  over  whole  continents, 
and  in  some,  perhaps,  over  the  whole  globe.  These,  if  ob- 
served at  magnetic  observatories  with  precise  attention  to 
astronomical  time,  may  become  the  means  of  determining 
their  differences  of  longitude  with  more  precision,  possibly, 
than  by  any  other  method,  if  a  sufficient  number  of  remark- 
able shocks  be  observed  to  ascertain  their  identity,  about 
which  the  intervals  of  time  between  their  occurrence  (exactly 
alike  at  both  stations)  will  leave  no  doubt. 

•  For  a  complete  account  of  this  method,  and  the  mode  of  deducing  the  most 
advantageous  result  from  a  combination  of  all  the  observations,  see  a  paper  on 
the  difference  of  longitudes  of  Greenwich  and  Paris,  Phil.  Trans.  1 826 ;  by  the 
Author  of  this  volume. 

\  This  idea  was  first  suggested  by  the  late  Dr.  Maskelyne,  to  whom,  how- 
ever, the  practically  useful  fact  of  their  periodic  recurrence  was  unknown.  Mr. 
Cooper  has  thus  employed  the  meteors  of  the  10th  and  12th  August,  1847,  to 
determine  the  difference  of  longitudes  of  Markree  and  Mount  Eagle,  in  Ireland. 
'J  hose  of  the  same  epoch  have  also  been  used  in  Germany  for  ascertaining  the 
longitudes  of  several  stations,  and  with  very  satisfactory  results. 


ECLIPSES    OF    JUriTER'S    SATELLITES.  175 

(2fiG.)  Another  species  of  natural  signal,  visible  at  once 
over  a  whole  terrestrial  hemisphere,  is  afforded  by  the  eclipses 
of  Jupiter's  satellites,  of  which  we  shall  speak  more  at  large 
when  we  come  to  treat  of  those  bodies.  Every  such  eclipse 
is  an  event  which  possesses  one  great  advantage  in  its  appli- 
cability to  the  purpose  in  question,  viz.  that  the  time  of  its 
happening,  at  any  fixed  station,  such  as  Greenwich,  can  be 
predicted  from  a  long  course  of  previous  recorded  observation 
and  calculation  thereon  founded,  and  that  this  prediction  is 
sufficiently  precise  and  certain,  to  stand  in  the  place  of  a  cor- 
responding observation.  So  that  an  observer  at  any  other 
station  wherever,  who  shall  have  observed  one  or  more  of 
these  eclipses,  and  ascertained  his  local  time,  instead  of  wait- 
ing for  a  communication  with  Greenwich,  to  inform  him  at 
what  moment  the  eclipse  took  place  there,  may  use  the  pre- 
dicted Greenwich  time  instead,  and  thence,  at  once,  and  on 
the  spot,  determine  his  longitude.  This  mode  of  ascertain- 
ing longitudes  is,  however,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  not  sus- 
ceptible of  great  exactness,  and  should  only  be  resorted  to 
when  others  cannot  be  had.  The  nature  of  the  observation 
also  is  such  that  it  cannot  be  made  at  sea  * ;  so  that,  however 
useful  to  the  geographer,  it  is  of  no  advantage  to  navigation. 

(267.)  But  such  phenomena  as  these  are  of  only  occasional 
occurrence ;  and  in  their  intervals,  and  when  cut  off  from  all 
communication  with  any  fixed  station,  it  is  indispensable  to 
possess  some  means  of  determining  longitudes,  on  which  not 
only  the  geographer  may  rely  for  a  knowledge  of  the  exact 
position  of  important  stations  on  land  in  remote  regions,  but 
on  which  the  navigator  can  securely  stake,  at  every  instant  of 
his  adventurous  course,  the  lives  of  himself  and  comrades,  the 
interests  of  his  country,  and  the  fortunes  of  his  employers. 
Such  a  method  is  afforded  by  Lunar  Observations.  Though 

•  To  accomplish  this  is  still  a  desideratum.  Observing  chairs,  suspended 
with  studious  precaution  for  ensuring  freedom  of  motion,  have  been  resorted  to, 
under  the  vain  hope  of  mitigating  the  effect  of  the  ship's  oscillation.  The 
opposite  course  seems  more  promising,  viz.  to  merely  deaden  the  motion  by  a 
somewhat  stiff"  suspension  (as  by  a  coarse  and  rough  cable),  and  by  friction 
strings  attached  to  weights  running  through  loops  (not  pulleys)  fixed  in  the 
wood-work  of  the  vessel.  At  least,  such  means  have  !»een  found  by  the  author 
of  singular  efficacy  in  increasing  personal  comfort  in  the  suspension  of  a  cot 
[Vide  Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  Jan.  4,  1861  ] 


176  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

we  have  not  yet  introduced  the  reader  to  the  phenomena  ot 
the  moon's  motion,  this  will  not  prevent  us  from  giving  here 
the  exposition  of  the  principle  of  the  lunar  method ;  on  the 
contrary,  it  will  be  highly  advantageous  to  do  so,  since  by 
this  course  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  the  naked  principle, 
apart  from  all  the  peculiar  sources  of  difficulty  with  which  the 
lunar  theory  is  encumbered,  but  which  are,  in  fact,  completely 
extraneous  to  the  principle  of  its  application  to  the  problem 
of  the  longitudes,  which  is  quite  elementary. 

(268.)  If  there  were  in  the  heavens  a  clock  furnished  with 
a  dial-plate  and  hands,  which  always  marked  Greenwich  time, 
the  longitude  of  any  station  would  be  at  once  determined,  so 
soon  as  the  local  time  was  known,  by  comparing  it  with  this 
filock.  Now,  the  offices  of  the  dial-plate  and  hands  of  a 
clock  are  these: — the  former  carries  a  set  of  marks  upon  it, 
whose  position  is  known;  the  latter,  by  passing  over  and 
among  these  marks,  informs  us,  by  the  place  it  holds  with 
respect  to  them,  what  it  is  o'clock,  or  what  time  has  elapsed, 
since  a  certain  moment  when  it  stood  at  one  particular  spot. 

(269.)  In  a  clock  the  marks  on  the  dial-plate  are  uniformly 
distributed  all  around  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  whose 
centre  is  that  on  which  the  hands  revolve  with  a  uniform 
motion.  But  it  is  clear  that  we  should,  with  equal  certainty, 
though  with  much  more  trouble,  tell  what  o'clock  it  were,  if 
the  marks  on  the  dial-plate  were  wraequally  distributed, — if 
the  hands  were  excentric,  and  their  motion  not  uniform, — 
provided  we  knew,  1st,  the  exact  intervals  round  the  circle  at 
which  the  hour  and  minute  marks  were  placed ;  which  would 
be  the  case  if  we  had  them  all  registered  in  a  table,  from  the 
results  of  previous  careful  measurement :  —  2dly,  if  we  knew 
the  exact  amount  and  direction  of  excentricity  of  the  centre 
of  motion  of  the  hands; — and,  3dly,  if  we  were  fully  ac- 
quainted with  all  the  mechanism  which  put  the  hands  in 
motion,  so  as  to  be  able  to  say  at  every  instant  what  were 
their  velocity  of  movement,  and  so  as  to  be  able  to  calculate, 
without  fear  of  error,  how  much  time  should  correspond  to 
SO  MUCH  angular  movement. 

(270.)  The  visible  surface  of  the  starry  heavens  is   the 


LUNAR    METHOD.  177 

dial-plate  of  our  clock,  the  stars  are  the  fixed  marks  distributed 
around  its  circuit,  the  moon  is  the  moveable  hand,  wnich, 
with  a  motion  that,  superficially  considered,  seems  uniform, 
but  which,  when  carefully  examined,  is  found  to  be  far  other- 
wise, and  which,  regulated  by  mechanical  laws  of  astonishing 
complexity  and  intricacy  in  result,  though  beautifully  simple 
in  principle  and  design,  performs  a  monthly  circuit  among 
them,  passing  visibly  over  and  hiding,  or,  as  it  is  called,  oc- 
culring  some,  and  gliding  beside  and  between  others;  and 
whose  position  among  them  can,  at  any  moment  when  it  is 
visible,  be  exactly  measured  by  the  help  of  a  sextant,  just  as 
we  might  measure  the  place  of  our  clock-hand  among  the 
marks  on  its  dial-plate  with  a  pair  of  compasses,  and  thence, 
from  the  known  and  calculated  laws  of  its  motion,  deduce  the 
time.  That  the  moon  does  so  move  among  the  stars,  while  the 
hitter  hold  constantly,  with  respect  to  each  other,  the  same 
relative  position,  the  notice  of  a  few  nights,  or  even  hours, 
will  satisfy  the  commencing  student,  and  this  is  all  that  at 
present  we  require. 

(271.)  There  is  only  one  circumstance  wanting  to  make 
our  analogy  complete.  Suppose  the  hands  of  our  clock,  in- 
stead of  moving  quite  close  to  the  dial-plate,  were  considerably 
elevated  above,  or  distant  in  front  of  it.  Unless,  then,  in 
viewing  it,  we  kept  our  eye  just  in  the  line  of  their  centre, 
we  should  not  see  them  exactly  thrown  or  projected  upon  their 
proper  places  on  the  dial.  And  if  we  were  either  unaware 
of  this  cause  of  optical  change  of  place,  this  parallax  —  or 
negligent  in  not  taking  it  into  account  —  we  might  make 
great  mistakes  in  reading  the  time,  by  referring  the  hand  to 
the  wrong  mark,  or  incorrectly  appreciating  its  distance  from 
the  right.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  took  care  to  note,  in 
every  case  when  we  had  occasion  to  observe  the  time,  the 
exact  position  of  the  eye,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in 
ascertaining  and  allowing  for  the  precise  influence  of  this 
pause  of  apparent  displacement.  Now,  this  is  just  what 
obtains  with  the  apparent  motion  of  the  moon  among  the 
stars.  The  former  (as  will  appear)  is  comparatively  near  to 
the  earth  —  the  latter  immensely  distant :  and  in  consequence 

N 


178  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

of  our  not  occupying  the  centre  of  the  earth,  but  being  carried 
about  on  its  surface,  and  constantly  changing  place,  there 
arises  a  parallax,  which  displaces  the  moon  apparently  among 
the  stars,  and  must  be  allowed  for  before  we  can  tell  the  true 
place  she  would  occupy  if  seen  from  the  centre. 

(272.)  Such  a  clock  as  we  have  described  might,  no  doubt, 
be  considered  a  very  bad  one ;  but  if  it  were  our  only  one, 
and  if  incalculable  interests  were  at  stake  on  a  perfect  know- 
ledge of  time,  we  should  justly  regard  it  as  most  precious, 
and  think  no  pains  ill  bestowed  in  studying  the  laws  of  its 
movements,  or  in  facilitating  the  means  of  reading  it  correctly. 
Such,  in  the  parallel  we  are  drawing,  is  the  lunar  theory, 
whose  object  is  to  reduce  to  regularity,  the  indications  of  this 
strangely  irregular-going  clock,  to  enable  us  to  predict,  long 
beforehand,  and  with  absolute  certainty,  whereabouts  among 
the  stars,  at  every  hour,  minute,  and  second,  in  every  day  of 
every  year,  in  Greenwich  local  time,  the  moon  would  be  seen 
from  the  earth's  centre,  and  will  be  seen  from  every  accessible 
point  of  its  surface ;  and  such  is  the  lunar  method  of  longi- 
tudes. The  moon's  apparent  angular  distance  from  all  those 
principal  and  conspicuous  stars  which  lie  in  its  course,  as  seen 
from  the  earth's  centre,  are  computed  and  tabulated  with  the 
utmost  care  and  precision  in  almanacks  published  under 
national  control.  No  sooner  does  an  observer,  in  any  part 
of  the  globe,  at  sea  or  on  land,  measure  its  actual  distance 
from  any  one  of  those  standard  stars  (whose  places  in  the 
heavens  have  been  ascertained  for  the  purpose  with  the  most 
anxious  solicitude),  than  he  has,  in  fact,  performed  that  com- 
parison of  his  local  time  with  the  local  times  of  every  ob- 
servatory in  the  world,  which  enables  him  to  ascertain  his 
difference  of  longitude  from  one  or  all  of  them. 

(273.)  The  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  any  number  of  points 
on  the  earth's  surface  may  be  ascertained  by  the  methods  above 
described ;  and  by  thus  laying  down  a  sufficient  number  of 
principal  points,  and  filling  in  the  intermediate  spaces  by  local 
surveys,  might  maps  of  countries  be  constructed.  In  prac- 
tice, however,  it  is  found  simpler  and  easier  to  divide  each 
particular  nation  into  a  series  of  great  triangles,  the  angles  of 


CONSTRUCTION   OF    MAPS. 


173 


which  are  stations  conspicuously  visible  from  each  other.  (.  )f 
these  triangles,  the  angles  only  are  measured  by  means  of  the 
theodolite,  with  the  exception  of  one  side  only  of  one  triangle, 
which  is  called  a  base,  and  which  is  measured  with  every 
-efinement  which  ingenuity  can  devise  or  expense  command. 
This  base  is  of  moderate  extent,  rarely  surpassing  six  or  seven 
miles,  and  purposely  selected  in  a  perfectly  horizontal  plane, 
otherwise  conveniently  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  measure- 
ment. Its  length  between  its  two  extreme  points  (which  are 
dots  on  plates  of  gold  or  platina  let  into  massive  blocks  of 
stone,  and  which  are,  or  at  least  ought  to  be,  in  all  cases 
preserved  with  almost  religious  care,  as  monumental  records 
of  the  highest  importance),  is  then  measured,  with  every  pre- 
caution to  ensure  precision*,  and  its  position  with  respect  to 
the  meridian,  as  well  as  the  geographical  positions  of  its 
extremities,  carefully  ascertained. 

(274.)  The  annexed   figure   represents   such  a   chain   of 


triangles.  A  B  is  the  base,  O,  C,  stations  visible  from  both 
its  extremities  (one  of  which,  O,  we  will  suppose  to  be  a 
national  observatory,  with  which  it  is  a  principal  object  that 
the  base  should  be  as  closely  and  immediately  connected  as 
possible) ;  and  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  K,  other  stations,  remarkable 
points  in  the  country,  by  whose  connection  its  whole  surface 
may  be  covered,  as  it  were,  with  a  network  of  triangles. 
Now,  it  is  evident  that  the  angles  of  the  triangle  A,  B,  C 
being  observed,  and  one  of  its  sides,  A  B,  measured,  the 
other  two  sides,  A  C,  B  C,  may  be  calculated  by  the  rules  of 
trigonometry ;  and  thus  each  of  the  sides  A  C  and  B  C 

*  The  greatest  possible  error  in  the   Iiish  base  of  between  sevon  and  eight 
miles,  near  Londonderry,  is  supposed  not  to  exceed  two  inches. 

N  2 


180  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

becomes  in  its  turn  a  base  capable  of  being  employed  as 
known  sides  of  other  triangles.  For  instance,  the  angles  of 
ihe  triangles  A  C  G  and  B  C  F  being  known  by  observation, 
and  their  sides  A  C  and  B  C,  we  can  thence  calculate  the 
lengths  AG,  C  G,  and  B  F,  C  F.  Again,  C  G  and  C  F 
being  known,  and  the  included  angle  G  C  F,  G  F  may  be 
calculated,  and  so  on.  Thus  may  all  the  stations  be  accu- 
rately determined  and  laid  down,  and  as  this  process  may  be 
carried  on  to  any  extent,  a  map  of  the  whole  country  may 
be  thus  constructed,  and  filled  in  to  any  degree  of  detail  we 
please. 

(275.)  Now,  on  this  process  there  are  two  important 
remarks  to  be  made.  The  first  is,  that  it  is  necessary  to  be 
careful  in  the  selection  of  stations,  so  as  to  form  triangles 
free  from  any  very  great  inequality  in  their  angles.  For  in- 
stance, the  triangle  K  B  F  would  be  a  very  improper  one  to 
determine  the  situation  of  F  from  observations  at  B  and  K, 
because  the  angle  F  being  very  acute,  a  small  error  in  the 
angle  K  would  produce  a  great  one  in  the  place  of  F  upon 
the  line  B  F.  Such  ill-conditioned  triangles,  therefore,  must 
be  avoided.  But  if  this  be  attended  to,  the  accuracy  of  the 
determination  of  the  calculated  sides  will  not  be  much  short 
of  that  which  would  be  obtained  by  actual  measurement 
(were  it  practicable) ;  and,  therefore,  as  we  recede  from  the 
base  on  all  sides  as  a  centre,  it  will  speedily  become  practi- 
cable to  use  as  bases,  the  sides  of  much  larger  triangles,  such 
as  G  F,  G  H,  H  K,  &c. ;  by  which  means  the  next  step  of 
the  operation  will  come  to  be  carried  on  on  a  much  larger 
scale,  and  embrace  far  greater  intervals,  than  it  would  have 
been  safe  to  do  (for  the  above  reason)  in  the  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  base.  Thus  it  becomes  easy  to  divide  the 
whole  face  of  a  country  into  great  triangles  of  from  30  to  100 
miles  in  their  sides  (according  to  the  nature  of  the  ground), 
which,  being  once  well  determined,  may  be  afterwards,  by  a 
second  series  of  subordinate  operations,  broken  up  into  smaller 
ones,  and  these  again  into  others  of  a  still  minuter  order,  till 
the  final  filling  in  is  brought  within  the  limits  of  personal 
survey  and  draftsmanship,  and  till  a  map  is  constructed,  with 
any  required  degree  of  detail. 


CONSTRUCTION    OF   MAPS.  181 

(276.)  The  next  remark  we  have  to  make  is,  that  all  the 
triangles  in  question  are  not,  rigorously  speaking,  plane,  but 
spherical —  existing  on  the  surface  of  a  sphere,  or  rather,  to 
speak  correctly,  of  an  ellipsoid.  In  very  small  triangles,  of 
six  or  seven  miles  in  the  side,  this  may  be  neglected,  as  the 
difference  is  imperceptible ;  but  in  the  larger  ones  it  must  be 
taken  into  consideration.  It  is  evident  that,  as  every  object 
used  for  pointing  the  telescope  of  a  theodolite  has  some  cer- 
tain elevation,  not  only  above  the  soil,  but  above  the  level  of 
the  sea,  and  as,  moreover,  these  elevations  differ  in  every  in- 
stance, a  reduction  to  the  horizon  of  all  the  measured  angles 
would  appear  to  be  required.  But,  in  fact,  by  the  construc- 
tion of  the  theodolite  (art.  192.),  which  is  nothing  more  than 
an  altitude  and  azimuth  instrument, 
this  reduction  is  made  in  the  very 
act  of  reading  off  the  horizontal 
angles.  Let  E  be  the  centre  of  the 
earth;  A,  B,  C,  the  places  on  its 
spherical  surface,  to  which  three  sta- 
tions, A,  P,  Q,  in  a  country  are  re- 
ferred by  radii  E  A,  E  B  P,  E  C  Q. 
If  a  theodolite  be  stationed  at  A,  the 
axis  of  its  horizontal  circle  will 
point  to  E  when  truly  adjusted, 
and  its  plane  will  be  a  tangent  to  the 
sphere  at  A,  intersecting  the  radii  EBP,  E  C  Q,  at  M  and 
N,  above  the  spherical  surface.  The  telescope  of  the  theodo- 
lite, it  is  true,  is  pointed  in  succession  to  P,  and  Q ;  but  the 
readings  off  of  its  azimuth  circle  give  —  not  the  angle  P  A  Q 
between  the  directions  of  the  telescope,  or  between  the  ob- 
jects P,  Q,  as  seen  from  A  ;  but  the  azimuthal  angle  M  A  N, 
which  is  the  measure  of  the  angle  A  of  the  spherical  triangle 
B  A  C.  Hence  arises  this  remarkable  circumstance,  —  that 
the  sum  of  the  three  observed  angles  of  any  of  the  great  tri- 
angles in  geodesical  operations  is  always  found  to  be  rather 
more  than  180°.  Were  the  earth's  surface  a  plane,  it  ought 
to  be  exactly  180°;  and  this  excess,  which  is  called  the  sphe- 
rical excess,  is  so  far  from  being  a  proof  of  incorrectness  in 
the  work,  that  it  is  essential  to  its  accuracy,  and  offers  at  the 
same  time  another  palpable  proof  of  the  earth's  sphericity. 


182  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

(277.)  The  true  way,  then,  of  conceiving  the  subject  of  a 
trigonometrical  survey,  when  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth 
is  taken  into  consideration,  is  to  regard  the  network  of  tri- 
angles with  which  the  country  is  covered,  as  the  bases  of  an 
assemblage  of  pyramids  converging  to  the  centre  of  the  earth. 
The  theodolite  gives  us  the  true  measures  of  the  angles  in- 
cluded by  the  planes  of  these  pyramids  ;  and  the  surface  of  an 
imaginary  sphere  on  the  level  of  the  sea  intersects  them  in  an 
assemblage  of  spherical  triangles,  above  whose  angles,  in  the 
radii  prolonged,  the  real  stations  of  observation  are  raised,  by 
the  superficial  inequalities  of  mountain  and  valley.  The 
operose  calculations  of  spherical  trigonometry  which  this  con- 
sideration would  seem  to  render  necessary  for  the  reductions 
of  a  survey,  are  dispensed  with  in  practice  by  a  very  simple 
and  easy  rule,  called  the  rule  for  the  spherical  excess,  which 
is  to  be  found  in  most  works  on  trigonometry.  If  we  would 
take  into  account  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth,  it  may  also  be 
done  by  appropriate  processes  of  calculation,  which,  however, 
are  too  abstruse  to  dwell  upon  in  a  work  like  the  present. 

(278.)  Whatever  process  of  calculation  we  adopt,  the  re- 
sult will  be  a  reduction  to  the  level  of  the  sea,  of  all  the 
triangles,  and  the  consequent  determination  of  the  geogra- 
phical latitude  and  longitude  of  every  station  observed.  Thus 
we  are  at  length  enabled  to  construct  maps  of  countries ;  to 
lay  down  the  outlines  of  continents  and  islands ;  the  courses 
of  rivers ;  the  places  of  cities,  towns  and  villages  ;  the  direc- 
tion of  mountain  ridges,  and  the  places  of  their  principal 
summits ;  and  all  those  details  which,  as  they  belong  to  phy- 
sical and  statistical,  rather  than  to  astronomical  geography, 
we  need  not  here  dilate  on.  A  few  words,  however,  will  be 
necessary  respecting  maps,  which  are  used  as  well  in  astro- 
nomy as  in  geography. 

(279.)  A  map  is  nothing  more  than  a  representation,  upon  a 
plane,  of  some  portion  of  the  surface  of  a  sphere,  on  which  are 
traced  the  particulars  intended  to  be  expressed,  whether  they 
be  continuous  outlines  or  points.     Now,  as  a  spherical  surface  * 

•  We  here  neglect  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth,  which,  for  such  a  purpose  as 
map-  making,  is  too  trifling  to  have  any  material  influence 


PROJECTIONS   OF    THE   STHEliE. 


183 


can  by  no  contrivance  be  extended  or  projected  into  a 
plane,  without  undue  enlargement  or  contraction  of  some 
parts  in  proportion  to  others ;  and  as  the  system  adopted  in 
so  extending  or  projecting  it  will  decide  what  parts  shall  be 
enlarged  or  relatively  contracted,  and  in  what  proportions ; 
it  follows,  that  when  large  portions  of  the  sphere  are  to  be 
mapped  down,  a  great  difference  in  their  representations  may 
subsist,  according  to  the  system  of  projection  adopted! 

(280.)  The  projections  chiefly  used  in  maps,  are  the  ortho- 
graphic, stenographic,  and  Mercator's.  In  the  orthographic 
projection,  every  point  of  the  hemi- 
sphere is  referred  to  its  diametral 
plane  or  base,  by  a  perpendicular  let 
fall  on  it,  so  that  the  representation 
of  the  hemisphere  thus  mapped  on 
its  base,  is  such  as  would  actually 
appear  to  an  eye  placed  at  an  infinite 
distance  from  it.  It  is  obvious,  from  the  annexed  figure, 
that  in  this  projection  only  the  central  portions  are  repre- 
sented of  their  true  forms,  while  all  the  exterior  is  more 
and  more  distorted  and  crowded  together  as  we  approach  the 
edges  of  the  map.  Owing  to  this  cause,  the  orthographic 
projection,  though  very  good  for  small  portions  of  the  globe, 
is  of  little  service  for  large  ones. 

(281.)  The  stereographic 
projection  is  in  great  mea 
sure  free  from  this  defect. 
To  understand  this  projec- 
tion, we  must  conceive  an 
eye  to  be  placed  at  E,  one 
extremity  of  a  diameter, 
E  C  B,  of  the  sphere,  and 
to  view  the  concave  surface 
of  the  sphere,  every  point 
of  which,  as  P,  is  referred  to 
the  diametral  plane  A  D  F, 

perpendicular  to  E  B  by    the    visual    line    P  M  E.       The 
stereographic  projection  of  a  sphere,  then,  is  a  true  per^pee- 


a        x 
II      ^k    \ 

.KVAmU 

K         y£VA 

*th/k 

/   / 

184 


OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 


tive  representation  of  its  concavity  on  a  diametral  plane  ;  an«l, 
as  such,  it  possesses  some  singularly  elegant  geometrical  pro- 
perties, of  which  we  shall  state  one  or  two  of  the  principal. 

(282.)  And  first,  then,  all  circles  on  the  sphere  are  re- 
presented by  circles  in  the  projection.  Thus  the  circle  X  is 
projected  into  x.  Only  great  circles  passing  through  the 
vertex  B  are  projected  into  straight  lines  traversing  the 
tentre  C  :  thus,  B  P  A  is  projected  into  C  A. 

2ndly.  Every  very  small  triangle,  G  H  K,  on  the  sphere,  is 
represented  by  a  similar  triangle,  g h k,  in  the  projection.  This 
is  a  very  valuable  property,  as  it  insures  a  general  similarity 
of  appearance  in  the  map  to  the  reality  in  all  its  smaller 
parts,  and  enables  us  to  project  at  least  a  hemisphere  in 
a  single  map,  without  any  violent  distortion  of  the  configura- 
tions on  the  surface  from  their  real  forms.  As  in  the  ortho- 
graphic projection,  the  borders  of  the  hemisphere  are  unduly 
crowded  together;  in  the  stereographic,  their  projected  di- 
mensions are,  on  the  contrary,  somewhat  enlarged  in  receding 
from  the  centre. 

(283.)  Both  these  projections  may  be  considered  natural 
ones,  inasmuch  as  they  are  really  perspective  representations 
of  the  surface  on  a  plane.  Mercators  is  entirely  an  artificial 
one,  representing  the  sphere  as  it  cannot  be  seen  from  any 
one  point,  but  as  it  might  be  seen  by  an  eye  carried  succes- 
sively over  every  part  of  it.     In  it,  the  degrees  of  longitude, 


) 

40 

<r 

s 

< 

w 

/- 

1 

*(t 

y 

^) 

L. 

_J 

L, 

-J 

0     20 

40 

60 

and  those  of  latitude,  bear  always  to  each  other  their  due 
proportion :  the  erpiator  is  conceived  to  be  extended  out  into 
a  straight  line,  and  the  meridians  are  straight  lines  at  right 
angles  to  it,  as  in  the  figure.     Altogether,  the  general  cha 


PROJECTIONS   OF    THE    SPHEKE.  185 

racier  cf  maps  on  this  projection  is  not  very  dissimilar  to 
what  would  be  produced  by  referring  every  point  in  the  globe 
to  a  circumscribing  cylinder,  by  lines  drawn  from  the  centre, 
nnd  then  unrolling  the  cylinder  into  a  plane.  Like  the 
rtereographic  projection,  it  gives  a  true  representation,  as  to 
form,  of  every  particular  small  part,  but  varies  greatly  in 
point  of  scale  in  its  different  regions ;  the  polar  portions  in 
particular  being  extravagantly  enlarged ;  and  the  whole  map, 
3ven  of  a  single  hemisphere,  not  being  comprizable  within 
any  finite  limits. 

(283  a.)  A  very  convenient  projection,  at  once  simple  in 
principle,  and  remarkable  for  the  facility  with  which  places 
on  the  earth's  surface  may  be  laid  down  from  a  knowledge  of 
their  latitudes  and  longitudes,  or  stars  from  that  of  their 
right  ascensions  and  polar  distances ;  or  read  off  from  the 
chart  when  projected,  is  one  in  which  (the  radius  of  a  circle 
being  divided  into  ninety  equal  parts,  representing  degrees 
of  polar  distance,)  parallels  of  latitude  or  of  declination  are 
expressed  by  concentric  circles,  described  through  each  ot 
the  points  of  division,  and  circles  of  longitude  or  of  declina- 
tion are  represented  by  the  radii.  In  a  planisphere  con- 
structed on  this  principle,  the  proportions  of  the  spaces 
occupied  on  the  chart  by  equal  areas  differently  situated,  are 
better  preserved  than  in  any  of  those  already  described,  and 
with  an  amount  of  distortion  of  shape,  on  the  whole,  as 
little  offensive  as  the  nature  of  a  planisphere  chart  allows. 
This  projection  (as  does  also  one  recently  proposed  by 
Sir  H.  James,  which  takes  in  two-thirds  of  the  sphere) 
admits  of  being  extended  considerably  beyond  a  hemisphere, 
without  producing  a  very  intolerable  distortion. 

(283  b.)  The  following  projection,  in  which  equal  areas 
on  the  projection  correspond  precisely  to  equal  areas  on  the 
spherical  surface  projected,  is  also  occasionally  employed.* 
Take  out,  upon  any  scale,  from  a  table  of  natural  sines,  the 
sines  of  30',  1°,  1°  30', ...  up  to  45°,  and  from  any  center 

•  See  "  Results  of  Astronomical  Observations  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope," 
by  the  Author,  Plate  XI.,  where  this  projection  is  used  to  exhibit  the  law  of 
distribution  of  the  Nebulae. 


186  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

with  these  as  radii  describe  circles.  These  will  represent 
the  projections  of  small  circles  of  the  sphere  about  a  pole, 
whose  projection  is  their  common  center,  naving  the  re- 
spective polar  distances  1°,  2°,  3°,  .  .  .  90°. 

(284.)  We  shall  not,  of  course,  enter  here  into  any  geo- 
graphical details ;  but  one  result  of  maritime  discovery  on 
the  great  scale  is,  so  to  speak,  massive  enough  to  call  for 
mention  as  an  astronomical  feature.  When  the  continents 
and  seas  are  laid  down  on  a  globe  (and  since  the  discovery  of 
Australia  and  the  recent  addition  to  our  antarctic  knowledge 
of  Victoria  Land  by  Sir  J.  C.  Ross,  we  are  sure  that  no 
very  extensive  tracts  of  land  remain  unknown),  we  find  that 
it  is  possible  so  to  divide  the  globe  into  two  hemispheres,  that 
one  shall  contain  nearly  all  the  land;  the  other  being  almost 
entirely  sea.  It  is  a  fact,  not  a  little  interesting  to  English- 
men, and,  combined  with  our  insular  station  in  that  great 
highway  of  nations,  the  Atlantic,  not  a  little  explanatory  of 
our  commercial  eminence,  that  London  *  occupies  nearly  the 
center  of  the  terrestrial  hemisphere.  Astronomically  speaking, 
the  fact  of  this  divisibility  of  the  globe  into  an  oceanic  and  a 
terrestrial  hemisphere  is  important,  as  demonstrative  of  a 
want  of  absolute  equality  in  the  density  of  the  solid  material 
of  the  two  hemispheres.  Considering  the  whole  mass  of  land 
and  water  as  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  it  is  evident  that  the 
half  which  protrudes  must  of  necessity  be  buoyant ;  not,  of 
course,  that  we  mean  to  assert  it  to  be  lighter  than  water, 
but,  as  compared  with  the  whole  globe,  in  a  less  degree  heavier 
than  that  fluid.  We  leave  to  geologists  to  draw  from  these 
premises  their  own  conclusions  (and  we  think  them  obvious 
enough)  as  to  the  internal  constitution  of  the  globe,  and  the 
immediate  nature  of  the  forces  which  sustain  its  continents  at 
their  actual  elevation  ;  but  in  any  future  investigations  which 

*  More  exactly,  Falmouth.  The  central  point  of  the  hemisphere  which 
contains  the  maximum  of  land  falls  very  nearly  indeed  upon  this  port.  The 
land  in  the  opposite  hemisphere,  with  exception  of  the  tapering  extremity  of 
South  America  and  the  slender  peninsula  of  Malacca,  is  wholly  insular,  and 
were  it  not  for  Australia,  would  be  quite  insignificant  in  amount.  This 
interesting  feature  of  geogra'phy  was  first  noticed  by  Colson  (I'hil.  Tr.  xxxix. 
p.  210. ).  A  pair  of  planispheres  for  the  horizon  of  London  has  been  published 
by  Hughes  (London,  1839> 


BAROMETRIC   MEASUREMENT   OF    HEIGHTS. 


187 


may  have  for  their  object  to  explain  the  local  deviations  ol 
the  intensity  of  gravity,  from  what  the  hypothesis  of  an  exact 
elliptic  figure  would  require,  this,  as  a  general  fact,  ought  not 
to  be  lost  sight  of. 

(285.)  Our  knowledge  of  the  surface  of  our  globe  is  in- 
complete, unless  it  include  the  heights  above  the  sea  level  of 
every  part  of  the  land,  and  the  depression  of  the  bed  of  the 
ocean  below  the  surface  over  all  its  extent.  The  latter  object 
is  attainable  (with  whatever  difficulty  and  howsoever  slowly) 
by  direct  sounding  ;  the  former  by  two  distinct  methods :  the 
one  consisting  in  trigonometrical  measurement  of  the  differ- 
ences  of  level  of  all  the  stations  of  a  survey  ;  the  other,  by 
the  use  of  the  barometer,  the  principle  of  which  is,  in  fact, 
identical  with  that  of  the  sounding  line.  In  both  cases  we 
measure  the  distance  of  the  point  who?e  level  we  would  know 
from  the  surface  of  an  equilibrated  ocean ;  only  in  the  one 
case  it  is  an  ocean  of  water;  in  the  other,  of  air.  In  the 
one  case  our  sounding  line  is  real  and  tangible  ;  in  the  other, 
an  imaginary  one,  measured  by  the  length  of  the  column  of 
quicksilver  the  superincumbent  air  is  capable  of  counter- 
balancing. 

(286.)  Suppose  that  instead  of  air,  the  earth  and  ocean 
were  covered  with  oil,  and  that  human  life  could  subsist 
under  such  circumstances.  Let  AB  C  D  E  be  a  continent,  of 
which  the  portion  ABC  projects  above  the  water,  but  is 


covered  by  the  oil,  which  also  floats  at  an  uniform  depth  on 
the  whole  ocean.  Then  if  we  would  know  the  depth  of  any 
point  D  below  the  sea  level,  we  let  down  a  plummet  from  F. 
But,  if  we  would  know  the  height  of  B  above  the  same  level, 
we  have  only  to  send  up  a  float  from  B  to  the  surface  of  the 
oil ;  and  having  done  the  same  at  C,  a  point  at  the  sea  level,  the 
difference  of  the  two  float  Hues  (fives  the  height  in  question. 


188  OUTLINES  OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(287).  Now,  though  the  atmosphere  differs  from  oil  in  noi 
having  a  positive  surface  equally  definite,  and  in  not  being 
capable  of  carrying  up  any  float  adequate  to  such  an  use,  yet 
it  possesses  all  the  properties  of  a  fluid  really  essential  to  the 
purpose  in  view,  and  this  in  particular,  —  that,  over  the  whole 
surface  of  the  globe,  its  strata  of  equal  density  supposed  in  a 
state  of  equilibrium,  are  parallel  to  the  surface  of  equilibrium, 
or  to  what  would  be  the  surface  of  the  sea,  if  prolonged  under 
the  continents,  and  therefore  each  or  any  of  them  has  all  the 
characters  of  a  definite  surface  to  measure  from,  provided  it 
can  be  ascertained  and  identified.  Now,  the  height  at  which, 
at  any  station  B,  the  mercury  in  a  barometer  is  supported, 
informs  us  at  once  how  much  of  the  atmosphere  is  incumbent 
on  B,  or,  in  other  words,  in  what  stratum  of  the  general 
atmosphere  (indicated  by  its  density)  B  is  situated :  whence 
we  are  enabled  finally  to  conclude,  by  mechanical  reasoning*, 
at  what  height  above  the  sea-level  that  degree  of  density  is  to 
be  found  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  globe.  Such  is  the 
principle  of  the  application  of  the  barometer  to  the  measure- 
ment of  heights.  For  details,  the  reader  is  referred  to  other 
works.f 

(288.)  We  will  content  ourselves  here  with  a  general  cau- 
tion against  an  implicit  dependence  on  barometric  measure- 
ments, except  as  a  differential  process,  at  stations  not  too 
remote  from  each  other.  They  rely  in  their  application  on 
the  assumption  of  a  state  of  equilibrium  in  the  atmospheric 
strata  over  the  whole  globe  —  which  is  very  far  from  being 
their  actual  state  (art.  37.).  Winds,  especially  steady  and 
general  currents  sweeping  over  extensive  continents  undoubt- 
edly tend  to  produce  some  degree  of  conformity  in  the  cur- 
vature of  these  strata  to  the  general  form  of  the  land-surface, 
and  therefore  to  give  an  undue  elevation  to  the  mercurial 
column  at  some  points.  On  the  other  hand,  the  existence  of 
localities  on  the  earth's  surface,  where  a  permanent  depres- 

*  Newton's  Princip.  ii.  Prop.  22. 

•(•  Biot,  Astronomie  Physique,  vol.  iii.  For  tables,  see  the  work  of  Biot 
cited.  Also  those  of  Oltmann,  annually  published  by  the  French  board  of 
longitudes  in  their  Annuaire ;  and  Mr.  Baily's  Collection  of  Astronomical 
Tables  and  Formula?.      See  also  Encyc.  Brit.,  "  Meteorology,"  §  34. 


NATITRAL    GEOGRAPIIICAL    DIVISIONS.  189 

sion  of  the  barometer  prevails  to  the  astonishing  extent  of 
nearly  an  inch,  has  been  clearly  proved  by  the  observations  of 
Ermann  in  Siberia  and  of  Ross  in  the  Antarctic  Seas,  and  is 
probably  a  result  of  the  same  cause,  and  may  be  conceived 
as  complementary  to  an  undue  habitual  elevation  in  other 
regions.  The  mode  in  which  both  elevations  and  depressions 
of  a  permanent  character  may  be  maintained  in  the  surface 
of  a  fluid  in  motion,  will  not  be  enigmatical  to  any  one  who 
contemplates  the  ripple  caused  by  a  pebble  in  a  brook. 

(289.)  Possessed  of  a  knowledge  of  the  heights  of  stations 
above  the  sea,  we  may  connect  all  stations  at  the  same 
altitude  by  level  lines,  the  lowest  of  which  will  be  the  outline 
of  the  sea-coast ;  and  the  rest  will  mark  out  the  successive 
coast-lines  which  would  take  place  were  the  sea  to  rise  by 
regular  and  equal  accessions  of  level  over  the  whole  world, 
till  the  highest  mountains  were  submerged.  The  bottoms  of 
valleys  and  the  ridge-lines  of  hills  are  determined  by  their 
property  of  intersecting  all  these  level  lines  at  right  angles, 
and  being,  subject  to  that  condition,  the  shortest  and  longest, 
that  is  to  say,  the  steepest,  and  the  most  gently  sloping 
courses  respectively  which  can  be  pursued  from  the  summit 
to  the  sea.  The  former  constitute  "  the  water  courses"  of  a 
country  ;  the  latter  its  lines  of  "  watersched  "  *  by  which  it 
is  divided  into  distinct  basins  of  drainage.  Thus  originate 
natural  districts  of  the  most  ineffaceable  character,  on  which 
the  distribution,  limits,  and  peculiarities  of  human  com- 
munities are  in  great  measure  dependent.  The  mean  height 
of  the  continent  of  Europe,  or  that  height  which  its  surface 
would  have  were  all  inequalities  levelled  and  the  mountains 
spread  equally  over  the  plains,  is  according  to  Humboldt 
1 342  English  feet ;  that  of  Asia,  2274  ;  of  North  America, 
1496  ;  and  of  South  America,  2302.  | 

*  Watser-schcide,  the  separation  of  the  water*. 

■f  Humboldt's  numbers  are  the  halves  of  these,  but  express,  not  the  trmui 
heights  of  the  surfucet,  but  the  heights  of  the  several  cetUrtt  of  gravity  of  tha 
continental  masses  above  the  sea  level. 


1  90  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


CHAPTER  V. 

OF    URANOGRAPHY. 

CONSTRUCTION    OF   CELESTIAL  MAPS   AND  GLOBES  BY  OBSERVATIONS 

OF    RIGHT    ASCENSION   AND    DECLINATION. CELESTIAL    OBJECTS 

DISTINGUISHED    INTO    FIXED   AND   ERRATIC. OF    THE   CONSTEL- 
LATIONS  NATURAL    REGIONS    IN    THE    HEAVENS. THE    M1LKT 

WAY. THE  ZODIAC. —  OF  THE  ECLIPTIC. CELESTIAL  LATITUDES 

AND  LONGITUDES. PRECESSION  OF  THE  EQUINOXES. NUTATION. 

—  ABERRATION.— REFRACTION. PARALLAX. SUMMARY  VIEW  OF 

THE   URANOGRAPHICAL   CORRECTIONS. 

(290.)  The  determination  of  the  relative  situations  of  objects 
in  the  heavens,  and  the  construction  of  maps  and  globes 
which  shall  truly  represent  their  mutual  configurations  as 
well  as  of  catalogues  which  shall  preserve  a  more  precise 
numerical  record  of  the  position  of  each,  is  a  task  at  once 
simpler  and  less  laborious  than  that  by  which  the  surface  of 
the  earth  is  mapped  and  measured.  Every  star  in  the  great 
constellation  which  appears  to  revolve  above  us,  constitutes, 
so  to  speak,  a  celestial  station  ;  and  among  these  stations  we 
may,  as  upon  the  earth,  triangulate,  by  measuring  with 
proper  instruments  their  angular  distances  from  each  other, 
which,  cleared  of  the  effect  of  refraction,  are  then  in  a  state 
for  laying  down  on  charts,  as  we  would  the  towns  and  villages 
of  a  country  :  and  this  without  moving  from  our  place,  at 
least  for  all  the  stars  which  rise  above  our  horizon. 

(291.)  Great  exactness  might,  no  doubt,  be  attained  by 
this  means,  and  excellent  celestial  charts  constructed;  but 
there  is  a  far  simpler  and  easier,  and  at  the  same  time,  infi- 
nitely more  accurate  course  laid  open  to  us  if  we  take  advan- 
tage of  the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis,  and  by  observing  each 
celestial  object  as  it  passes  our  meridian,  refer  it  separately 
and  independently  to  the  celestial  equator,  and  thus  ascertain 


CONSTRUCTION   OP    CELESTIAL    MAPS.  191 

its  place  on  the  surface  of  an  imaginary  sphere,  which  may 
be  conceived  to  revolve  with  it,  and  on  which  it  may  be  con 
sidered  as  projected. 

(292.)  The  right  ascension  and  declination  of  a  point  in 
the  heavens  correspond  to  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  a 
station  on  the  earth ;  and  the  place  of  a  star  on  a  celestial 
sphere  is  determined,  when  the  former  elements  are  known, 
just  as  that  of  a  town  on  a  map,  by  knowing  the  latter.  The 
great  advantages  which  the  method  of  meridian  observation 
possesses  over  that  of  triangulation  from  star  to  star,  are, 
then,  1st,  That  in  it  every  star  is  observed  in  that  point  of 
its  diurnal  course,  when  it  is  best  seen  and  least  displaced 
by  refraction.  2dly,  That  the  instruments  required  (the 
transit  and  meridian  circle)  are  the  simplest  and  least  liable 
to  error  or  derangement  of  any  used  by  astronomers.  3dly, 
That  all  the  observations  can  be  made  systematically,  in 
regular  succession,  and  with  equal  advantages ;  there  being 
here  no  question  about  advantageous  or  disadvantageous 
triangles,  &c.  And,  lastly,  That,  by  adopting  this  course, 
the  very  quantities  which  we  should  otherwise  have  to  calcu- 
late by  long  and  tedious  operations  of  spherical  trigonometry, 
and  which  are  essential  to  the  formation  of  a  catalogue,  are 
made  the  objects  of  immediate  measurement.  It  is  almost 
needless  to  state,  then,  that  this  is  the  course  adopted  by 
astronomers. 

(293.)  To  determine  the  right  ascension  of  a  celestial  ob- 
ject, all  that  is  necessary  is  to  observe  the  moment  of  its 
meridian  passage  with  a  transit  instrument,  by  a  clock  regu- 
lated to  exact  sidereal  time,  or  reduced  to  such  by  applying 
its  known  error  and  rate.  The  rate  may  be  obtained  by 
repeated  observations  of  the  same  star  at  its  successive  meri- 
dian passages.  The  error,  however,  requires  a  knowledge  of 
the  equinox,  or  initial  point  from  which  all  right  ascensions  in 
the  heavens  reckon,  as  longitudes  do  on  the  earth  from  a  first 
meridian. 

(294.)  The  nature  of  this  point  will  be  explained  pre- 
sently ;  but  for  the  purposes  of  uranography,  in  so  far  as 
they  concern  only  the  actual  configurations  of  the  stars  inter 


192  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

se,  a  knowledge  of  the  equinox  is  not  necessary.  The  choice 
of  the  equinox,  as  a  zero  point  of  right  ascensions,  is  purely 
artificial,  and  a  matter  of  convenience.  As  on  the  earth, 
any  station  (as  a  national  observatory)  may  be  chosen  for  an 
origin  of  longitudes;  80  in  uranography,  any  conspicuous 
Btar  might  be  selected  as  an  initial  point  from  which  hour 
angles  might  be  reckoned,  and  from  which,  by  merely  ol>- 
serving  differences  or  intervals  of  time,  the  situation  of  all 
others  might  be  deduced.  In  practice,  these  intervals  are 
affected  by  certain  minute  causes  of  inequality,  which  must 
be  allowed  for,  and  which  will  be  explained  in  their  proper 
places. 

(295.)  The  declinations  of  celestial  objects  are  obtained, 
1st,  By  observation  of  their  meridian  altitudes,  with  the 
mural  or  meridian  circle,  or  other  proper  instruments.  This 
requires  a  knowledge  of  the  geographical  latitude  of  the 
station  of  observation,  which  itself  is  only  to  be  obtained 
by  celestial  observation.  2dly,  And  more  directly,  by  ob- 
servation of  their  polar  distances  on  the  mural  circle,  as 
explained  in  art.  170.,  which  is  independent  of  any  previous 
determination  of  the  latitude  of  the  station  ;  neither,  how- 
ever, in  this  case,  does  observation  give  directly  and  imme- 
diately the  exact  declinations.  The  observations  require  to 
be  corrected,  first  for  refraction,  and  moreover  for  those 
minute  causes  of  inequality  which  have  been  just  alluded  to 
in  the  case  of  right  ascensions. 

(296.)  In  this  manner,  then,  may  the  places,  one  among 
the  other,  of  all  celestial  objects  be  ascertained,  and  maps 
and  globes  constructed.  Now  here  arises  a  very  important 
question.  How  far  are  these  places  permanent  ?  Do  these 
stars  and  the  greater  luminaries  of  heaven  preserve  for  ever 
one  invariable  connection  and  relation  of  place  inter  se,  as  if 
they  formed  part  of  a  solid  though  invisible  firmament ;  and, 
like  the  great  natural  land-marks  on  the  earth,  preserve 
immutably  the  same  distances  and  bearings  each  from  the 
other  ?  If  so,  the  most  rational  idea  we  could  form  of  the 
universe  would  be  that  of  an  earth  at  absolute  re3t  in  the 
center,  and  a  hollow  crystalline  sphere  circulating  round  it, 


FIXED    AND    ERRATIC    STARS.  19.'i 

and  carrying  sun,  moon,  and  stars  along  in  its  diurnal  motion. 
If  not,  we  must  dismiss  all  such  notions,  and  inquire  in- 
dividually into  the  distinct  history  of  each  object,  with  a  view 
to  discovering  the  laws  of  its  peculiar  motions,  and  whether 
any  and  what  other  connection  subsists  between  them. 

(297.)  So  far  is  this,  however,  from  being  the  case,  that 
observations,  even  of  the  most  cursory  nature,  are  sufficient 
to  show  that  some,  at  least,  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  those 
the  most  conspicuous,  are  in  a  state  of  continual  change  ot 
place  among  the  rest.  In  the  case  of  the  moon,  indeed,  the 
change  is  so  rapid  and  remarkable,  that  its  alteration  of 
situation  with  respect  to  such  bright  stars  as  may  happen 
to  be  near  it  may  be  noticed  any  fine  night  in  a  few  hours ; 
and  if  noticed  on  two  successive  nights,  cannot  fail  to  strike 
the  most  careless  observer.  With  the  sun,  too,  the  change 
of  place  among  the  stars  is  constant  and  rapid ;  though,  from 
the  invisibility  of  stars  to  the  naked  eye  in  the  day-time,  it 
is  not  so  readily  recognized,  and  requires  either  the  use  of 
telescopes  and  angular  instruments  to  measure  it,  or  a  longer 
continuance  of  observation  to  be  struck  with  it.  Neverthe- 
less, it  is  only  necessary  to  call  to  mind  its  greater  meridian 
altitude  in  summer  than  in  winter,  and  the  fact  that  the 
stars  which  come  into  view  at  night  (and  which  are  therefore 
situated  in  an  hemisphere  opposite  to  that  occupied  by  the 
sun,  and  having  that  luminary  for  its  centre)  vary  with  the 
season  of  the  year,  to  perceive  that  a  great  change  must  have 
taken  place  in  that  interval  in  its  relative  situation  with 
respect  to  all  the  stars.  Besides  the  sun  and  moon,  too, 
there  are  several  other  bodies,  called  planets,  which,  for  the 
most  part,  appear  to  the  naked  eye  only  as  the  largest  and 
most  brilliant  stars,  and  which  offer  the  same  phenomenon  of 
a  constant  change  of  place  among  the  stars ;  now  approaching, 
and  now  receding  from,  such  of  them  as  we  may  refer  them  to 
as  marks ;  and,  some  in  longer,  some  in  shorter  periods, 
making,  like  the  sun  and  moon,  the  complete  tour  of  the 
heavens. 

(298.)  These,  however,  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule. 
The  innumerable  multitude  of  the  stars  which  are  distributed 

o 


194  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

over  the  vault  of  the  heavens  form  a  constellation,  which 
preserves,  not  only  to  the  eye  of  the  casual  observer,  but  *,o 
the  nice  examination  of  the  astronomer,  a  uniformity  of 
Aspect  which,  when  contrasted  with  the  perpetual  change  in 
the  configurations  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets,  may  well 
be  termed  invariable.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that,  by  the 
refinement  of  exact  measurements  prosecuted  from  age  to 
age,  some  small  changes  of  apparent  place,  attributable  to 
no  illusion  and  to  no  terrestrial  cause,  have  been  detected  in 
many  of  them.  Such  are  called,  in  astronomy,  the  proper 
motions  of  the  stars.  But  these  are  so  excessively  slow,  that 
their  accumulated  amount  (even  in  those  stars  for  which 
they  are  greatest)  has  been  insufficient,  in  the  whole  duration 
of  astronomical  history,  to  produce  any  obvious  or  material 
alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  starry  heavens. 

(299.)  This  circumstance,  then,  establishes  a  broad  dis- 
tinction of  the  heavenly  bodies  into  two  great  classes ;  —  the 
fixed,  among  which  (unless  in  a  course  of  observations 
continued  for  many  years)  no  change  of  mutual  situation  can 
be  detected;  and  the  erratic,  or  wandering — (which  is 
implied  in  the  word  planet*)  —  including  the  sun,  moon,  and 
planets,  as  well  as  the  singular  class  of  bodies  termed  comets, 
in  whose  apparent  places  among  the  stars,  and  among  each 
other,  the  observation  of  a  few  days,  or  even  hours,  is 
sufficient  to  exhibit  an  indisputable  alteration. 

(300.)  Uranography,  then,  as  it  concerns  the  fixed  ce- 
lestial bodies  (or,  as  they  are  usually  called,  the  fixed  stars), 
is  reduced  to  a  simple  marking  down  of  their  relative  places 
on  a  globe  or  on  maps ;  to  the  insertion  on  that  globe,  in  its 
due  place  in  the  great  constellation  of  the  stars,  of  the  pole 
of  the  heavens,  or  the  vanishing  point  of  parallels  to  the 
earth's  axis ;  and  of  the  equator  and  place  of  the  equinox : 
points  and  circles  these,  which,  though  artificial,  and  having 
reference  entirely  to  our  earth,  and  therefore  subject  to  all 
changes  (if  any)  to  which  the  earth's  axis  may  be  liable,  are 
yet  so  convenient  in  practice,  that  they  have  obtained  an 

•  nArwjTTTjy,  a  wanderer. 


OP    THE   CONSTELLATIONS.  195 

admission  (with  some  other  circles  and  lines),  sanctioned  by 
usage,  in  all  globes  and  planispheres.  The  reader,  however, 
will  take  care  to  keep  them  separate  in  his  mind,  and  to 
familiarize  himself  with  the  idea  rather  of  two  or  more 
celestial  globes,  superposed  and  fitting  on  each  other,  on  one 
of  which  —  a  real  one  —  are  inscribed  the  stars ;  on  the  others 
those  imaginary  points,  lines,  and  circles,  which  astronomers 
have  devised  for  their  own  uses,  and  to  aid  their  calculations; 
and  to  accustom  himself  to  conceive  in  the  latter  or  artificial 
spheres  a  capability  of  being  shifted  in  any  manner  upon  the 
surface  of  the  other;  so  that,  should  experience  demonstrate 
(as  it  does)  that  these  artificial  points  and  lines  are  brought, 
by  a  slow  motion  of  the  earth's  axis,  or  by  other  secular 
variations  (as  they  are  called),  to  coincide,  at  very  distant 
intervals  of  time,  with  different  stars,  he  may  not  be  un- 
prepared for  the  change,  and  may  have  no  confusion  to 
correct  in  his  notions. 

(301.)  Of  course  we  do  not  here  speak  of  those  uncouth 
figures  and  outlines  of  men  and  monsters,  which  are  usually 
scribbled  over  celestial  globes  and  maps,  and  serve,  in  a  rude 
and  barbarous  way,  to  enable  us  to  talk  of  groups  of  stars,  or 
districts  in  the  heavens,  by  names  which,  though  absurd  or 
puerile  in  their  origin,  have  obtained  a  currency  from  which 
it  would  be  difficult  to  dislodge  them.  In  so  far  as  they 
have  really  (as  some  have)  any  slight  resemblance  to  the 
figures  called  up  in  imagination  by  a  view  of  the  more 
splendid  "  constellations,"  they  have  a  certain  convenience ; 
but  as  they  are  otherwise  entirely  arbitrary,  and  correspond 
to  no  natural  subdivisions  or  groupings  of  the  stars,  astro 
nomers  treat  them  lightly,  or  altogether  disregard  them* 
except  for  briefly  Jiuming  remarkable  stars,  as  a  Leonis, 
/8  Scorpii,  &c  &c,  by  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet  attached 


•  This  disregard  is  neither  supercilious  nor  causeless.  The  constellations 
seem  to  have  been  almost  purposely  named  and  delineated  to  cause  as  much 
contusion  and  inconvenience  as  possible.  Innumerable  snakes  twine  through 
long  and  contorted  areas  of  the  heavens,  where  no  memory  can  follow  them  ; 
bears,  lions,  and  fishes  large  and  small,  northern  and  southern,  confime  all 
nomenclature,  &c.  A  better  system  of  constellations  might  have  been  a  ma- 
terial help  as  an  artificial  memory. 

o  2 


196  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

to  them.  The  reader  will  find  them  on  any  celestial  charts 
or  globes,  and  may  compare  them  with  the  heavens,  and 
there  learn  for  himself  their  position. 

(302.)  There  are  not  wanting,  however,  natural  districts 
in  the  heavens,  which  offer  great  peculiarities  of  character, 
and  strike  every  observer :  such  is  the  milky  way,  that  great 
luminous  band,  which  stretches,  every  evening,  all  across  the 
sky,  from  horizon  to  horizon,  and  which,  when  traced  with 
diligence,  and  mapped  down,  is  found  to  form  a  zone  com- 
pletely encircling  the  whole  sphere,  almost  in  a  great  circle, 
which  is  neither  an  hour  circle,  nor  coincident  with  any  other 
of  our  astronomical  grarnmata.  It  is  divided  in  one  part  of 
its  course,  sending  off  a  kind  of  branch,  which  unites  again 
with  the  main  body,  after  remaining  distinct  for  about  150 
degrees,  within  which  it  suffers  an  interruption  in  its  con- 
tinuity. This  remarkable  belt  has  maintained,  from  the 
earliest  ages,  the  same  relative  situation  among  the  stai's , 
and,  when  examined  through  powerful  telescopes,  is  found 
(wonderful  to  relate!)  to  consist  entirely  of  stars  scattered  by 
millions,  like  glittering  dust,  on  the  black  ground  of  the 
general  heavens.  It  will  be  described  more  particularly  in 
the  subsequent  portion  of  this  work. 

(303.)  Another  remarkable  region  in  the  heavens  is  the 
zodiac,  not  from  any  thing  peculiar  in  its  own  constitution, 
but  from  its  being  the  area  within  which  the  apparent 
motions  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  all  the  greater  planets  are  con- 
fined. To  trace  the  path  of  any  one  of  these,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  ascertain,  by  continued  observation,  its  places 
at  successive  epochs,  and  entering  these  upon  our  map  or 
sphere  in  sufficient  number  to  form  a  series,  not  too  far 
disjoined,  to  connect  them  by  lines  from  point  to  point,  as  we 
mark  out  the  course  of  a  vessel  at  sea  by  mapping  down  its 
place  from  day  to  day.  Now  when  this  is  done,  it  is  found, 
first,  that  the  apparent  path,  or  track,  of  the  sun  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  heavens,  is  no  other  than  an  exact  great  circle  of 
the  sphere  which  is  called  the  ecliptic,  and  which  is  inclined 
to  the  equinoctial  at  an  angle  of  about  23°  28',  intersecting 
it  at  two  opposite  points,  called  the  equinoctial  points,  or 


OF   THE    ECLIPTIC    AND    ZODIAC.  197 

equinoxes,  and  which  are  distinguished  from  each  other  by 
the  epithets  vernal  and  autumnal ;  the  vernal  being  that  at 
which  the  sun  crosses  the  equinoctial  from  south  to  north  ; 
the  autumnal,  when  it  quit3  the  northern  and  enters  the 
southern  hemisphere.  Secondly,  that  the  moon  and  all  the 
planets  pursue  paths  which,  in  like  manner,  encircle  the  whole 
heavens,  but  are  not,  like  that  of  the  sun,  great  circles  exactly 
returning  into  themselves  and  bisecting  the  sphere,  but  rather 
spiral  curves  of  much  complexity,  and  described  with  very 
unequal  velocities  in  their  different  parts.  They  have  all, 
however,  this  in  common,  that  the  general  direction  of  their 
motions  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  sun,  viz.  from  west  to  east, 
that  is  to  say,  the  contrary  to  that  in  which  both  they  and 
the  stars  appear  to  be  carried  by  the  diurnal  motion  of  the 
heavens ;  and,  moreover,  that  they  never  deviate  far  from  the 
ecliptic  on  either  side,  crossing  and  recrossing  it  at  regular 
and  equal  intervals  of  time,  and  confining  themselves  within 
a  zone,  or  belt  (the  zodiac  already  spoken  of),  extending  (with 
certain  exceptions  among  the  smaller  planets)  not  further 
than  8°  or  9°  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic. 

(304.)  It  would  manifestly  be  useless  to  map  down  on 
globes  or  charts  the  apparent  paths  of  any  of  those  bodies 
which  never  retrace  the  same  course,  and  which,  therefore, 
demonstrably,  must  occupy  at  some  one  moment  or  other  of 
their  history,  every  point  in  the  area  of  that  zone  of  the  hea- 
vens within  which  they  are  circumscribed.  The  apparent 
complication  of  their  movements  arises  (that  of  the  moon  ex- 
cepted) from  our  viewing  them  from  a  station  which  is  itself 
in  motion,  and  would  disappear,  could  we  shift  our  point  of 
view  and  observe  them  from  the  sun.  On  the  other  hand  the 
apparent  motion  of  the  sun  is  presented  to  us  under  its  least 
involved  form,  and  is  studied,  from  the  station  we  occupy,  to 
the  greatest  advantage.  So  that,  independent  of  the  impor- 
tance of  that  luminary  to  us  in  other  respects,  it  is  by  the 
investigation  of  the  laws  of  its  motions  in  the  first  instance 
that  we  must  rise  to  a  knowledge  of  those  of  all  the  other 
bodies  of  our  system. 

(305.)  The  ecliptic,  which  is  its  apparent  path  among  the 


198  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

stars,  is  traversed  by  it  in  the  period  called  the  sidereal  yeai, 
which  consists  of  365d  6h  9m  9*6%  reckoned  in  mean  solar 
time  or  366d  6h  9m  9'6S  reckoned  in  sidereal  time.  The  reason 
of  this  difference  (and  it  is  this  which  constitutes  the  origin 
of  the  difference  between  solar  and  sidereal  time)  is,  that  as 
the  sun's  apparent  annual  motion  among  the  stars  is  performed 
in  a  contrary  direction  to  the  apparent  diurnal  motion  of  both 
sun  and  stars,  it  comes  to  the  same  tiling  as  if  the  diurnal 
motion  of  the  sun  were  so  much  slower  than  that  of  the  stars, 
or  as  if  the  sun  lasted  behind  them  in  its  daily  course. 
When  this  has  gone  on  for  a  whole  year,  the  sun  will  have 
fallen  behind  the  stars  by  a  whole  circumference  of  the 
heavens  —  or,  in  other  words — in  a  year  the  sun  will  have 
made  fewer  diurnal  revolutions,  by  one,  than  the  stars.  So 
that  the  same  interval  of  time  which  is  measured  by  366d  6h, 
&e.  of  sidereal  time,  will  be  called  365  days,  6  hours,  &c,  if 
reckoned  in  mean  solar  time.  Thus,  then,  is  the  proportion 
between  the  mean  solar  and  sidereal  day  established,  which, 
reduced  into  a  decimal  fraction,  is  that  of  1  "00273791  to  1 
The  measurement  of  time  by  these  different  standards  may 
be  compared  to  that  of  space  by  the  standard  feet,  or  ells  of 
two  different  nations;  the  proportion  of  which,  once  settled 
and  borne  in  mind,  can  never  become  a  source  of  error. 

(306.)  The  position  of  the  ecliptic  among  the  stars  may, 
for  our  present  purpose,  be  regarded  as  invariable.  It  is 
true  that  this  is  not  strictly  the  case ;  and  on  comparing 
together  its  position  at  present  with  that  which  it  held  at  the 
most  distant  epoch  at  which  we  possess  observations,  we  find 
evidences  of  a  small  change,  which  theory  accounts  for,  and 
whose  nature  will  be  hereafter  explained ;  but  that  change  ic 
so  excessively  slow,  that  for  a  great  many  successive  years, 
or  even  for  whole  centuries,  this  circle  may  be  regarded,  for 
most  ordinary  purposes,  as  holding  the  same  position  in  the 
sidereal  heavens. 

(307.)  The  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  like  those  of  any  other 
great  circle  of  the  sphere,  are  opposite  points  on  its  surface, 
equidistant  from  the  ecliptic  in  every  direction.  They  are 
of  course  not  coincident  with  those  of  the  equinoctial,  but 


CELESTIAL    LATITUDES    AND    LONGITUDES. 


199 


removed  from  it  by  an  angular  interval  equal  to  the  inclina- 
tion of  the  ecliptic  to  the  equinoctial  (23°  28'),  which  is  called 
the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic.  In  the  next  figure,  if  P  p  repre- 
sent the  north  and  south  poles  (by  which  when  used  without 
qualification  we  always  mean  the  poles  of  the  equinoctial), 
and  E  A  Q  V  the  equinoctial,  VSAW  the  ecliptic,  and  K  h, 
its  poles  —  the  spherical  angle  Q  V  S  io  the  obliquity  of  the 
ocliptic,  and  is  equal  in  angular  measure  to  P  K  or  S  Q. 
If  we  suppose  the  sun's  apparent  motion  to  be  in  the  direction 
V  S  A  W,  V  will  be  the  vernal  and  A  the  autumnal  equinox. 
S  and  W,  the  two  points  at  which  the  ecliptic  is  most  distant 
from  the  equinoctial,  are  termed  solstices,  because,  when 
arrived  there,  the  sun  ceases  to  recede  from  the  equator,  and 
(in  that  sense,  so  far  as  its  motion  in  declination  is  concerned) 
to  stand  still  in  the  heavens.  S,  the  point  where  the  sun 
has  the  greatest  northern  declination,  is  called  the  summer, 
and  W,  that  where  it  is  farthest  south,  the  winter  solstice. 
These  epithets  obviously  have  their  origin  in  the  dependence 
of  the  seasons  on  the  sun's  declination,  which  will  be  explained 
in  the  next  chapter.  The  circle  E  K  P  Q  k  p,  which  passes 
through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  equinoctial,  is  called  the 
solstitial  colure  ;  and  a  meridian  drawn  through  the  equinoxes, 
P  V  p  A,  the  equinoctial  colure. 

(308.)  Since  the  ecliptic  holds  a  determinate  situation  in 
the  starry  heavens,  it  may  be  employed,  like  the  equinoctial, 
to  refer  the  positions  of  the  stars  to,  by  circles  drawn  through 
them  from  its  poles,  and  therefore  perpendicular  to  it.  Such 
circles  are  termed,  inastronomy,  v 

circles  of  latitude  —  the  distance 
of  a  star  from  the  ecliptic,  reck- 
oned on  the  circle  of  latitude 
passing  through  it,  is  called  the 
latitude  of  the  stars  —  and  the  r\. 
arc  of  the  ecliptic  intercepted 
between  the  vernal  equinox  and 
this  circle,  its  longitude.  In  the 
figure,  X  is  a  star,  P  X  11  a 
circle    of     declination     drawn 


200  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

through  it,  by  which  it  is  referred  to  the  equinoctial,  and 
K  X  T  a  circle  of  latitude  referring  it  to  the  ecliptic  — 
then,  as  V  R  is  the  right  ascension,  and  R  X  the  declination, 
of  X,  so  also  is  V  T  its  longitude,  and  T  X  its  latitude.  The 
use  of  the  terms  longitude  and  latitude,  in  this  sense,  seems 
to  have  originated  in  considering  the  ecliptic  as  forming  a 
kind  of  natural  equator  to  the  heavens,  as  the  terrestrial 
equator  does  to  the  earth  —  the  former  holding  an  invariable 
position  with  respect  to  the  stars,  as  the  latter  does  with 
respect  to  stations  on  the  earth's  surface.  The  force  of  this 
observation  will  presently  become  apparent. 

(309.)  Knowing  the  right  ascension  and  declination  of  an 
object,  we  may  find  its  longitude  and  latitude,  and  vice  versa. 
This  is  a  problem  of  great  use  in  physical  astronomy — the 
following  is  its  solution:  —  In  our  last  figure,  EKPQ,  the 
solstitial  colure  is  of  course  90°  distant  from  V,  the  vernal 
equinox,  which  is  one  of  its  poles  —  so  that  V  R  (the  right 
ascension)  being  given,  and  also  V  E,  the  arc  E  R,  and  its 
measure,  the  spherical  angle  E  P  R,  or  K  P  X,  is  known. 
In  the  spherical  triangle  K  P  X,  then,  we  have  given,  1st, 
The  side  P  K,  which,  being  the  distance  of  the  poles  of  the 
ecliptic  and  equinoctial,  is  equal  to  the  obliquity  of  the 
ecliptic ;  2d,  The  side  P  X,  the  polar  distance,  or  the  com- 
plement of  the  declination  R  X ;  and,  3d,  the  included  angle 
K  P  X ;  and  therefore,  by  spherical  trigonometry,  it  is  easy 
to  find  the  other  side  K  X,  and  the  remaining  angles.  Now 
K  X  is  the  complement  of  the  required  latitude  X  T,  and  the 
angle  P  K  X  being  known,  and  P  K  V  being  a  right  angle 
(because  S  V  is  90°),  the  angle  X  K  V  becomes  known. 
Now  this  is  no  other  than  the  measure  of  the  longitude  V  T 
of  the  object.  The  inverse  problem  is  resolved  by  the  same 
triangle,  and  by  a  process  exactly  similar. 

(310.)  It  is  often  of  use  to  know  the  situation  of  the 
ecliptic  in  the  visible  heavens  at  any  instant ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  points  where  it  cuts  the  horizon,  and  the  altitude  of  its 
highest  point,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the  nonagesimal 
point  of  the  ecliptic,  as  well  as  the  longitude  of  this  point  on 
the  ecliptic  itself  from  the  equinox.     These,  and  all  questions 


NONAGESIMAL.       ANGLE    OF    SITUATION. 


201 


referable  to  the  same  data  and  quaesita,  are  resolved  by  the 
spherical  triangle  Z  P  E,  formed  by  the  zenith  Z  (considered 
as  the  pole  of  the  horizon),  the  pole  of  the  equinoctial  P,  and 
the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  E.  The 
sidereal  time  being  given,  and 
also  the  right  ascension  of  the 
pole  of  the  ecliptic  (which  is 
always  the  same,  viz.  18h  0m  08), 
the  hour  angle  ZPE  of  that 
point  is  known.  Then,  in  this 
triangle  we  have  given  P  Z.  the 
colatitude  ;  P  E,  the  polar  dis- 
tance of  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic, 
23°  28'.  and  the  angle  ZPE 
from  which  we  may  find,  1st,  the  side  Z  E,  which  is  easily 
seen  to  be  equal  to  the  altitude  of  the  nonagesimal  point 
sought ;  and  2dly,  the  angle  P  Z  E,  which  is  the  azimuth  of 
the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  and  which,  therefore,  being  added 
to  and  subtracted  from  90°,  gives  the  azimuth  of  the  eastern 
and  western  intersections  of  the  ecliptic  with  the  horizon. 
Lastly,  the  longitude  of  the  nonagesimal  point  may  be  had, 
by  calculating  in  the  same  triangle  the  angle  PEZ,  which 
is  its  complement. 

(311.)  The  angle  of  situation  of  a  star  is  the  angle  included 
between  circles  of  latitude  and  of  declination  passing  through 
it.  To  determine  it  in  any  proposed  case,  we  must  resolve 
the  triangle  P  S  E,  in  which  are  given  PS,  P  E,  and  the 
angle  S  P  E,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  star's  right 
ascension  and  18  hours ;  from  which  it  is  easy  to  find  the 
angle  P  S  E  required.  This  angle  is  of  use  in  many  in- 
quiries in  physical  astronomy.  It  is  called  in  most  books 
on  astronomy,  the  angle  of  position,  but  this  expression 
has  become  otherwise  and  more  conveniently  appropriated. 
(See  Art.  204.) 

(312.)  The  same  course  of  observations  by  which  the  path 
of  the  sun  among  the  fixed  stars  is  traced,  and  the  ecliptic 
marked  out  among  them,  determines,  of  course,  the  place  of 
the  equinox  V  (Fig.  art.  308.)  upon   the  starry  sphere,  at 


202  OUTLINES   OF    ASTKONOMY. 

that  time — a  point  of  great  importance  in  practical  astro- 
nomy, as  it  is  the  origin  or  zero  point  of  right  ascension. 
Now,  when  this  process  is  repeated  at  considerably  distant 
intervals  of  time,  a  very  remarkable  phenomenon  is  observed  ; 
viz.  that  the  equinox  does  not  preserve  a  constant  place  among 
the  stars,  but  shifts  its  position,  travelling  continually  and 
regularly,  although  with  extreme  slowness,  backwards,  along 
the  ecliptic,  in  the  direction  V  W  from  east  to  west,  or  the 
contrary  to  that  in  which  the  sun  appears  to  move  in  that 
circle.  As  the  ecliptic  and  equinoctial  are  not  very  much 
inclined,  this  motion  of  the  equinox  from  east  to  west  along 
the  former,  conspires  (speaking  generally)  with  the  diurnal 
motion,  and  carries  it,  with  reference  to  that  motion,  con- 
tinually in  advance  upon  the  stars :  hence  it  has  acquired  the 
name  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  because  the  place  of 
the  equinox  among  the  stars,  at  every  subsequent  moment, 
precedes  (with  reference  to  the  diurnal  motion)  that  which  it 
held  the  moment  before.  The  amount  of  this  motion  by 
which  the  equinox  travels  backward,  or  retrogrades  (as  it  is 
called),  on  the  ecliptic,  is  0°  0'  5O10"  per  annum,  an  ex- 
tremely minute  quantity,  but  which,  by  its  continual  accu- 
mulation from  year  to  year,  at  last  makes  itself  very  palpable, 
and  that  in  a  way  highly  inconvenient  to  practical  astronomers, 
by  destroying,  in  the  lapse  of  a  moderate  number  of  years, 
the  arrangement  of  their  catalogues  of  stars,  and  making  it 
necessaiy  to  reconstruct  them.  Since  the  formation  of  the 
earliest  catalogue  on  record,  the  place  of  the  equinox  has  re- 
trograded already  about  30°.  The  period  in  which  it  performs 
a  complete  tour  of  the  ecliptic,  is  25,868  years. 

(313.)  The  immediate  uranographical  effect  of  the  pre- 
cession of  the  equinoxes  is  to  produce  a  uniform  increase  of 
longitude  in  all  the  heavenly  bodies,  whether  fixed  or  erratic. 
For  the  vernal  equinox  being  the  initial  point  of  longitudes, 
as  well  as  of  right  ascension,  a  retreat  of  this  point  on  the 
ecliptic  tells  upon  the  longitudes  of  all  alike,  whether  at  rest 
or  in  motion,  and  produces,  so  far  as  its  amount  extends,  the 
appearance  of  a  motion  in  longitude  common  to  all,  as  if  the 


PRECESSION    OF    THE    EQUINOXES.  203 

whole  heavens  had  a  slow  rotation  round  the  poles  of  the 
ecliptic  in  the  long  period  above  mentioned,  similar  to  what 
they  have  in  twenty-four  hours  round  those  of  the  equinoctial. 
This  increase  of  longitude,  the  reader  will  of  course  observe, 
and  bear  in  mind,  is,  properly  speaking,  neither  a  real  nor  an 
apparent  movement  of  the  stars.  It  is  a  purely  technical 
result,  arising  from  the  gradual  shifting  of  the  zero  point 
from  which  longitudes  are  reckoned.  Had  a  fixed  star  been 
chosen  as  the  origin  of  longitudes,  they  would  have  been 
invariable. 

(314.)  To  form  a  just  idea  of  this  curious  astronomical 
phenomenon,  however,  we  must  abandon,  for  a  time,  the 
consideration  of  the  ecliptic,  as  tending  to  produce  confusion 
in  our  ideas ;  for  this  reason,  that  the  stability  of  the  ecliptic 
itself  among  the  stars  is  (as  already  hinted,  art.  306.)  only 
approximate,  and  that  in  consequence  its  intersection  with  the 
equinoctial  is  liable  to  a  certain  amount  of  change,  arising 
from  its  fluctuation,  which  mixes  itself  with  what  is  due  to 
the  principal  uranographical  cause  of  the  phenomenon.  This 
cause  will  become  at  once  apparent,  if,  instead  of  regarding 
the  equinox,  we  fix  our  attention  on  the  pole  of  the  equinoc- 
tial, or  the  vanishing  point  of  the  earth's  axis. 

(315.)  The  place  of  this  point  among  the  stars  is  easily 
determined  at  any  epoch,  by  the  most  direct  of  all  astrono- 
mical observations, — those  with  the  meridian  or  mural  circle. 
By  this  instrument  we  are  enabled  to  ascertain  at  every 
moment  the  exact  distance  of  the  polar  point  from  any  three 
or  more  stars,  and  therefore  to  lay  it  down,  by  triangulating 
from  these  stars,  with  unerring  precision,  on  a  chart  or  globe, 
without  the  least  reference  to  the  position  of  the  ecliptic,  or 
to  any  other  circle  not  naturally  connected  with  it.  Now, 
when  this  is  done  with  proper  diligence  and  exactness,  it 
results  that,  although  for  short  intervals  of  time,  such  as  a 
few  days,  the  place  of  the  pole  may  be  regarded  as  not  sen- 
sibly variable,  yet  in  reality  it  is  in  a  state  of  constant, 
although  extremely  6low  motion ;  and,  what  is  still  more  re- 
markable, this  motion  is  not  uniform,  but  compounded  of 


204  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

one  principal,  uniform,  or  nearly  uniform,  part,  and  other 
smaller  and  subordinate  periodical  fluctuations :  the  former 
giving  rise  to  the  phenomena  of  precession;  the  latter  to 
another  distinct  phenomenon  called  nutation.  These  two 
phenomena,  it  is  true,  belong,  theoretically  speaking,  to  one 
and  the  same  general  head,  and  are  intimately  connected 
together,  forming  part  of  a  great  and  complicated  chain  of 
consequences  flowing  from  the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis: 
but  it  will  be  conducive  to  clearness  at  present  to  consider 
them  separately 

(316.)  It  is  found,  then,  that  in  virtue  of  the  uniform  part 
of  the  motion  of  the  pole,  it  describes  a  circle  in  the  heavens 
around  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  as  a  centre,  keeping  constantly 
at  the  same  distance  of  23°  28'  from  it  in  a  direction  from 
east  to  west,  and  with  such  a  velocity,  that  the  annual  angle 
described  by  it,  in  this  its  imaginary  orbit,  is  50'10";  so  that 
the  whole  circle  would  be  described  by  it  in  the  above-men- 
tioned period  of  25,868  years.  It  is  easy  to  perceive  how 
such  a  motion  of  the  pole  will  give  rise  to  the  retrograde 
motion  of  the  equinoxes ;  for  in  the  figure,  art.  308,  suppose 
the  pole  P  in  the  progress  of  its  motion  in  the  small  circle 
POZ  round  K  to  come  to  O,  then,  as  the  situation  of  the 
equinoctial  E  V  Q  is  determined  by  that  of  the  pole,  this,  it  is 
evident,  must  cause  a  displacement  of  the  equinoctial,  which 
will  take  a  new  situation,  EUQ,  90°  distant  in  every  part 
from  the  new  position  O  of  the  pole.  The  point  U,  there- 
fore, in  which  the  displaced  equinoctial  will  intersect  the 
ecliptic,  i.  e.  the  displaced  equinox,  will  lie  on  that  side  of  V, 
its  original  position,  towards  which  the  motion  of  the  pole  is 
directed,  or  to  the  westward. 

(317.)  The  precession  of  the  equinoxes  thus  conceived, 
consists,  then,  in  a  real  but  very  slow  motion  of  the  pole  of 
the  heavens  among  the  stars,  in  a  small  circle  round  the  pole 
of  the  ecliptic.  Now  this  cannot  happen  without  producing 
corresponding  changes  in  the  apparent  diurnal  motion  of  the 
sphere,  and  the  aspect  which  the  heavens  must  present  at  very 
remote  periods  of  history.  The  pole  is  nothing  more  than 
the  vanishing  point  of  the  earth's  axis       As  this  point,  then, 


THE    POLE    STAR    NOT    ALWAYS    THE    SAME.  206 

r  as  such  a  motion  as  we  have  described,  it  necessarily  follows 
that  the  earth's  axis  must  have  a  conical  motion,  in  virtue  of 
which  it  points  successively  to  every  part  of  the  small  circle 
in  question.  We  may  form  the  best  idea  of  such  a  motion 
by  noticing  a  child's  peg-top,  when  it  spins  not  upright,  or 
that  amusing  toy  the  te-to-tum,  which,  when  delicately  ex- 
ecuted, and  nicely  balanced,  becomes  an  elegant  philosophical 
instrument,  and  exhibits,  in  the  most  beautiful  manner,  the 
whole  phenomenon.  The  reader  will  take  care  not  to  con- 
found the  variation  of  the  position  of  the  earth's  axis  in  space 
with  a  mere  shifting  of  the  imaginary  line  about  which  it 
revolves,  in  its  interior.  The  whole  earth  participates  in  the 
motion,  and  goes  along  with  the  axis  as  if  it  were  really  a 
bar  of  iron  driven  through  it.  That  such  is  the  case  is  proved 
by  the  two  great  facts :  1st,  that  the  latitudes  of  places  on 
the  earth,  or  their  geographical  situation  with  respect  to  the 
poles,  have  undergone  no  perceptible  change  from  the  earliest 
ages.  2dly,  that  the  sea  maintains  its  level,  which  could  not 
be  the  case  if  the  motion  of  the  axis  were  not  accompanied 
with  a  motion  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  earth.* 

(318.)  The  visible  effect  of  precession  on  the  aspect  of  the 
heavens  consists  in  the  apparent  approach  of  some  stars  and 
constellations  to  the  pole  and  recess  of  others.  The  bright 
star  of  the  Lesser  Bear,  which  we  call  the  pole  star,  has  not 
always  been,  nor  will  always  continue  to  be,  our  cynosure. 
At  the  time  of  the  construction  of  the  earliest  catalogues  it 
was  12°  from  the  pole  —  it  is  now  only  1°  24',  and  will 
approach  yet  nearer,  to  within  half  a  degree,  after  which  it 
will  again  recede,  and  slowly  give  place  to  others,,  which  will 
succeed  in  its  companionship  to  the  pole.  After  a  lapse  of 
about  1 2,000  years,  the  star  a  Lyra?,  the  brightest  in  the 
northern  hemisphere,  will  occupy  the  remarkable  situation  of 
a  pole  star  approaching  within  about  5°  of  the  pole. 

(319.)  At  the  date  of  the  erection  of  the  Great  Pyramid 
of  Gizeh,  which  precedes  by  3970  years  (say  4000)  the  pre- 

*  Local  changes  of  the  sea  level,  arising  from  purely  geological  causes,  are 
easily  distinguished  from  that  general  and  systematic  alteration  which  a  shifting 
1. 1  the  axis  of  rotation  would  giv«  rise  to. 


200  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

sent  epoch,  the  longitudes  of  all  the  stars  were  less  by  55 
45'  than  at  present.  Calculating  from  this  datum*  the  place 
of  the  pole  of  the  heavens  among  the  stars,  it  will  be  found 
to  fall  near  a  Draconis ;  its  distance  from  that  star  being 
3°  44'  25".  This  being  the  most  conspicuous  star  J  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  was  therefore  the  pole  star  at  that 
epoch.  And  the  latitude  of  Gizeh  being  just  30°  north,  and 
consequently  the  altitude  of  the  north  pole  there  also  30°,  it 
follows  that  the  star  in  question  must  have  had  at  its  lower 
culmination,  at  Gizeh,  an  altitude  of  26°  15'  35".  Now  it  is  a 
remarkable  fact,  ascertained  by  the  late  researches  of  Col. 
Vyse,  that  of  the  nine  pyramids  still  existing  at  Gizeh,  six 
(including  all  the  largest)  have  the  narrow  passages  by  which 
alone  they  can  be  entered,  (all  which  open  out  on  the  northern 
faces  of  their  respective  pyramids)  inclined  to  the  horizon 
downwards  at  angles  as  follows. 

1st,  or  Pyramid  of  Cheops        - 

2d,  or  Pyramid  of  Cephren       - 

3d,  or  Pyramid  of  Mycerinus  - 

4th,     - 

5th,     ------ 

9th,     ------ 

Mean         -     26     47 

Of  the  two  pyramids  at  Abousseir  also,  which  alone  exist 
in  a  state  of  sufficient  preservation  to  admit  of  the  inclina- 
tions of  their  entrance  passages  being  determined,  one  has 
the  angle  27°  5',  the  other  26°. 

(320.)  At  the  bottom  of  every  one  of  these  passages  there- 
fore, the  then  pole  star  must  have  been  visible  at  its  lower 
culmination,  a  circumstance  which  can  hardly  be  supposed  to 
have  been  unintentional,  and  was  doubtless  connected  (per- 
haps superstitiously)  with  the  astronomical  observation  of  that 
star,  of  whose  proximity  to  the  pole  at  the  epoch  of  the  erec- 

»  On  this  calculation  the  diminution  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  in  the 
4000  years  elapsed  has  no  influence.  That  diminution  arises  from  a  change  in 
the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  change  in  the 
position  of  its  axis,  as  referred  to  the  starry  sphere. 

■\  a  Draconis  is  now  an  inconspicuous  star  of  the  4th  magn.tude,  but  there  it 
distinct  evidence  to  show  that  it  was  formerly  brighter. 


26° 

41' 

25 

55 

26 

2 

27 

0 

27 

12 

28 

0 

NUTATION    OF    TIIE    EAKTIl's   AXIS.  207 

tion  of  these  wonderful  structures,  we  are  thus  furnished  with 
a  monumental  record  of  the  most  imperishable  nature. 

(321.)  The  nutation  of  the  earth's  axis  is  a  small  and  slow 
subordinate  gyratory  movement,  by  which,  if  subsisting 
alone,  the  pole  would  describe  among  the  stars,  in  a  period  of 
about  nineteen  years,  a  minute  ellipsis,  having  its  longer  axis 
equal  to  18" '5,  and  its  shorter  to  13"-74  ;  the  longer  being 
directed  towards  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  shorter,  of 
course,  at  right  angles  to  it.  The  consequence  of  this  real 
motion  of  the  pole  is  an  apparent  approach  and  recess  of  all 
the  stars  in  the  heavens  to  the  pole  in  the  same  period. 
Since,  also,  the  place  of  the  equinox  on  the  ecliptic  is  deter- 
mined by  the  place  of  the  pole  in  the  heavens,  the  same  cause 
will  give  rise  to  a  small  alternate  advance  and  recess  of  the 
equinoctial  points,  by  which,  in  the  same  period,  both 
the  longitudes  and  the  right  ascensions  of  the  stars  will  be 
also  alternately  increased  and  diminished. 

(322.)  Both  these  motions,  however,  although  here  con 
sidered  separately,  subsist  jointly ;  and  since,  while  in  virtue 
of  the  nutation,  the  pole  is  describing  its  little  ellipse  of  18" '5 
in  diameter,  it  is  carried  by  the  greater  and  regularly  pro- 
gressive motion  of  precession  over  so  much  of  its  circle  round 
the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  as  corresponds  to  nineteen  years,  — 
that  is  to  say,  over  an  angle  of  nineteen  times  50"#1  round 
the  centre  (which,  in  a  small  circle  of  23°  28'  in  diameter, 
corresponds  to  6'  20'',  as  seen  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere) : 
the  path  which  it  will  pursue  in  virtue  of  the  two  motions, 
subsisting  jointly,  will  be  neither  an  ellipse  nor  an  exact 
circle,  but  a  gently  undulated  ring  like  that  in  the  figure 
(where,  however,  the  undulations  are  much  exaggerated). 
(See  Jiff,  to  art.  325.) 

(323.)  These  movements  of  precession  and  nutation  are 
common  to  all  the  celestial  bodies,  both  fixed  and  erratic ; 
and  this  circumstance  makes  it  impossible  to  attribute  them 
to  any  other  cause  than  a  real  motion  of  the  earth's  axis 
such  as  we  have  described.  Did  they  only  affect  the  stars, 
they  might,  with  equal  plausibility,  be  urged  to  arise  from 
a  real  rotation  of  the  starry  heavens,  as  a  solid  shell,  round 


208  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

an  axis  passing  througli  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  in  25,868 
years,  and  a  real  elliptic  gyration  of  that  axis  in  nineteen 
years :  but  since  they  also  affect  the  sun,  moon,  and  pianets, 
which,  having  motions  independent  of  the  general  body  of 
the  stars,  cannot  without  extravagance  be  supposed  attached 
to  the  celestial  concave  *,  this  idea  falls  to  the  ground ;  and 
there  only  remains,  then,  a  real  motion  in  the  earth  by  which 
they  can  be  accounted  for.  It  will  be  shown  in  a  subsequent 
chapter  that  they  are  necessary  consequences  of  the  rotation 
of  the  earth,  combined  with  its  elliptical  figure,  and  the 
unequal  attraction  of  the  sun  and  moon  on  its  polar  and 
equatorial  regions. 

(324.)  Uranographically  considered,  as  affecting  the  ap- 
parent places  of  the  stars,  they  are  of  the  utmost  importance 
in  practical  astronomy.  When  we  speak  of  the  right  as- 
cension and  declination  of  a  celestial  object,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  state  what  epoch  we  intend,  and  whether  we 
mean  the  mean  right  ascension  —  cleared,  that  is,  of  the 
periodical  fluctuation  in  its  amount,  which  arises  from  nutation, 
or  the  apparent  right  ascension,  which,  being  reckoned  from 
the  actual  place  of  the  vernal  equinox,  is  affected  by  the 
periodical  advance  and  recess  of  the  equinoctial  point  pro- 
duced by  nutation — and  so  of  the  other  elements.  It  is 
the  practice  of  astronomers  to  reduce,  as  it  is  termed,  all 
their  observations,  both  of  right  ascension  and  declination,  to 
some  common  and  convenient  epoch — such  as  the  beginning 
of  the  year  for  temporary  purposes,  or  of  the  decade,  or  the 
century  for  more  permanent  uses,  by  subtracting  from  them 
the  whole  effect  of  precession  in  the  interval ;  and,  moreover, 
to  divest  them  of  the  influence  of  nutation  by  investigating 
and  subducting  the  amount  of  change,  both  in  right  ascension 
and  declination,  due  to  the  displacement  of  the  pole  from 
the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  little  ellipse  above 
mentioned.    This  last  process  is  technically  termed  correcting 

*  This  argument,  cogent  as  it  is,  acquires  additional  and  decisive  force  from 
the  law  of  nutation,  which  is  dependent  on  the  position,  for  the  time,  of  the 
lunar  orbit.  If  we  attribute  it  to  a  real  motion  of  the  celestial  sphere,  we  must 
then  maintain  that  sphere  to  be  kept  in  a  constant  state  of  tremor  by  the  motion 
of  the  moon  1 


CORRECTIONS    FOR    PRECESSION    AND   NUTATION.       209 


or  equating  the  observation  for  nutation;  by  which  latter 
word  is  always  understood,  in  astronomy,  the  getting  rid  of 
a  periodical  cause  of  fluctuation,  and  presenting  a  result,  not 
as  it  was  observed,  but  as  it  would  have  been  observed,  had 
that  cause  of  fluctuation  had  no  existence. 

(325.)  For  these  purposes,  in  the  present  case,  very  con- 
venient formula?  have  been  derived,  and  tables  constructed. 
They  are,  however,  of  too  technical  a  character  for  this 
work;  we  shall,  however,  point  out  the  manner  in  which 
the  investigation  is  conducted.  It  has  been  shown  in  art. 
309.  by  what  means  the  right  ascension  and  declination  of  an 
object  are  derived  from  its  longitude  and  latitude.  Referring 
to  the  figure  of  that  article,  and  supposing  the  triangle 
KPX  orthographically  projected  on  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic 
sis  in  the  annexed  figure :  in  the  triangle  KPX,  K P  is  the 
obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  KX  the  co-latitude  (or  complement 
of  latitude),  and  the  angle  PKX  the  co-longitude  of  the 
object  X.  These  are  the  data  of  our  question,  of  which  the 
second  is  constant,  and  the  other  two  are  varied  by  the  effect 
of  precession  and  nutation  :  and  their  variations  (considering 
the  minuteness  of  the  latter  effect  generally,  and  the  small 
number  of  years  in  comparison  of  the  whole  period  of  25,868, 
for  which  we  ever  require  to  estimate  the  effect  of  the 
former,)  are  of  that  order 
which  may  be  regarded  as 
infinitesimal  in  geometry, 
and  treated  as  such  without 
fear  of  error.  The  whole 
question,  then,  is  reduced 
to  this :  —  In  a  spherical 
triangle  KPX,  in  which 
one  side  KX  is  constant, 
and  an  angle  K,  and  ad- 
jacent side  KP  vary  by 
given  infinitesimal  changes 
of  the  position  of  P :  re- 
quired the  changes  thence  arising  in  the  other  side  P  X,  and 
the  angle  KPX.     This  is  a  very  simple  and  easy  problem  of 


210  OUTLINES   CF    ASTHONOMV. 

spherical  geometry,  and  being  resolved,  it  gives  at  once  the 
reductions  we  are  seeking;  for  PX  being  the  polar  distance 
of  the  object,  and  the  angle  K  PX  its  right  ascension  plus 
90°,  their  variations  are  the  very  quantities  we  seek.  It  only 
remains,  then,  to  express  in  proper  form  the  amount  of  the 
precession  and  nutation  in  longitude  and  latitude,  when  their 
amount  in  right  ascension  and  declination  will  immediately 
be  obtained. 

(326.)  The  precession  in  latitude  is  zero,  since  the  latitudes 
of  objects  are  not  changed  by  it :  that  in  longitude  is  a  quan- 
tity proportional  to  the  time  at  the  rate  of  50" '10  per  annum. 
With  regard  to  the  nutation  in  longitude  and  latitude,  these 
are  no  other  than  the  abscissa  and  ordinate  of  the  little 
ellipse  in  which  the  pole  moves.  The  law  of  its  motion, 
however,  therein,  cannot  be  understood  till  the  reader  has 
been  made  acquainted  with  the  principal  features  of  the 
moon's  motion  on  which  it  depends. 

(327.)  Another  consequence  of  what  has  been  shown 
respecting  precession  and  nutation  is,  that  sidereal  time,  as 
astronomers  use  it,  i.  e.  as  reckoned  from  the  transit  of  the 
equinoctial  point,  is  not  a  mean  or  uniformly  flowing  quantity, 
being  affected  by  nutation ;  and,  moreover,  that  so  reckoned, 
even  when  cleared  of  the  periodical  fluctuation  of  nutation, 
it  does  not  strictly  correspond  to  the  earth's  diurnal  rotation. 
As  the  sun  loses  one  day  in  the  year  on  the  stars,  by  its 
direct  motion  in  longitude  ;  so  the  equinox  gains  one  day  in 
25,868  years  on  them  by  its  retrogradation.  We  ought, 
therefore,  as  carefully  to  distinguish  between  mean  and 
apparent  sidereal  as  between  mean  and  apparent  solar  time. 

(328.)  Neither  precession  nor  nutation  change  the  apparent 
places  of  celestial  objects  inter  se.  We  see  them,  so  far  as 
these  causes  go,  as  they  are,  though  from  a  station  more  or 
less  unstable,  as  we  see  distant  land  objects  correctly  formed, 
though  appearing  to  rise  and  fall  when  viewed  from  the 
heaving  deck  of  a  ship  in  the  act  of  pitching  and  rolling. 
But  there  is  an  optical  cause,  independent  of  refraction  or  of 
perspective,  which  displaces  them  one  among  the  other,  and 
causes  us  to  view  the  heavens  under  an  aspect  always  to  a 


ABKKUATION   OF    LIGHT. 


211 


certain  slight  extent  false;  and  whose  influence  must  be 
estimated  and  allowed  for  before  we  can  obtain  a  precise 
knowledge  of  the  place  of  any  object.  This  cause  is  what 
is  called  the  aberration  of  light;  a  singular  and  surprising 
effect  arising  from  this,  that  we  occupy  a  station  not  at  rest 
but  in  rapid  motion ;  and  that  the  apparent  directions  of  the 
rays  of  light  are  not  the  same  to  a  spectator  in  motion  as  to 
one  at  rest.  As  the  estimation  of  its  effect  belongs  to 
uranography,  we  must  explain  it  here,  though,  in  so  doing, 
we  must  anticipate  some  of  the  results  to  be  detailed  in 
subsequent  chapters. 

(329.)  Suppose  a  shower  of  rain  to  fall  perpendicularly  in  a 
dead  calm ;  a  person  exposed  to  the  shower,  who  should  stand 
quite  still  and  upright,  would  receive  the  drops  on  his  hat, 
which  would  thus  shelter  him,  but  if  he  ran  forward  in  any 
direction  they  would  strike  him  in  the  face.  The  effect 
would  be  the  same  as  if  he  remained  still,  and  a  wind  should 
arise  of  the  same  velocity,  and  drift  them  against  him. 
Suppose  a  ball  let  fall  from  a  point  A  above  a  horizontal  line 
E  F,  and  that  at  B  were  placed  to  receive  it  the  open  mouth 
of  an  inclined  hollow  tube  P  Q ;  if  the  tube  were  held  im- 


Qa. 


moveable  the  ball  would  strike  on  its  lower  side,  but  if  the 
tube  were  carried  forward  in  the  direction  E  F,  with  a 
velocity  properly  adjusted  at  every  instant  to  that  of  the  ball, 
while  pi  eserving  its  inclination  to  the  horizon,  so  that  when 
the  ball  in  its  natural  descent  reached  C,  the  tube  should 
have  been  carried  into  the  position  R  S,  it  is  evident  that  tha 

p  2 


212  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

ball  would,  throughout  its  whole  descent,  be  found  in  the 
axis  of  the  tube ;  and  a  spectator  referring  to  the  tube  the 
motion  of  the  ball,  and  carried  along  with  the  former,  uncon- 
scious of  its  motion,  would  fancy  that  the  ball  had  been 
moving  in  the  inclined  direction  R  S  of  the  tube's  axis. 

(330.)  Our  eyes  and  telescopes  are  such  tubes.  In  what- 
ever manner  we  consider  light,  whether  as  an  advancing 
wave  in  a  motionless  ether,  or  a  shower  of  atoms  traversing 
space,  (provided  that  in  both  cases  we  regard  it  as  absolutely 
incapable  of  suffering  resistance  or  corporeal  obstruction  from 
the  particles  of  transparent  media  traversed  by  it*,)  if  in  the 
interval  between  the  rays  traversing  the  object  glass  of  the 
one  or  the  cornea  of  the  other  (at  which  moment  they  acquire 
that  convergence  which  directs  them  to  a  certain  point  infixed 
space),  and  their  arrival  at  their  focus,  the  cross  wires  of  the 
one  or  the  retina  of  the  other  be  slipped  aside,  the  point  of 
convergence  (which  remains  unchanged)  will  no  longer  cor- 
respond to  the  intersection  of  the  wires  or  the  central  point 
of  our  visual  area.  The  object  then  will  appear  displaced ;  and 
the  amount  of  this  displacement  is  aberration. 

(331.)  The  earth  is  moving  through  space  with  a  velocity 
of  about  19  miles  per  second,  in  an  elliptic  path  round  the 
sun,  and  is  therefore  changing  the  direction  of  its  motion  at 
every  instant.  Light  travels  with  a  velocity  of  192,000 
miles  per  second,  which,  although  much  greater  than  that  of 
the  earth,  is  yet  not  infinitely  so.  Time  is  occupied  by  it  in 
traversing  any  space,  and  in  that  time  the  earth  describes  a 
space  which  is  to  the  former  as  19  to  192,000,  or  as  the 
tangent  of  20//-5  to  radius.  Suppose  now  A  P  S  to  represent 
a  ray  of  light  from  a  star  at  A,  and  let  the  tube  P  Q  be  that 
of  a  telescope  so  inclined  forward  that  the  focus  formed  by 

*  This  condition  is  indispensable.  Without  it  we  fall  into  all  those  diffi- 
culties which  M.  Doppler  has  so  well  pointed  out  in  his  paper  on  Aberration 
(Abhandlungen  der  k.  boemischen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften.  Folge  V. 
▼ol.  iii. ).  If  light  itself,  or  the  luminiferous  ether,  be  eorporeal,  the  condition 
insisted  on  amounts  to  a  formal  surrender  of  the  dogma,  either  of  the  extension 
or  of  the  impenetrability  of  matter ;  at  least  in  the  sense  in  which  tbore  terms 
have  been  hitherto  .used  by  metaphysician!.  At  the  point  to  which  science  is 
arrived,  probably  few  will  be  found  disposed  to  maintain  either  the  one  or  the 
other. 


ABERRATION   OF    LIGHT.  213 

its  object  glass  shall  be  received  upon  its  cross  wire,  it  is 
evident  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  inclination  of  the 
tube  must  be  such  as  to  make  PS:  S  Q : :  velocity  of  light : 
velocity  of  the  earth : :  1  :  tan.  20"*5  ;  and,  therefore,  the 
angle  S  P  Q,  or  PSR,  by  which  the  axis  of  the  telescope 
must  deviate  from  the  true  direction  of  the  star,  must  be 
20"-5. 

(332.)  A  similar  reasoning  will  hold  good  when  the  direc- 
tion of  the  earth's  motion  is  not  perpendicular  to  the  visual 
i-ay.  If  S  B  be  the  true  direction  of  the  visual  ray,  and  A  0 
the  position  in  which  the  telescope 
requires  to  be  held  in  the  apparent 
direction,  we  must  still  have  the  pro- 
portion B  C  :  B  A  : :  velocity  of 
light :  velocity  of  the  earth  : :  rad.  : 
sine  of  20"*5  (for  in  such  small  angles  d~ 
it  matters  not  whether  we  use  the 

sines  or  tangents).  But  we  have,  also,  by  trigonometry, 
BC  :  B  A: :  sine  of  B  A  C:  sine  of  A  C  B  or  C  B  P,  which  last 
is  the  apparent  displacement  caused  by  aberration.  Thus  it 
appears  that  the  sine  of  the  aberration,  or  (since  the  angle  is 
extremely  small)  the  aberration  itself,  is  proportional  to  the 
sine  of  the  angle  made  by  the  earth's  motion  in  space  with 
the  visual  ray,  and  is  therefore  a  maximum  when  the  line  of 
sight  is  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  earth's  motion. 

(333.)  The  uranographical  effect  of  aberration,  then,  is  to 
distort  the  aspect  of  the  heavens,  causing  all  the  stars  to 
crowd  as  it  were  directly  towards  that  point  in  the  heavens 
which  is  the  vanishing  point  of  all  lines  parallel  to  that  in 
which  the  earth  is  for  the  moment  moving.  As  the  earth 
moves  round  the  sun  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  this  point 
must  lie  in  that  plane,  90°  in  advance  of  the  earth's  longitude, 
or  90°  behind  the  sun's,  and  shifts  of  course  continually,  de- 
scribing the  circumference  of  the  ecliptic  in  a  year.  It  is  easy 
to  demonstrate  that  the  effect  on  each  particular  star  will  be 
to  make  it  apparently  describe  a  small  ellipse  in  the  heavens, 
having  for  its  centre  the  point  in  which  the  star  would  be 
seen  if  the  earth  were  at  rest. 


214  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

(334.)  Aberration  then  affects  the  apparent  right  ascen- 
sions and  declinations  of  all  the  stars,  and  that  by  quantities 
easily  calculable.  The  formulae  most  convenient  for  that 
purpose,  and  which,  systematically  embracing  at  the  same 
time  the  corrections  for  precession  and  nutation,  enable  the 
observer,  with  the  utmost  readiness,  to  disencumber  his 
observations  of  right  ascension  and  declination  of  their  in- 
fluence, have  been  constructed  by  Prof.  Bessel,  and  tabulated 
in  the  appendix  to  the  first  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the 
Astronomical  Society,  where  they  will  be  found  accompanied 
with  an  extensive  catalogue  of  the  places,  for  1830,  of  the 
principal  fixed  stars,  one  of  the  most  useful  and  best  arranged 
works  of  the  kind  which  has  ever  appeared. 

(335.)  When  the  body  from  which  the  visual  ray  emanates  is 
itself  in  motion,  an  effect  arises  which  is  not  properly  speaking 
aberration,  though  it  is  usually  treated  under  that  head 
in  astronomical  books,  and  indeed  confounded  with  it,  to  the 
production  of  some  confusion  in  the  mind  of  the  student. 
The  effect  in  question  (which  is  independent  of  any  theoretical 
views  respecting  the  nature  of  light*)  may  be  explained  as 
follows.  The  ray  by  which  we  see  any  object  is  not  that 
which  it  emits  at  the  moment  we  look  at  it,  but  that  which  it 
did  emit  some  time  before,  viz.  the  time  occupied  by  light  in 
traversing  the  interval  which  separates  it  from  us.  The 
aberration  of  such  a  body  then  arising  from  the  earth's 
velocity  must  be  applied  as  a  correction,  not  to  the  line  join- 
ing the  earth's  place  at  the  moment  of  observation  with  that 
occupied  by  the  body  at  the  same  moment,  but  at  that  ante- 
cedent instant  when  the  ray  quitted  it.  Hence  it  is  easy 
to  derive  the  rule  given  by  astronomical  writers  for  the  case 

*  The  results  of  the  undulatory  and  corpuscular  theories  of  light,  in  the 
matter  of  aberration  are,  in  the  main,  the  same.  We  say  in  the  main.  There 
is,  however,  a  minute  difference  even  of  numerical  results.  In  the  undulatory 
doctrine,  the  propagation  of  light  takes  place  with  equal  velocity  in  all  direc- 
tions, whether  the  luminary  he  at  rest  or  in  motion.  In  the  corpuscular,  with 
,m  excess  of  velocity  in  the  direction  of  the  motion  over  that  in  the  contrary 
equal  to  twice  the  velocity  of  the  body's  motion.  In  the  cases,  then,  of  a  body 
moving  with  equal  velocity  directly  to  and  directly  from  the  earth,  the  aberra- 
tions will  be  alike  on  the  undulatory,  but  different  on  the  corpuscular  hypothesis. 
The  utmost  difference  which  can  arise  from  this  caiiso  in  our  syttein  cannot 
amount  to  above  six  thousandths  of  a  second 


EQUATION   OF    LIGHT.  215 

of  a  moving  object.  From  the  known  laws  of  its  motion  and 
the  earth's,  calculate  its  apparent  or  relative  angular  motion  in 
the  time  taken  by  light  to  traverse  its  distance  from  the  earth. 
This  is  the  total  amount  of  its  apparent  misplacement.  Its 
effect  is  to  displace  the  body  observed  in  a  direction  contrary 
to  its  apparent  motion  in  the  heavens.  And  it  is  a  compound 
or  aggregate  effect  consisting  of  two  parts,  one  of  which  is 
the  aberration,  properly  so  called,  resulting  from  the  composi- 
tion of  the  earth's  motion  wTith  that  of  light,  the  other  being 
what  is  not  inaptly  termed  the  Equation  of  light,  being  the 
allowance  to  be  made  for  the  time  occupied  by  the  light  in 
traversing  a  variable  space. 

(336.)  The  complete  Reduction,  as  it  is  called,  of  an  astro- 
nomical observation  consists  in  applying  to  the  place  of  the 
observed  heavenly  body  as  read  off  on  the  instruments  (sup- 
posed perfect  and  in  perfect  adjustment)  five  distinct  and 
independent  corrections,  viz.  those  for  refraction,  parallax, 
aberration,  precession,  and  nutation.  Of  these  the  correc- 
tion for  refraction  enables  us  to  declare  what  would  have 
been  the  observed  place,  were  there  no  atmosphere  to 
displace  it.  That  for  parallax  enables  us  to  say  from  its 
place  observed  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  where  it  would 
have  been  seen  if  observed  from  the  centre.  That  for  aberra- 
tion, where  it  would  have  been  observed  from  a  motionless, 
instead  of  a  moving  station  :  while  the  corrections  for  pre- 
cession and  nutation  refer  it  to  fixed  and  determinate  instead 
of  constantly  varying  celestial  circles.  The  great  importance 
of  these  corrections,  which  pervade  all  astronomy,  and  have 
to  be  applied  to  every  observation  before  it  can  be  employed 
for  any  practical  or  theoretical  purpose,  renders  this  recapitu- 
lation far  from  superfluous. 

(337.)  Refraction  has  been  already  sufficiently  explained, 
Art.  40.  and  it  is  only,  therefore,  necessary  here  to  add  that 
in  its  use  as  an  astronomical  correction  its  amount  must  be 
applied  in  a  contrary  sense  to  that  in  which  it  affects  the 
observation ;  a  remark  equally  applicable  to  all  other  cor- 
rections. 

(338.)  The  general  nature  of  parallax  or  rather  of  paral- 


216 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


lactic  motion  has  also  been  explained  in  Art.  80.  But 
parallax  in  the  uranographical  sense  of  the  word  has  a  more 
technical  meaning.  It  is  understood  to  express  that  optical 
displacement  of  a  body  observed  which  is  due  to  its  being 
observed,  not  from  that  point  which  we  have  fixed  upon  as  a 
conventional  central  station  (from  which  we  conceive  the 
apparent  motion  would  be  more  simple  in  its  laws),  but  from 
some  other  station  remote  from  such  conventional  centre :  not 
from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  for  instance,  but  from  its  sur- 
face :  not  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  (which,  as  we  shall 
hereafter  see,  is  for  some  purposes  a  preferable  conventional 
station),  but  from  that  of  the  earth.  In  the  former  case 
this  optical  displacement  is  called  the  diurnal  or  geocentric 
parallax ;  in  the  latter  the  annual  or  heliocentric.  In  either 
case  parallax  is  the  correction  to  be  applied  to  the  apparent 
place  of  the  heavenly  body,  as  actually  seen  from  the  station 
of  observation,  to  reduce  it  to  its  place  as  it  would  have  been 
seen  at  that  instant  from  the  conventional  station. 

(339.)  The  diurnal  or  geocentric  parallax  at  any  place  of 
the  earth's  surface  is  easily  calculated  if  we  know  the  distance 
of  the  body,  and,  vice  versa,  if  we  know  the  diurnal  parallax 
that  distance  may  be  calculated.  For  supposing  S  the  object, 
C  the  centre  of  the  earth, 
A  the  station  of  observation 
at  its  surface,  and  C  A  Z 
the  direction  of  a  perpen- 
dicular to  the  surface  at  A, 
then  will  the  object  be  seen 
from  A  in  the  direction  A  S, 
and  its  apparent  zenith  dis- 
tance will  be  Z  A  S  ; 
whereas,  if  seen  from  the 
centre,  it  will  appear  in  the 
direction  C  S,  with  an  an- 
gular distance  from  the 
zenith  of  A  equal  to  Z  C  S ; 

bo  that    ZAS— ZCS  or    ASC    is   the   parallax, 
since    by    trigonometry  C  S  :   C  A  ::  sin    C  A 


Now 

S  = 


sin 


SUMMARY    OF    URANOGKAPIIICAL    CORRECTIONS.       217 

Z  A  S  :  sin  A  S  C,  it  follows  that  the  sine  of  the  parallax 
__  Radius  of  earth        •     7  a  c 
Distance  of  body 

(340.)  The  diurnal  or  geocentric  parallax,  therefore,  at  a 
given  place,  and  for  a  given  distance  of  the  body  observed, 
is  proportional  to  the  sine  of  its  apparent  zenith  distance,  and 
is,  therefore,  the  greatest  when  the  body  is  observed  in  the 
act  of  rising  or  setting,  in  which  case  its  parallax  is  called 
its  horizontal  parallax,  so  that  at  any  other  zenith  distance, 
parallax  =  horizontal  parallax  x  sine  of  apparent  zenith 
distance,  and  since  A  C  S  is  always  less  than  Z  A  S  it  appears 
that  the  application  of  the  reduction  or  correction  for  parallax 
always  acts  in  diminution  of  the  apparent  zenith  distance  or 
increase  of  the  apparent  altitude  or  distance  from  the  Nadir, 
1.  e.  in  a  contrary  sense  to  that  for  refraction. 

(341.)  In  precisely  the  same  manner  as  the  geocentric  or 
diurnal  parallax  refers  itself  to  the  zenith  of  the  observer 
for  its  direction  and  quantitative  rule,  so  the  heliocentric  or 
annual  parallax  refers  itself  for  its  law  to  the  point  in  the 
heavens  diametrically  opposite  to  the  place  of  the  sun  as  seen 
from  the  earth.  Applied  as  a  correction,  its  effect  takes  place  in 
a  plane  passing  through  the  sun,  the  earth,  and  the  observed 
l)ody.  Its  effect  is  always  to  decrease  its  observed  distance 
from  that  point  or  to  increase  its  angular  distance  from  the 
sun.  And  its  sine  is  given  by  the  relation,  Distance  of  the 
observed  body  from  the  sun  :  distance  of  the  earth  from  the 
sun : :  sine  of  apparent  angular  distance  of  the  body  from 
the  sun  (or  its  apparent  elongation) :  sine  of  heliocentric 
parallax.  * 

(342.)  On  a  summary  view  of  the  whole  of  the  urano- 
graphical  corrections,  they  divide  themselves  into  two  classes, 
those  which  do,  and  those  which  do  not,  alter  the  apparent 
configurations  of  the  heavenly  bodies  inter  sc.  The  former 
are  real,  the  latter  technical  corrections.  The  real  corrections 
are  refraction,  aberration   and  parallax.     The  technical  are 

•  This  account  of  the  law  of  heliocentric  parallax  is  in  anticipation  of  what 
follows  hi  a  subsequent  chapter,  and  will  be  better  understood  by  the  student 
when  somewhat  farther  advanced. 


218  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

precession  and  nutation,  unless,  indeed,  we  choose  to  consider 
parallax  as  a  technical  correction  introduced  with  a  view  to 
simplification  by  a  better  choice  of  our  point  of  sight. 

(343.)  The  corrections  of  the  first  of  these  classes  have 
one  peculiarity  in  respect  of  their  law,  common  to  them  all, 
which  the  student  of  practical  astronomy  will  do  well  to  fix 
in  his  memory.  They  all  refer  themselves  to  definite  apexes 
or  points  of  convergence  in  the  sphere.  Thus,  refraction  in  its 
apparent  effect  causes  all  celestial  objects  to  draw  together  or 
converge  towards  the  zenith  of  the  observer  :  geocentric  pa- 
rallax, towards  his  Nadir :  heliocentric,  towards  the  place  of 
the  sun  in  the  heavens :  aberration  towards  that  point  in  the 
celestial  sphere  which  is  the  vanishing  point  of  all  lines  pa- 
rallel to  the  direction  of  the  earth's  motion  at  the  moment,  or 
(as  will  be  hereafter  explained)  towards  a  point  in  the  great 
circle  called  the  ecliptic,  90°  behind  the  sun's  place  in  that 
circle.  When  applied  as  corrections  to  an  observation,  these 
directions  are  of  course  to  be  reversed. 

(344.)  In  the  quantitative  law,  too,  which  this  class  of  cor- 
rections follow,  a  like  agreement  takes  place,  at  least  as 
regards  the  geocentric  and  heliocentric  parallax  and  aberra- 
tion, in  all  three  of  which  the  amount  of  the  correction  (or 
more  strictly  its  sine)  increases  in  the  direct  proportion  of  the 
sine  of  the  apparent  distance  of  the  observed  body  from  the  apex 
appropriate  to  the  particular  correction  in  question.  In  the 
case  of  refraction  the  law  is  less  simple,  agreeing  more  nearly 
with  the  tangent  than  the  sine  of  that  distance,  but  agreeing 
with  the  others  in  placing  the  maximum  at  90°  from  its  apex. 

(345.)  As  respects  the  order  in  which  these  corrections  are 
tu  be  applied  to  any  observation,  it  is  as  follows:  1.  Refraction ; 
2.  Aberration ;  3.  Geocentric  Parallax ;  4.  Heliocentric  Pa- 
rallax ;  5.  Nutation  ;  6.  Precession.  Such,  at  least,  is  the 
order  in  theoretical  strictness.  But  as  the  amount  of  aberra- 
tion and  nutation  is  in  all  cases  a  very  minute  quantity,  it 
matters  not  in  what  order  they  are  applied  ;  so  that  for  prac- 
tical convenience  they  are  always  thrown  together  with  the 
precession,  and  applied  after  the  others. 


OF    THE    SUN'S    MOTION.  219 

CHAPTER   VI. 

OF  THE  SUN'S  MOTION  AND  PHYSICAL  CONSTITUTION. 

APPARENT     MOTION    OF    THE     SUN   NOT     UNIFORM. ITS   APPARENT 

DIAMETER  ALSO  VARIABLE. VARIATION  OF    ITS    DISTANCE    CON- 
CLUDED.  ITS  APPARENT  ORBIT  AN    ELLIPSE  ABOUT    THE  FOCUS. 

LAW   OF    THE    ANGULAR    VELOCITY. EQUABLE    DESCRIPTION 

OF  AREAS. PARALLAX   OF  THE   SUN. ITS  DISTANCE   AND  MAG 

NITUDE. COPERNICAN   EXPLANATION    OF    THE    SUN's  APPARENT 

MOTION. PARALLELISM  OF  THE  EARTH'S  AXIS. THE    SEASONS. 

—  HEAT  RECEIVED  FROM  THE  SUN  IN  DIFFERENT    PARTS   OF   THE 

ORBIT. EFFECT  OF  EXCENTRICITY  OF    THE   ORBIT  AND  POSITION 

OF  ITS  AXIS  ON  CLIMATE.  —  MEAN  AND  TRUE  LONGITUDES  OF  THE 

SUN. EQUATION    OF  THE    CENTRE.  —  SIDEREAL,    TROPICAL,    AND 

ANOMALISTIC    YEARS. PHYSICAL    CONSTITUTION   OF  THE  SUN. — 

ITS  SPOTS. FACULjE. — PROBABLE    NATURE  AND   CAUSE  OF    THE 

SPOTS. RECENT  DISCOVERIES  OF    MR.  DAWES. — OF  MR.  NASMYTH. 

ROTATION  OF   THE  SUN  ON  ITS  AXIS. — ITS  ATMOSPHERE. SUP- 
POSED CLOUDS. PERIODICAL  RECURRENCE  OF  A  MORE  AND    LESS 

SPOTTED  STATE  OF  ITS  SURFACE. TEMPERATURE  OF  ITS  SURFACE. 

ITS     EXPENDITURE     OF     HEAT. PROBABLE     CAUSE     OF    SOLAR 

RADLA.TION. 

(346.)  In  the  foregoing  chapters,  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
apparent  path  of  the  sun  is  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  which 
it  perforins  in  a  period  of  one  sidereal  year.  From  this  it 
follows,  that  the  line  joining  the  earth  and  sun  lies  constantly 
in  one  plane ;  and  that,  therefore,  whatever  be  the  real  motion 
from  which  this  apparent  motion  arises,  it  must  be  confined 
to  one  plane,  which  is  called  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

(347.)  We  have  already  seen  (art.  146.)  that  the  sun's 
motion  in  right  ascension  among  the  stars  is  not  uniform. 
This  is  partly  accounted  for  by  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic, 
in  consequence  of  which  equal  variations  in  longitude  do  not 
correspond  to  equal  changes  of  right  ascension.  But  if  we 
observe  the  place  of  the  sun  daily  throughout  the  year,  by 
the  transit  and  circle,  and  from  these  calculate  the  longitude 
for  each  day,  it  will  still  be  found  that,  even  in  its  own  proper 


220  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY". 

path,  its  apparent  angular  motion  is  far  from  uniform.  The 
change  of  longitude  in  twenty -four  mean  solar  hours  averages 
0°  59'  8"*33  ;  but  about  the  31st  of  December  it  amounts  to 
1°  1'  9"-9,  and  about  the  1st  of  July  is  only  0°  57'  11  "*5. 
Such  are  the  extreme  limits,  and  such  the  mean  value  of  the 
eun's  apparent  angular  velocity  in  its  annual  orbit. 

(348.)  This  variation  of  its  angular  velocity  is  accompanied 
with  a  corresponding  change  of  its  distance  from  us.  The 
change  of  distance  is  recognized  by  a  variation  observed  to 
take  place  in  its  apparent  diameter,  when  measured  at  differ- 
ent seasons  of  the  year,  with  an  instrument  adapted  for  that 
purpose,  called  the  heliometer*,  or,  by  calculating  from  the 
time  which  its  disc  takes  to  traverse  the  meridian  in  the 
transit  instrument.  The  greatest  apparent  diameter  corre- 
sponds to  the  1st  of  January,  or  to  the  greatest  angular 
velocity,  and  measures  32'  36 "'%  the  least  is  31'  32//,0  ;  and 
corresponds  to  the  1st  of  July ;  at  which  epochs,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  angular  motion  is  also  at  its  extreme  limit  either 
way.  Now,  as  we  cannot  suppose  the  sun  to  alter  its  real 
eize  periodically,  the  observed  change  of  its  apparent  size  can 
only  arise  from  an  actual  change  of  distance.  And  the 
sines  or  tangents  of  such  small  arcs  being  proportional  to 
the  arcs  themselves,  its  distances  from  us,  at  the  above-named 
epoch,  must  be  in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  apparent 
diameters.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  greatest,  the 
mean,  and  the  least  distances  of  the  sun  from  us  are  in  the 
respective  proportions  of  the  numbers  1*01679,  1  00000,  and 
0*98321;  and  that  its  apparent  angular  velocity  diminishes 
as  the  distance  increases,  and  vice  versa. 

(349.)  It  follows  from  this,  that  the  real  orbit  of  the  sun, 
as  referred  to  the  earth  supposed  at  rest,  is  not  a  circle  with 
the  earth  in  the  centre.  The  situation  of  the  earth  within  it 
is  excentric,  the  excentricity  amounting  to  0*01679  of  the 
mean  distance,  which  may  be  regarded  as  our  unit  of  measure 
in  this  inquiry.  But  besides  this,  the  form  of  the  orbit  ia 
not  circular,  but  elliptic.  If  from  any  point  (),  taken  to 
represent  the  earth,  we  draw  a  line,  O  A,  in  some  fixed 

*  'HAiuj  the  iun.  and  utrpeip  to  measure. 


FORM    OF    TIIE    SUN'S    APPARENT    ORBIT.  221 

direction,  from  which  we  then  set  off  a  series  of  angles, 
AOB,  A  O  C,  &c.  equal  to  the  observed  longitudes  of  the 
sun  throughout  the  year,  and  in 
these  respective  directions  mea- 
sure off  from  O  the  distances 
O  A,  O  B,  O  C,  &c.  representing 
the  distances  deduced  from  the 
observed  diameter,  and  then  con- 
nect all  the  extremities  A,  B,  C, 
&c.  of  these  lines  by  a  continuous  curve,  it  is  evident  this  will 
be  a  correct  representation  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  sun  about 
the  earth.  Now,  when  this  is  done,  a  deviation  from  the  cir- 
cular figure  in  the  resulting  curve  becomes  apparent ;  it  is  found 
to  be  evidently  longer  than  it  is  broad  —  that  is  to  say,  ellip- 
tic, and  the  point  O  to  occupy,  not  the  centre,  but  one  of  the 
foci  of  the  ellipse.  The  graphical  process  here  described  is 
sufficient  to  point  out  the  general  figure  of  the  curve  in  ques- 
tion ;  but  for  the  purposes  of  exact  verification,  it  is  necessary 
to  recur  to  the  properties  of  the  ellipse  *,  and  to  express  the 
distance  6T  any  one  of  its  points  in  terms  of  the  angular  situ- 
ation of  that  point  with  respect  to  the  longer  axis,  or  diameter 
of  the  ellipse.  This,  however,  is  readily  done ;  and  when  nu- 
merically calculated,  on  the  supposition  of  the  excentricity 
being  such  as  above  stated,  a  perfect  coincidence  is  found  to 
subsist  between  the  distances  thus  computed,  and  those  de- 
rived from  the  measurement  of  the  apparent  diameter. 

(350.)  The  mean  distance  of  the  earth  and  sun  being  taken 
for  unity,  the  extremes  are  1-01679  and  0-98321.  But  if  we 
compare,  in  like  manner,  the  mean  or  average  angular  velocity 
with  the  extremes,  greatest  and  least,  we  shall  find  these  to 
be  in  the  proportions  of  1-03386,  1-00000,  and  0-96670. 
The  variation  of  the  sun's  angular  velocity,  then,  is  much 
greater  in  proportion  than  that  of  its  distance  —  fully  twice 
as  great ;  and  if  we  examine  its  numerical  expressions  at  dif- 
ferent periods,  comparing  them  with  the  mean  value,  and  also 
with  the  corresponding  distances,  it  will  be  found,  that,  by 

•  See  Conic  Sections,  by  the  Rev,  H.  P.  Hamilton,  or  any  other  of  the  vtrj 

numerous  works  on  this  subject. 


222  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

whatever  fraction  of  its  mean  value  the  distance  exceeds  the 
mean,  the  angular  velocity  will  fall  short  of  its  mean  or  average 
quantity  by  very  nearly  twice  as  great  a  fraction  of  the  latter, 
and  vice  versa.  Hence  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  the  angular 
velocity  is  in  the  inverse  proportion,  not  of  the  distance  simply, 
but  of  its  square;  so  that,  to  compare  the  daily  motion  in 
longitude  of  the  sun,  at  one  point,  A,  of  its  path,  with  that 
at  B,  we  must  state  the  proportion  thus :  — 

O  B2  :  O  A2  ::  daily  motion  at  A  :  daily  motion  at  B. 
And  this  is  found  to  be  exactly  verified  in  every  part  of  the 
orbit. 

(.351.)  Hence  we  deduce  another  remarkable  conclusion  — 
viz.  that  if  the  sun  be  supposed  really  to  move  around  the 
circumference  of.  this  ellipse,  its  actual  speed  cannot  be  uni- 
form, but  must  be  greatest  at  its  least  distance  and  less  at  its 
greatest.  For,  were  ii  uniform,  the  apparent  angular  velocity 
would  be,  of  course,  inversely  proportional  to  the  distance ; 
simply  because  the  same  linear  change  of  place,  being  produced 
in  the  same  time  at  different  distances  from  the  eye,  must, 
by  the  laws  of  perspective,  correspond  to  apparent  angular 
displacements  inversely  as  those  distances.  Since,  then, 
observation  indicates  a  more  rapid  law  of  variation  in  the 
angular  velocities,  it  is  evident  that  mere  change  of  distance, 
unaccompanied  with  a  change  of  actual  speed,  is  insufficient 
to  account  for  it ;  and  that  the  increased  proximity  of  the  sun 
to  the  earth  must  be  accompanied  with  an  actual  increase  of 
its  real  velocity  of  motion  along  its  path. 

(352.)  This  elliptic  form  of  the  sun's  path,  the  excentric 
position  of  the  earth  within  it,  and  the  unequal  speed  with 
which  it  is  actually  traversed  by  the  sun  itself,  all  tend  to 
render  the  calculation  of  its  longitude  from  theory  (».  e.  from 
a  knowledge  of  the  causes  and  nature  of  its  motion)  difficult ; 
and  indeed  impossible,  so  long  as  the  law  of  its  actual  velocity 
continues  unknown.  This  law,  however,  is  not  immediately 
apparent.  It  does  not  come  forward,  as  it  were,  and  present 
itself  at  once,  like  the  elliptic  form  of  the  orbit,  by  a  direct 
comparison  of  angles  and  distances,  but  requires  an  attentive 
consideration  of  the  whole  series  of  observations  registered 


LAWS    OF    THE    SUN'S    APPARENT    MOTION.  223 

during  an  entire  period.  It  was  not,  therefore,  without  much 
painful  and  laborious  calculation,  that  it  was  discovered  by- 
Kepler  (who  was  also  the  first  to  ascertain  the  elliptic  form 
of  the  orbit),  and  announced  in  the  following  terms:  —  Let  a 
line  be  always  supposed  to  connect  the  sun,  supposed  in 
motion,  with  the  earth,  supposed  at  rest;  then,  as  the  sun 
moves  along  its  ellipse,  this  line  (which  is  called  in  astronomy 
the  radius  vector)  will  describe  or  sweep  over  that  portion  of 
the  whole  area  or  surface  of  the  ellipse  which  is  included 
between  its  consecutive  positions :  and  the  motion  of  the  suu 
will  be  such  that  equal  areas  are  thus  swept  over  by  the  re- 
volving radius  vector  in  equal  times,  in  whatever  part  of  the 
circumference  of  the  ellipse  the  sun  may  be  moving. 

(353.)  From  this  it  necessarily  follows,  that  in  unequal 
times,  the  areas  described  must  be  proportional  to  the  times. 
Thus,  in  the  figure  of  art.  349.  the  time  in  which  the  suu 
moves  from  A  to  B,  is  to  the  time  in  which  it  moves  from  C 
to  D,  as  the  area  of  the  elliptic  sector  A  O  B  is  to  the  area 
of  the  sector  DOC. 

(354.)  The  circumstances  of  the  sun's  apparent  annual 
motion  may,  therefore,  be  summed  up  as  follows :  —  It  is 
performed  in  an  orbit  lying  in  one  plane  passing  through  the 
earth's  centre,  called  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  whose  pro- 
jection on  the  heavens  is  the  great  circle  so  called.  In  this 
plane  its  motion  is  from  west  to  east,  or  to  a  spectator  look- 
ing down  on  the  plane  of  the  elliptic  from  the  northern  side, 
in  a  direction  the  reverse  of  that  of  the  hands  of  a  watch 
laid  face  uppermost.  In  this  plane,  however,  the  actual 
path  is  not  circular,  but  elliptical;  having  the  earth,  not  in 
its  center,  but  in  one  focus.  The  excentricity  of  this  ellipse 
is  0*01679,  in  parts  of  a  unit  equal  to  the  mean  distance,  or 
half  the  longer  diameter  of  the  ellipse ;  i.  e.  about  one  sixtieth 
part  of  that  semi-diameter ;  and  the  motion  of  the  sun  in  its 
circumference  is  so  regulated,  that  equal  areas  of  the  ellipse 
are  passed  over  by  the  radius  vector  in  equal  times. 

(355.)  What  we  have  here  stated  supposes  no  knowledge 
of  the  sun's  actual  distance  from  the  earth,  nor,  consequently, 
of  the  actual  dimensions  of  its  orbit,  nor  of  the  body  of  the 


224 


or T LINKS    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


sun  itself.  To  come  to  any  conclusions  on  these  points,  we 
must  first  consider  by  what  means  we  can  arrive  at  any 
knowledge  of  the  distance  of  an  object  to  which  we  have  no 
access.  Now,  it  is  obvious,  that  its  parallax  alone  can  afford 
us  any  information  on  this  subject.  Suppose  V  A  B  Q  to 
represent  the  earth,  C  its  centre,  and  S  the  sun,  and  A,  B 


two  situations  of  a  spectator,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same 
thing',  the  stations  of  two  spectators,  both  observing  the  sun 
S  at,  the  same  instant.  The  spectator  A  will  see  it  in  the 
direction  A  is  a,  and  will  refer  it  to  a  point  a  in  the  infinitely 
distant  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  while  the  spectator  B  will 
see  it  in  the  direction  B  S  b,  and  refer  it  to  b.  The  angle 
included  between  these  directions,  or  the  measure  of  the 
celestial  arc  a  b,  by  which  it  is  displaced,  is  equal  to  the  angle 
A  S  B  ;  and  if  this  tingle  be  known,  and  the  local  situations 
of  A  and  B,  with  the  part  of  the  earth's  surface  A  B  included 
between  them,  it  is  evident  that  the  distance  C  S  may  be 
calculated.  Xow,  since  A  S  C  (art.  331;  )  is  the  parallax  of 
the  sun  as  seen  from  A,  and  B  S  C  as  seen  from  B,  the  angle 
A  S  B,  or  the  total  apparent  displacement  is  the  sum  of  the 
two  parallaxes.  Suppose,  then,  two  observers  —  one  in  the 
northern,  the  other  in  the  southern  hemisphere  —  at  stations 
on  the  same  meridian,  to  observe  on  the  same  day  the  meridian 
altitudes  of  the  sun's  centre.  Having  thence  derived  the 
apparent  zenith  distances,  and  cleared  them  of  the  effects  of 
refraction,  if  the  distance  of  the  sun  were  equal  to  that  of  the 
fixed  stars,  the  sum  of  the  zenith  distances  thus  found  would 
be  precisely  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  latitudes  north  and  south 
of  the  places  of  observation.  For  the  sum  in  question  would 
then  be  equal  to  the  angle  Z  C  X,  which  is  the  meridional 
distance  of  the  stations  across  the  equator.  But  the  effect 
of  parallax  being  in  both  cases  to  increase  the  apparent  zenith 


DISTANCE    OF    THE    SUN.  225 

distances,  their  observed  sum  will  be  greater  than  the  sum 
of  the  latitudes,  by  the  sum  of  the  two  parallaxes,  or  by  the 
angle  A  S  B.  This  angle,  then,  is  obtained  by  subducting 
the  sum  of  the  north  and  south  latitudes  from  that  of  the 
zenith  distances;  and  this  once  determined,  the  horizontal 
parallax  is  easily  found,  by  dividing  the  angle  so  determined 
by  the  sum  of  the  sines  of  the  two  latitudes. 

(356.)  If  the  two  stations  be  not  exactly  on  the  same 
meridian  (a  condition  very  difficult  to  fulfil),  the  same  process 
will  apply,  if  we  take  care  to  allow  for  the  change  of  the  sun'a 
actual  zenith  distance  in  the  interval  of  time  elapsing  between 
its  arrival  on  the  meridians  of  the  stations.  This  change  is 
readily  ascertained,  either  from  tables  of  the  sun's  motion, 
grounded  on  the  experience  of  a  long  course  of  observations, 
or  by  actual  observation  of  its  meridional  altitude  on  several 
days  before  and  after  that  on  which  the  observations  for 
parallax  are  taken.  Of  course,  the  nearer  the  stations  are  to 
each  other  in  longitude,  the  less  is  this  interval  of  time,  and, 
consequently,  the  smaller  the  amount  of  this  correction ;  and, 
therefore,  the  less  injurious  to  the  accuracy  of  the  final  result 
is  any  uncertainty  in  the  daily  change  of  zenith  distance 
which  may  arise  from  imperfection  in  the  solar  tables,  or  in 
the  observations  made  to  determine  it. 

(357.)  The  horizontal  parallax  of  the  sun  has  been  con- 
cluded from  observations  of  the  nature  above  described,  per- 
formed in  stations  the  most  remote  from  each  other  in  latitude, 
at  which  observatories  have  been  instituted.  It  has  also  been 
deduced  from  other  methods  of  a  more  refined  nature,  and 
susceptible  of  much  greater  exactness,  to  be  hereafter  de- 
scribed. Its  amount  so  obtained,  is  about  8"'6.  Minute  as 
this  quantity  is,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  a  tolerably 
correct  approximation  to  the  truth;  and  in  conformity  with  it, 
we  must  admit  the  sun  to  be  situated  at  a  mean  distance 
from  us,  of  no  less  than  23984  times  the  length  of  the 
earth's  radius,  or  about  95000000  miles.     [See  Note  F.] 

(358.)  That  at  so  vast  a  distance  the  sun  should  appear  to 
lie  of  the  size  it  does,  and  should  so  powerfully  influence  our 
condition  by  its  heat  and  light,  requires  us  to  form  a  very 

Q 


226  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

grand  conception  of  its  actual  magnitude,  and  of  the  scale  on 
which  those  important  processes  are  carried  on  within  it,  by 
which  it  is  enabled  to  keep  up  its  liberal  and  unceasing  supply 
of  these  elements.  As  to  its  actual  magnitude  we  can  be  at 
no  loss,  knowing  its  distance,  and  the  angles  under  which  its 
diameter  appears  to  us.  An  object,  placed  at  the  distance  of 
95000000  miles,  and  subtending  an  angle  of  32'  1",  must  have 
a  real  diameter  of  882000  miles.  Such,  then,  is  the  diameter  of 
this  stupendous  globe.  If  we  compare  it  with  what  we  have 
already  ascertained  of  the  dimensions  of  our  own,  we  shall 
find  that  in  linear  magnitude  it  exceeds  the  earth  in  the  pro- 
portion 111£  to  1,  and  in  bulk  in  that  of  1384472  to  1. 

(359.)  It  is  hardly  possible  to  avoid  associating  our  con- 
ception of  an  object  of  definite  globular  figure,  and  of  such 
enormous  dimensions,  with  some  corresponding  attribute  of 
massiveness  and  material  solidity.  That  the  sun  is  not  a 
mere  phantom,  but  a  body  having  its  own  peculiar  structure 
and  economy,  our  telescopes  distinctly  inform  us.  They  show 
us  dark  spots  on  its  surface,  which  slowly  change  their  places 
and  forms,  and  by  attending  to  whose  situation,  at  different 
times,  astronomers  have  ascertained  that  the  sun  revolves 
about  an  axis  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  performing  one  rotation  in  a  period  of  about  25  days, 
and  in  the  same  direction  with  the  diurnal  rotation  of 
the  earth,  i.  e.  from  west  to  east.  Here,  then,  we  have  an 
analogy  with  our  own  globe;  the  slower  and  more  majestic 
movement  only  corresponding  with  the  greater  dimensions  of 
the  machinery,  and  impressing  us  with  the  prevalence  of 
similar  mechanical  laws,  and  of,  at  least,  such  a  community 
of  nature  as  the  existence  of  inertia  and  obedience  to  force 
may  argue.  Now,  in  the  exact  proportion  in  which  we  invest 
our  idea  of  this  immense  bulk  with  the  attribute  of  inertia,  or 
weight,  it  becomes  difficult  to  conceive  its  circulation  round 
so  comparatively  small  a  body  as  the  earth,  without,  on  the 
one  hand,  dragging  it  along,  and  displacing  it,  if  bound  to  it 
by  seme  invisible  tie ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  not  so  held  to 
it,  pursuing  its  course  alone  in  space,  and  leaving  the  earth 
behind.  If  we  connect  two  solid  masses  by  a  rod,  and  fling 
them  aloft,  we  sec  them  circulate  about  a  point  between  them, 


THE    KAttTIl'S    ANNUAL    MOTION.  227 

which  is  their  common  centre  of  gravity  ;  but  if  one  of  them 
be  greatly  more  ponderous  than  the  other,  this  common  centre 
will  be  proportionally  nearer  to  that  one,  and  even  within  its 
surface ;  so  that  the  smaller  one  will  circulate,  in  fact,  about 
the  larger,  which  will  be  comparatively  but  little  disturbed 
from  its  place. 

(360.)  Whether  the  earth  move  round  the  sun,  the  sur 
round  the  earth,  or  boih  round  their  common  centre  of 
gravity,  will  make  no  difference,  so  far  as  appearances  are 
concerned,  provided  the  stars  be  supposed  sufficiently  distant 
to  undergo  no  sensible  apparent  parallactic  displacement  by 
the  motion  so  attributed  to  the  earth.  Whether  they  are  so 
or  not  must  still  be  a  matter  of  enquiry ;  and  from  the  absence 
of  any  measureable  amount  of  such  displacement,  we  can  con- 
clude nothing  but  this,  that  the  scale  of  the  sidereal  universe 
is  so  great,  that  the  mutual  orbit  of  the  earth  and  sun  may 
be  regarded  as  an  imperceptible  point  in  comparison  with  the 
distance  of  its  nearest  members.  Admitting,  then,  in  con- 
formity with  the  laws  of  dynamics,  that  two  bodies  connected 
with  and  revolving  about  each  other  in  free  space  do,  in  fact, 
revolve  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  which  remains 
immoveable  by  their  mutual  action,  it  becomes  a  matter  of 
further  enquiry,  whereabouts  between  them  this  centre  is 
situated.  Mechanics  teach  us  that  its  place  will  divide  their 
mutual  distance  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their  weights  or 
masses* ;  and  calculations  grounded  on  phenomena,  of  which 
an  account  will  be  given  further  on,  inform  us  that  this  ratio, 
in  the  case  of  the  sun  and  earth,  is  actually  that  of  354936 
to  1,  —  the  sun  being,  in  that  proportion,  more  ponderous 
than  the  earth.  From  this  it  will  follow  that  the  common 
point  about  which  they  both  circulate  is  only  267  miles  from 
the  sun's  centre,  or  about  j^ocrth  part  of  its  own  diameter. 

(361.)  Henceforward,  then,  in  conformity  with  the  above 
statements,  and  with  the  Copernican  view  of  our  system,  we 
must  learn  to  look  upon  the  sun  as  the  comparatively  motion- 
less centre  about  which  the  earth  performs  an  annual  elliptic 
orbit  of  the  dimensions  and  excentricity,  and  with  a  velocity, 

*   Principia,  lib.  i.  iez.  iii.  cor.  14. 
Q  2 


228 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


regulated  according  to  the  law  above  assigned ;  the  sun 
occupying  one  of  the  foci  of  the  ellipse,  and  from  that  station 
quietly  disseminating  on  all  sides  its  light  and  heat ;  while 
the  earth  travelling  round  it,  and  presenting  itself  differently 
to  it  at  different  times  of  the  year  and  day,  passes  through 
the  varieties  of  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  which  we 
enjoy ;  its  motion  (art.  354.)  being  from  west  to  east. 

(362.)  In  this  annual  motion  of  the  earth,  its  axis  pre- 
serves, at  all  times,  the  same  direction  as  if  the  orbitual 
movement  had  no  existence ;  and  is  carried  round  parallel  to 
itself,  and  pointing  always  to  the  same  vanishing  point  in 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  This  it  is  which  gives  rise  to 
the  variety  of  seasons,  as  we  shall  now  explain.  In  so  doing, 
we  shall  neglect  (for  a  reason  which  will  be  presently  ex- 
plained) the  ellipticity  of  the  orbit,  and  suppose  it  a  circle, 
with  the  sun  in  the  center  and  the  four  quadrants  of  its  orbit 
to  be  described  in  equal  times,  the  motion  in  a  circle  being 
uniform. 


p^k 


(363.)  Let,  then,  S  represent  the  sun,  and  A,  B,  C,  D, 
four  positions  of  the  earth  in  its  orbit  90°  apart,  viz.  A  that 
which  it  has  at  the  moment  when  the  sun  is  opposite  to  the 
intersection  of  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  B  G,  with  that  of 
the  equator  FE;B  that  which  it  has  a  quarter  of  a  year 
subsequently  or  90°  of  longitude  in  advance  of  A  ;  C,  180° 
and  D,  270°  in  advance  of  A.  In  each  of  these  positions 
let  P  Q  represent  the  axis  of  the  earth,  about  which  its 


OF    THE    SEASONS.  229 

diurnal  rotation  is  performed  without  interfering  with  its 
annual  motion  in  its  orbit.  Then,  since  the  sun  can  only 
enlighten  one  half  of  the  surface  at  once,  viz.  that  turned 
towards  it,  the  shaded  portions  of  the  globe  in  its  several 
positions  will  represent  the  dark,  and  the  bright,  the  en- 
lightened halves  of  the  earth's  surface  in  these  positions. 
Now,  1st,  in  the  position  A,  the  sun  is  vertically  over  the 
intersection  of  the  equinoctial  F  E  and  the  ecliptic  II  G.  It 
is,  therefore,  in  the  vernal  equinox ;  and  in  this  position  the 
poles  P,  Q,  both  fall  on  the  extreme  confines  of  the  en- 
lightened side.  In  this  position,  therefore,  it  is  day  over 
half  the  northern  and  half  the  southern  hemisphere  at  once ; 
and  as  the  earth  revolves  on  its  axis,  every  point  of  its  sur- 
face describes  half  its  diurnal  course  in  light,  and  half  in 
darkness ;  in  other  words,  the  duration  of  day  and  night  is 
here  equal  over  the  whole  globe :  hence  the  term  equinox. 
The  same  holds  good  at  the  autumnal  equinox  on  the  posi- 
tion C. 

(364  )  B  is  the  position  of  the  earth  at  the  time  of  the 
northern  summer  solstice.  (See  art.  389.)  Here  the  north 
pole  P,  and  a  considerable  portion  of  the  earth's  surface  in 
its  neighbourhood,  as  far  as  B,  are  situated  within  the  en- 
lightened half.  As  the  earth  turns  on  its  axis  in  this  position, 
therefore,  the  whole  of  that  part  remains  constantly  en- 
lightened ;  therefore,  at  this  point  of  its  orbit,  or  at  this 
season  of  the  year,  it  is  continual  day  at  the  north  pole,  and 
in  all  that  region  of  the  earth  which  encircles  this  pole  as  far 
as  B  —  that  is,  to  the  distance  of  23°  27'  W  from  the  pole, 
or  within  what  is  called  in  geography  the  arctic  circle.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  opposite  or  south  pole  Q,  with  all  the 
region  comprised  within  the  antarctic  circle,  as  far  as  23°  27' 
30"  from  the  south  pole,  are  immersed  at  this  season  in  dark- 
ness during  the  entire  diurnal  rotation,  so  that  it  is  here  con- 
tinual night. 

(365.)  With  regard  to  that  portion  of  the  surface  compre- 
hended between  the  arctic  and  antarctic  circles,  it  is  no  less 
evident  that  the  nearer  any  point  is  to  the  north  pole,  the 


230  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

larger  will  be  the  portion  of  its  diurnal  course  comprised 
within  the  bright,  and  the  smaller  within  the  dark  hemi- 
sphere ;  that  is  to  say,  the  longer  will  be  its  day,  and  the 
shorter  its  night.  Every  station  north  of  the  equator  will 
have  a  day  of  more  and  a  night  of  less  than  twelve  hours' 
duration,  and  vice  versa.  All  these  phenomena  are  exactly 
inverted  when  the  earth  comes  to  the  opposite  point  D  of  its 
orbit. 

(366.)  Now,  the  temperature  of  any  part  of  the  earth's 
surface  depends  mainly  on  its  exposure  to  the  sun's  rays. 
Whenever  the  sun  is  above  the  horizon  of  any  place,  that 
place  is  receiving  heat ;  when  below,  parting  with  it,  by  the 
process  called  radiation;  and  the  whole  quantities  received  and 
parted  with  in  the  year  (secondary  causes  apart)  must  balance 
each  other  at  every  station,  or  the  equilibrium  of  temperature 
(that  is  to  say,  the  constancy  which  is  observed  to  prevail  in 
the  annual  averages  of  temperature  as  indicated  by  the 
thermometer)  would  not  be  supported.  Whenever,  then, 
the  sun  remains  more  than  twelve  hours  above  the  horizon  of 
any  place,  and  less  beneath,  the  general  temperature  of  that 
place  will  be  above  the  average ;  when  the  reverse,  below. 
As  the  earth,  then,  moves  from  A  to  B,  the  days  growing 
longer,  and  the  nights  shorter  in  the  northern  hemisphere, 
the  temperature  of  every  part  of  that  hemisphere  increases, 
and  we  pass  from  spring  to  summer:  while,  at  the  same 
time,  the  reverse  obtains  in  the  southern  hemisphere.  As  the 
earth  passes  from  B  to  C,  the  days  and  nights  again  approach 
to  equality  —  the  excess  of  temperature  in  the  northern 
hemisphere  above  the  mean  state  grows  less,  as  well  as  its 
defect  in  the  southern ;  and  at  the  autumnal  equinox  C,  the 
mean  state  is  once  more  attained.  From  thence  to  D,  and, 
finally,  round  again  to  A,  all  the  same  phenomena,  it  is 
obvious,  must  again  occur,  but  reversed,  —  it  being  now 
winter  in  the  northern  and  summer  in  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere. 

(367.)  All  this  is  consonant  to  observed  fact.  The  con- 
tinual day  within  the  polar  circles  in  summer,  and  night  in 
winter,  the  general  increase  of  temperature  and   length  of 


OP   THE    SEASONS.  231 

day  as  the  sun  approaches  the  elevated  pole,  and  the  reversal 
of  the  seasons  in  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres,  are 
all  facts  too  well  known  to  require  further  comment.  The 
positions  A,  C  of  the  earth  correspond,  as  we  have  said,  to 
the  equinoxes ;  those  at  B,  D  to  the  solstices.  This  term 
must  be  explained.  If,  at  any  point,  X,  of  the  orbit,  we 
draw  X  P  the  earth's  axis,  and  X  S  to  the  sun,  it  is  evident 
that  the  angle  P  X  S  will  be  the  sun's  polar  distance.  Now, 
this  angle  is  at  its  maximum  in  the  position  D,  and  at  its  mi- 
nimum at  B:  being  in  the  former  case  =  90°  +  23c  28'=  113° 
28',  and  in  the  latter  90° -23°  28' =  66°  32'.  At  these 
points  the  sun  ceases  to  approach  to  or  to  recede  from  the 
pole,  and  hence  the  name  solstice. 

(368  a.)  Let  us  next  consider  how  these  phaenomena  are 
modified  by  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth's  orbit  and  the  posi- 
tion of  its  longer  axis  with  respect  to  the  line  of  the  solstices. 
This  ellipticity  (art.  350.)  is  about  one  sixtieth  of  the  mean 
distance,  so  that  the  sun,  at  its  greatest  proximity  is  about 
one  thirtieth  of  its  mean  distance  nearer  us  than  when  most 
remote.  Since  light  and  heat  are  equally  dispersed  from  the 
sun  in  all  directions,  and  are  spread,  in  diverging,  over  the 
surface  of  a  sphere  enlarging  as  they  recede  from  the  center, 
they  must  diminish  in  intensity  according  to  the  inverse  pro- 
portion of  the  surfaces  over  which  they  are  spread,  i.  e.  in 
the  inverse  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  distances.  Hence  the 
hemisphere  opposed  to  the  sun  will  receive  in  a  given  time, 
when  nearest,  two  thirtieths  or  one  fifteenth  more  heat  and 
light  than  when  most  remote,  as  may  be  shown  by  an  easy 
calculation.*  Now,  the  sun's  longitude  when  at  its  least  dis- 
tance from  the  earth  (at  which  time  it  is  said  to  be  in  perigee 
and  the  earth  in  its  perihelion  f)  is  at  present  280°  28'  in 
which  position  it  is  on  the  1st  of  January,  or  eleven  days 
after  the  time  of  the  winter  solstice  of  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere ;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  summer  solstice  of 
the  southern  (art.  364.),  while  on  the  other  hand  the  sun  in 
most  remote  (in  apogee  or  the  earth  in  its  aphelion  %),  when 

'  (!i)*  =  (^)2  very  nearly,  =  (iij)1  =  ggj  =  g«  very  nearly.  =  ft 

\  vtpi,  about  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of;  777,  the  earth  ;  ^Aicr,  the  eun. 

i  ar6,  away  from. 


232  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

in  longitude  100°  28'  or  on  the  2nd  of  July,  i.e.  eleven 
days  after  the  epoch  of  the  northern  summer  or  southern 
winter  solstice.  We  shall  suppose,  however,  for  simplicity  of 
explanation,  the  perigee  and  apogee  to  be  coincident  with 
the  solstice.  At  and  about  the  southern  summer  solstice 
then,  the  whole  earth  is  receiving  per  diem  the  greatest 
amount  of  heat  that  it  can  receive,  and  of  this  the  southern 
hemisphere  receives  the  larger  share,  because  its  pole  and  the 
whole  region  within  the  antarctic  circle  is  in  perpetual  sun- 
shine, while  the  corresponding  northern  regions  lie  in  shadow. 
On  the  other  hand,  at  and  about  the  northern  summer  solstice, 
although  it  is  true  that  the  reverse  conditions  as  to  the 
regions  illuminated  prevail,  yet  the  whole  earth  is  then  re- 
ceiving per  diem  less  heat  owing  to  the  sun's  remoteness :  so 
that  on  the  whole  if  the  seasons  were  of  equal  duration,  or  in 
other  words,  if  the  angular  movement  of  the  earth  in  its 
elliptic  orbit  were  uniform,  the  southern  hemisphere  would 
receive  more  heat  per  annum  than  the  northern,  and  would 
consequently  have  a  warmer  mean  temperature. 

(368 b.)  Such,  however,  is  not  the  case.  The  angular  ve- 
locity of  the  earth  in  its  orbit,  as  we  have  seen  (art.  350.),  is 
not  uniform,  but  varies  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of 
the  sun's  distance,  that  is,  in  the  same  precise  ratio  as  his 
heating  power.  The  momentary  supply  of  heat  then  re- 
ceived by  the  earth  in  every  point  of  its  orbit  varies  exactly 
as  the  momentary  increase  of  its  longitude,  from  which  it 
obviously  follows,  that  equal  amounts  of  heat  are  received 
from  the  sun  in  passing  over  equal  angles  round  it,  in  what- 
ever part  of  the  ellipse  those  angles  may  be  situated.  Sup- 
posing the  orbit,  then,  to  be  divided  into  two  segments  by  any 
straight  line  drawn  through  the  sun,  since  equal  angles  in  lon« 
gitude  (180°)  are  described  on  either  side  of  this  line,  the 
amount  of  heat  received  will  be  equal.  In  passing  then  from 
either  equinox  to  the  other,  the  whole  earth  receives  equal 
amount  of  heat,  the  inequality  in  the  intensities  of  solar  ra- 
diation in  the  two  intervals  being  precisely  compensated  by 
the  opposite  inequality  in  the  duration  of  the  intervals  them- 


OF    THE    SEASONS.  233 

selves;  which  amounts  to  about  7£  days,  by  which  the 
northern  spring  and  summer  are  together  longer  than  the 
southern.  For  these  intervals  are  to  each  other  in  the  pro- 
portion of  the  two  unequal  segments  of  the  whole  ellipse  into 
which  the  line  of  the  equinoxes  divides  it.  (See  art.  353.) 

(368  c.)  In  what  regards  the  comfort  of  a  climate  and  the 
character  of  its  vegetation,  the  intensity  of  a  summer  is 
more  naturally  estimated  by  the  temperature  of  its  hottest 
day,  and  that  of  a  winter  by  its  sharpest  frosts,  than  by  the 
mere  durations  of  those  seasons  and  their  total  amount  of  heat. 
Supposing  the  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  were  very 
much  greater  than  it  actually  is ;  the  position  of  its  perihe- 
lion remaining  the  same ;  it  is  evident  that  the  characters  of 
the  seasons  in  the  two  hemispheres  would  be  strongly  con- 
trasted. In  the  northern,  we  should  have  a  short  but  very 
mild  winter  with  a  long  but  very  cool  summer  —  i.  e.  an  ap- 
proach to  perpetual  spring ;  while  the  southern  hemisphere 
would  be  inconvenienced  and  might  be  rendered  uninhabitable 
by  the  fierce  extremes  caused  by  concentrating  half  the  annual 
supply  of  heat  into  a  summer  of  very  short  duration  and 
spreading  the  other  half  over  a  long  and  dreary  winter, 
sharpened  to  an  intolerable  intensity  of  frost  when  at  its  cli- 
max by  the  much  greater  remoteness  of  the  sun. 

(369.)  As  it  is,  the  difference,  except  under  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances, is  not  very  striking,  being  masked  to  a  certain 
extent  by  the  action  of  another  very  influential  cause  to  be 
explained  in  (art.  370.).  This  does  not  prevent,  however, 
the  direct  impression  of  the  solar  heat  in  the  height  of  sum- 
mer, —  the  glow  and  ardour  of  his  rays,  under  a  perfectly 
clear  sky,  at  noon,  in  equal  latitudes  and  under  equal  circum- 
stances of  exposure,  —  from  being  materially  greater  in  the 
southern  hemisphere  than  in  the  northern.  One  fifteenth  is 
too  considerable  a  fraction  of  the  whole  intensity  of  sunshine 
not  to  aggravate  in  a  serious  degree  the  sufferings  of  those 
for  instance  who  are  exposed  to  it  in  thirsty  deserts,  without 
shelter.  The  accounts  of  these  sufferings  in  the  interior  of 
Australia  are  of  the  most  frightful  kind,  and  would  seem  far 


234  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

to  exceed  what  have  ever  been  undergone  by  travellers  in 
the  northern  deserts  of  Africa.* 

(369  a.)  It  must  be  observed  moreover,  that  in  estimating 
the  effect  of  any  additional  fraction  (as  one  fifteenth)  of  solar 
radiation  on  temperature,  we  have  to  consider  as  our  unit, 
not  the  number  of  degrees  above  a  purely  arbitrary  zero 
point  (such  as  the  freezing  point  of  water  or  the  zero  of 
Fahrenheit's  scale)  at  which  a  thermometer  stands  in  a  hot 
summer  day,  as  compared  with  a  cold  winter  one,  but  the 
thermometric  interval  between  the  temperatures  it  indicates 
in  the  two  cases,  and  that  which  it  would  indicate  did  the 
sun  not  exist,  which  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  | 
would  be  at  least  as  low  as  239°  below  zero  of  Fahrenheit. 
And  as  a  temperature  Of  100°  Fahrenheit  above  zero  is  no 
uncommon  one  in  a  fair  shade  exposure  under  a  sun  nearly 
vertical,  we  have  to  take  one  fifteenth  of  the  sum  of  these 
intervals  (339°),  or  23°  Fahrenheit,  as  the  least  variation  of 
temperature  under  such  circumstances  which  can  reasonably 
be  attributed  to  the  actual  variation  of  the  sun's  distance. 

(369  b.)  In  what  has  been  premised  we  have  supposed  the 
situation  of  the  axis  of  the  earth's  orbit  to  coincide  with 
the  line  of  the  solstices,  neglecting  the  difference  of  about 
eleven  days'  motion  at  present  existing  between  them.  But 
this  near  coincidence  has  not  always  been  the  state  of  things, 
and  will  not  always  continue  to  be  so.  By  the  effect  of  pre- 
cession (art.  312.),  both  the  line  of  equinoxes  and  those  of 
solstices  retreat  on  the  ecliptic  by  an  annual  angular  move- 
ment of  50"'l,  which  cause  alone  would  carry  them  round, 
with  respect  to  the  axis  of  the  earth's  ellipse  through  a  com- 
plete revolution,  in  25868  years.  And  in  this  period,  sup- 
posing the  axis  to  retain  a  fixed  position,  the  perihelion  would 
come  to  coincide  successively  in  longitude  with  both  the  sol- 

*  See  the  account  of  Captain  Sturt's  exploration  in  Athena?um,  No.  1012. 
"  The  ground  was  almost  a  molten  surface,  and  if  a  match  accidentally  fell  upon 
it,  it  immediattly  ignited  "  The  author  has  observed  the  temperature  of  the 
surface  soil  in  South  Africa  as  high  as  159°  Fahrenheit.  An  ordinary  luci- 
fer  match  does  not  ignite  when  simply  pressed  upon  a  smooth  surface  at  21  2°, 
but  in  the  act  of  withdrawing  it,  it  takes  fire,  and  the  slightest  friction  upon  sucb 
a  surface  of  course  ignites  it. 

f  See  Meteoroi  ogv,  Encycl.  Brit,  (new  edition)  Art,  36. 


PERIODIC    VARIATION     OF    CLIMATES.  235 

eticcs  and  with  both  the  equinoxes.  But,  besides  this,  owing 
to  the  operation  of  causes  hereafter  to  be  explained,  the  axis 
does  not  remain  so  fixed,  but  shifts  its  position,  with  a  much 
slower  angular  movement,  of  1 l"-8  per  annum  in  the  opposite 
direction  to  that  in  which  precession  carries  the  line  of  equi- 
noxes, and  by  which  movement  alone,  if  uniformly  continued, 
the  direction  of  the  axis  itself  would  be  carried  entirely  round 
the  whole  circumference  of  the  ecliptic  in  an  immensely  long 
period  (no  less  than  109830  years).  Thus  then  we  see  that  the 
vernal  equinox  and  the  perihelion  recede  from  each  other  by 
the  joint  annual  amount  of  61"'9  or  a  degree  in  58*16  years, 
which  is,  in  effect,  the  same  as  if  the  perihelion  made  a  com- 
plete revolution  with  reference  to  a  fixed  equinox  in  20984 
years.  In  consequence  of  this  joint  variation  then,  the  place 
of  the  perihelion  must  have  coincided  with  the  vernal  equi- 
nox (or  have  been  situated  in  longitude  0°)  about  4000  years 
before  the  Christian  era,  and  in  longitude  £0°  about  a.d. 
1250,  and  will  be  situated  in  longitudes  180°  and  270°  respec- 
tively about  the  year  a.d.  6500  and  11700.  At  the  latter  of 
these  epochs,  the  case  we  have  considered  in  the  foregoing- 
articles  (368  a.  et  seq.}  will  be  reversed,  and  the  extreme  sum- 
mer and  winter  of  the  southern  hemisphere  will  be  trans- 
ferred to  the  northern. 

(369  c.)  In  the  immense  periods  which  geologists  contem- 
plate in  the  past  history  of  the  earth,  this  alternation  of  cli- 
mates must  have  happened,  not  once  only,  but  thousands  of 
times,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  some  of  the  indications 
which  they  have  discovered  of  the  prevalence  at  some  for- 
mer epoch  or  epochs  of  widely  different  climates  from  the 
present  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  may  be  referable,  in  part 
at  least,  to  this  cause,  though  we  are  very  far  from  supposing 
it  competent  (even  taken  in  conjunction  with  other  variations 
to  be  explained  further  on,  which  will  sometimes  go  to  ex- 
aggerate and  sometimes  to  palliate  its  influence,)  to  account 
for  the  whole  of  the  changes  which  appear  to  have  taken 
place.* 

*  ML  Iteynaud  (Extrait  <le  Philosophic  religieusc.  Paris:  Imprinicric  l)u- 
r/crgnc)  attributes  more  influence  tothiscauke,  in  historical  times,  than  we  should 


236  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(370.)  A  conclusion  of  a  very  remarkable  kind,  recently 
drawn  by  Professor  Dove  from  the  comparison  of  thermome- 
tric  observations  at  different  seasons  in  very  remote  regions 
of  the  globe,  may  appear  on  first  sight  at  variance  with  much 
that  is  above  stated.  That  eminent  meteorologist  has  shown, 
by  taking  at  all  seasons  the  mean  of  the  temperatures  of  points 
diametrically  opposite  to  each  other,  that  the  mean  tempera 
ture  of  the  whole  earth's  surface  in  June  considerably  exceeds 
that  in  December.  This  result,  which  is  at  variance  with 
the  greater  proximity  of  the  sun  in  December,  is,  however, 
due  to  a  totally  different  and  very  powerful  cause, — the  greater 
amount  of  land  in  that  hemisphere  which  has  its  summer 
solstice  in  June  (i.  e.  the  northern,  see  art.  362.) ;  and  the 
fact  is  so  explained  by  him.  The  effect  of  land  under  sun- 
shine is  to  throw  heat  into  the  general  atmosphere,  and  so 
distribute  it  by  the  carrying  power  of  the  latter  over  the 
whole  earth.  Water  is  much  less  effective  in  this  respect, 
the  heat  penetrating  its  depths,  and  being  there  absorbed ; 
so  that  the  surface  never  acquires  a  very  elevated  tempera- 
ture even  under  the  equator. 

(371.)  The  great  key  to  simplicity  of  conception  in  astro- 
nomy, and,  indeed,  in  all  sciences  where  motion  is  concerned, 
consists  in  contemplating  every  movement  as  referred  to  points 
which  are  either  permanently  fixed,  or  so  nearly  so  as  that 
their  motions  shall  be  too  small  to  interfere  materially  with 
and  confuse  our  notions.  In  the  choice  of  these  primary 
points  of  reference,  too,  we  must  endeavour,  as  far  as  possible, 
to  select  such  as  have  simple  and  symmetrical  geometrical 
relations  of  situation  with  respect  to  the  curves  described  by 
the  moving  parts  of  the  system,  and  which  are  thereby  fitted 
to  perform  the  office  of  natural  centers  —  advantageous  sta- 

be  disposed  to  allow  it,  when,  for  instance,  he  would  explain  by  it  the  almost 
total  disappearance  of  the  date  palm  from  Judasa  since  the  time  of  Pliny,  at 
which  it  appears  to  have  flourished  in  perfection.  At  that  epoch,  however, 
the  perihelion  occupied  a  situation  only  20°  from  the  December  solstice  ;  which 
implies  a  difference  between  the  sun's  perihelial  and  solsticial  distances  not  ex- 
ceeding a  thousandth  part  of  its  mean  distance,  corresponding  to  a  difference  of  a 
five-hundredth  part  in  the  solar  radiation.  The  effect  of  this,  reckoned  on  the 
principles  explained  in  the  text,  would  not  exceed  two-thirds  of  a  degree 
Fahr.  in  the  midsummer  temperature  of  Judaea  at  noon.  See  also  his  "  Dis- 
cours  sur  la  Constitution  physique  dc  la  Torre"  (Encyclopedie  Nouvelie.) 


GEOCENTRIC    AND    ITELIOCENTRIC    PLACES.  237 

tions  for  the  eye  of  reason  and  theory.  Having  learned  to 
attribute  an  orbital  motion  to  the  earth,  it  loses  this  advan- 
tage, which  is  transferred  to  the  sun,  as  the  fixed  center  about 
which  its  orbit  is  performed.  Precisely  as,  when  embarrassed 
by  the  earth's  diurnal  motion,  we  have  learned  to  transfer,  in 
imagination,  our  station  of  observation  from  its  surface  to  its 
center,  by  the  application  of  the  diurnal  parallax ;  so,  when 
we  come  to  inquire  into  the  movements  of  the  planets,  we 
shall  find  ourselves  continually  embarrassed  by  the  orbital 
motion  of  our  point  of  view,  unless,  by  the  consideration  of 
the  annual  or  heliocentric  parallax,  we  consent  to  refer  all  our 
observations  on  them  to  the  center  of  the  sun,  or  rather  to  the 
common  center  of  gravity  of  the  sun,  and  the  other  bodies 
which  are  connected  with  it  in  our  system. 

(372.)  Hence  arises  the  distinction  between  the  geocentric 
and  heliocentric  place  of  an  object.  The  former  refers  its 
situation  in  space  to  an  imaginary  sphere  of  infinite  radius, 
having  the  center  of  the  earth  for  its  center — the  latter  to 
one  concentric  with  the  sun.  Thus,  when  we  speak  of  the 
heliocentric  longitudes  and  latitudes  of  objects,  we  suppose  the 
spectator  situated  in  the  sun,  and  referring  them  by  circles 
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  to  the  great  circle 
marked  out  in  the  heavens  by  the  infinite  prolongation  of 
that  plane. 

(373.)  The  point  in  the  imaginary  concave  of  an  infinite 
heaven,  to  which  a  spectator  in  the  sun  refers  the  earth,  must, 
of  course,  be  diametrically  opposite  to  that  to  which  a  spec- 
tator on  the  earth  refers  the  sun's  center  ;  consequently  the 
heliocentric  latitude  of  the  earth  is  always  nothing,  and  its 
heliocentric  longitude  always  equal  to  the  sun's  geocentric 
longitude  +  180°.  The  heliocentric  equinoxes  and  solstices 
are,  therefore,  the  same  as  the  geocentric  reversely  named  ; 
and  to  conceive  them,  we  have  only  to  imagine  a  plane  passing 
through  the  sun's  center,  parallel  to  the  earth's  equator,  and 
prolonged  infinitely  on  all  sides.  The  line  of  intersection  of 
this  plane  and  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  is  the  line  of  equinoxes, 
and  the  solstices  are  90°  distant  from  it. 

(374.)  Were  the  earth's  orbit  a  circle,  described  with  a 
uniform  velocity  about  the  sun  placed  in  its  center,  nothing 


238  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

could  be  easier  than  to  calculate  its  position  at  any  time  with 
respect  to  the  line  of  equinoxes,  or  its  longitude,  for  we  should 
only  have  to  reduce  to  numbers  the  proportion  following ;  viz. 
One  year  :  the  time  elapsed: :  360° :  the  arc  of  longitude 
passed  over.  The  longitude  so  calculated  is  called  in  astro- 
nomy the  mean  longitude  of  the  earth.  But  since  the  earth's 
orbit  is  neither  circular,  nor  uniformly  described,  this  rule 
will  not  give  us  the  true  place  in  the  orbit  at  any  proposed 
moment.  Nevertheless,  as  the  excentricity  and  deviation 
from  a  circle  are  small,  the  true  place  will  never  deviate  very 
far  from  that  so  determined  (which,  for  distinction's  sake,  is 
called  the  mean  place),  and  the  former  may  at  all  times  be 
calculated  from  the  latter,  by  applying  to  it  a  correction  or 
equation  (as  it  is  termed),  whose  amount  is  never  very  great, 
and  whose  computation  is  a  question  of  pure  geometry, 
depending  on  the  equable  description  of  areas  by  the  earth 
about  the  sun.  For  since,  in  elliptic  motion  according  to 
Kepler's  law  above  stated,  areas  not  angles  are  described 
uniformly,  the  proportion  must  now  be  stated  thus;  —  One 
year  :  the  time  elapsed : :  the  whole  area  of  the  ellipse  :  the 
area  of  the  sector  swept  over  by  the  radius  vector  in  that  time. 
This  area,  therefore,  becomes  known,  and  it  is  then,  as  above 
observed,  a  problem  of  pure  geometry  to  ascertain  the  anglt 
about  the  sun  (X  SZ,  Jig.  art.  362.),  which  corresponds  to  any 
proposed  fractional  area  of  the  whole  ellipse  supposed  to  be 
contained  in  the  sector  X  Z  S.  Suppose  we  set  out  from  X, 
the  perihelion,  then  will  the  angle  X  S  Z  at  first  increase  more 
rapidly  than  the  mean  longitude,  and  will,  therefore,  during 
the  whole  semi-revolution  from  A  to  M,  exceed  it  in  amount ; 
or,  in  other  words,  the  true  place  will  be  in  advance  of  the 
mean :  at  M,  one  half  the  year  will  have  elapsed,  and  one 
half  the  orbit  have  been  described,  whether  it  be  circular  or 
elliptic.  Here,  then,  the  mean  and  true  places  coincide ;  but 
in  all  the  other  half  of  the  orbit,  from  M  to  A,  the  true  place 
will  fall  short  of  the  mean,  since  at  M  the  angular  motion  is 
slowest,  and  the  true  place  from  this  point  begins  to  lag 
behind  the  mean — to  make  up  with  it,  however,  as  it 
approaches  A,  where  it  once  more  overtakes  it. 


EQUATION    OF    TIIE    CENTER.  2  )9 

(375.)  The  quantity  by  which  the  true  longitude  of  the 
earth  differs  from  the  mean  longitude  is  called  the  equation 
of  the  center,  and  is  additive  during  all  the  half-year  in  which 
the  earth  passes  from  A  to  M,  beginning  at  0°  0/  0",  increasing 
to  a  maximum,  and  again  diminishing  to  zero  at  M  ;  after 
which  it  becomes  subtractive,  attains  a  maximum  of  sub- 
tractive  magnitude  between  M  and  A,  and  again  diminishes 
to  0  at  A.  Its  maximum,  both  additive  and  subtractive,  is 
1°  55'  33"-3. 

(376.)  By  applying,  then,  to  the  earth's  mean  longitude 
the  equation  of  the  center  corresponding  to  any  given  time 
at  which  we  would  ascertain  its  place,  the  true  longitude 
becomes  known  ;  and  since  the  sun  is  always  seen  from  the 
earth  in  180°  more  longitude  than  the  earth  from  the  sun,  in 
this  way  also  the  sun's  true  place  in  the  ecliptic  becomes 
known.  The  calculation  of  the  equation  of  the  center  is 
performed  by  a  table  constructed  for  that  purpose,  to  be 
found  in  all  "  Solar  Tables." 

(377.)  The  maximum  value  of  the  equation  of  the  center 
depends  only  on  the  ellipticity  of  the  orbit,  and  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  terms  of  the  excentricity.  Vice  versa,  therefore, 
if  the  former  quantity  can  be  ascertained  by  observation,  the 
latter  may  be  derived  from  it;  because,  whenever  the  law. 
or  numerical  connection,  between  two  quantities  is  known, 
the  one  can  always  be  determined  from  the  other.  Now,  by 
assiduous  observation  of  the  sun's  transits  over  the  meridian, 
we  can  ascertain,  for  every  day,  its  exact  right  ascendion,  and 
thence  conclude  its  longitude  (art.  309.).  After  this,  it  is 
easy  to  assign  the  angle  by  which  this  observed  longitude  ex- 
ceeds or  falls  short  of  the  mean ;  and  the  greatest  amount  of 
this  excess  or  defect  which  occurs  in  the  whole  year  is  the 
maximum  equation  of  the  center.  This,  as  a  means  of  ascer- 
taining the  eccentricity  of  the  orbit,  is  a  far  more  easy  and 
accurate  method  than  that  of  concluding  the  sun's  distance  by 
measuring  its  apparent  diameter.  The  results  of  the  two 
methods  coincide,  however,  perfectly. 

(378.)  If  the  ecliptic  coincided  with  the  equinoctial,  the 
effect  of  the  equation  of  the  center  by  disturbing  the  unifor- 


240  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

mity  of  the  sun'?  apparent  motion  in  longitude,  would  cause 
an  inequality  in  its  time  of  coming  on  the  meridian  on  suc- 
cessive days.  When  the  sun's  center  comes  to  the  meridian, 
it  is  apparent  noon,  and  if  its  motion  in  longitude  were  uni- 
form, and  the  ecliptic  coincident  with  the  equinoctial,  tln3 
would  always  coincide  with  the  mean  noon,  or  the  stroke  of 
12  on  a  well-regulated  solar  clock.  But,  independent  of  the 
want  of  uniformity  in  its  motion,  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic 
gives  rise  to  another  inequality  in  this  respect ;  in  conse- 
quence of  which,  the  sun,  even  supposing  its  motion  in  the 
ecliptic  uniform,  would  yet  alternately,  in  its  time  of  attain- 
ing the  meridian,  anticipate  and  fall  short  of  the  mean  noon 
as  shown  by  the  clock.  For  the  right  ascension  of  a  celestial 
object  forming  a  side  of  a  right-angled  spherical  triangle,  of 
which  its  longitude  is  the  hypothenuse,  it  is  clear  that  the 
uniform  increase  of  the  latter  must  necessitate  a  deviation 
from  uniformity  in  the  increase  of  the  former. 

(379.)  These  two  causes,  then,  acting  conjointly,  produce, 
in  fact,  a  very  considerable  fluctuation  in  the  time  as  shown 
per  clock,  when  the  sun  really  attains  the  meridian.  It 
amounts,  in  fact,  to  upwards  of  half  an  hour ;  apparent  noon 
sometimes  taking  place  as  much  as  16^min.  before  mean 
noon,  and  at  others  as  much  a?  14  J  min.  after.  This  differ- 
ence between  apparent  and  mean  noon  is  called  the  equation 
of  time,  and  is  calculated  and  inserted  in  ephemerides  for 
every  day  of  the  year,  under  that  title  :  or  else,  which  comes 
to  the  same  thing,  the  moment,  in  mean  time,  of  the  sun's 
culmination  for  each  day,  is  set  down  as  an  astronomical 
phamomenon  to  be  observed. 

(380.)  As  the  sun,  in  its  apparent  annual  course,  is  carried 
along  the  ecliptic,  its  declination  is  continually  varying  be- 
tween the  extreme  limits  of  23°  27'  30"  north,  and  as  much 
south,  which  it  attains  at  the  solstices.  It  is  consequently 
always  vertical  over  some  part  or  other  of  that  zone  or  belt 
of  the  earth's  surface  which  lies  between  the  north  and  south 
parallels  of  23°  27'  30".  These  parallels  are  called  in  geo- 
graphy the  tropics  ;  the  northern  one  that  of  Cancer,  and  the 
southern,  of  Capricorn;  because  the  sun,  at  the  respective 


BIONS   OP   THE    ZODIAC.  24 1 

solstices,  is  situated  in  the  divisions,  or  signs  of  the  ecliptic 
so  denominated.  Of  these  signs  there  are  twelve,  each  oc- 
cupying 30°  of  its  circumference.  They  commence  at  the 
vernal  equinox,  and  are  named  in  order  —  Aries,  Taurus, 
Gemini,  Cancer,  Leo,  Virgo,  Libra,  Scorpio,  Sagittarius, 
Capricornus,  Aquarius,  Pisces.*  They  are  denoted  also  by 
the  following  symbols : — or,  8,  n,  ©,  Si,  nR,  ^,  v\,  /, 
yf,  a:,  X.  Longitude  itself  is  also  divided  into  signs, 
degrees,  and  minutes,  &c.  Thus  5s  27°  0'  corresponds  to 
177°  0/. 

(381.)  These  Signs  are  purely  technical  subdivisions  of 
the  ecliptic,  commencing  from  the  actual  equinox,  and  are 
not  to  be  confounded  with  the  constellations  so  called  (and 
sometimes  so  symbolized).  The  constellations  of  the  zodiac, 
as  they  now  stand  arranged  on  the  ecliptic,  are  all  a  full 
"  sign"  in  advance  or  anticipation  of  their  symbolic  cog- 
nomens thereon  marked.  Thus  the  constellation  Aries 
actually  occupies  the  sign  Taurus  & ,  the  constellation 
Taurus,  the  sign  Gemini  n ,  and  so  on,  the  signs  having  re- 
treated f  among  the  stars  (together  with  the  equinox  their 
origin),  by  the  effect  of  precession.  The  bright  star  Spica  in 
the  constellation  Virgo  (a  Virginis),  by  the  observations  of 
Hipparchus,  128  years  B.C.,  preceded,  or  was  westward  of  the 
autumnal  equinox  in  longitude  by  6°.  In  1750  it  followed 
or  stood  eastward  of  the  same  equinox  by  20°  21'.  Its  place 
then,  as  referred  to  the  ecliptic  at  the  former  epoch,  would  be 
in  longitude  5*  24°  0',  or  in  the  24th  degree  of  the  sign  Si , 
whereas  in  the  latter  epoch  it  stood  in  the  21st  degree  of  nji, 
the  equinox  having  retreated  by  26°  21'  in  the  interval,  1878 
years,  elapsed.  To  avoid  this  source  of  misunderstanding,  the 
use  of  "  signs"  and  their  symbols  in  the  reckoning  of  celestial 
longitudes  is  now  almost  entirely  abandoned,  and  the  ordi- 
nary reckoning  (by  degrees,  &c.  from  0  to  360)  adopted  in 

•   They  may  be  remembered  by  the  following  memorial  hexameters : — 
Sunt  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer   Leo,  Virgo, 
Libraque,  Scorpius,  Arcitenens,  Caper,  Amphora,  Pisces. 

f    Retreated  is  here  used   with    reference   to    longitude,  not  to  the  apparent 
diurnal  motion. 


242  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

its  place,  and  the  names  Aries,  Virgo,  &c.  are  becoming  re 
etricted  to  the  constellations  so  called.* 

(382.)  When  the  sun  is  in  either  tropic,  it  enlightens,  as 
we  have  seen,  the  pole  on  that  side  the  equator,  and  shines 
over  or  beyond  it  to  the  extent  of  23°  27'  30".  The  parallels 
of  latitude,  at  this  distance  from  either  pole,  are  called  the 
polar  circles,  and  are  distinguished  from  each  other  by  thd 
names  arctic  and  antarctic.  The  regions  within  these  circles 
are  sometimes  termed  frigid  zones,  while  the  belt  between 
the  tropics  is  called  the  torrid  zone,  and  the  intermediate 
belts  temperate  zones.  These  last,  however,  are  merely  names 
given  for  the  sake  of  naming;  as,  in  fact,  owing  to  the 
different  distribution  of  land  and  sea  in  the  two  hemispheres, 
zones  of  climate  are  not  co-terminal  with  zones  of  latitude. 

(383.)  Our  seasons  are  determined  by  the  apparent  pas- 
sages of  the  sun  across  the  equinoctial,  and  its  alternate  arrival 
in  the  northern  and  southern  hemisphere.  Were  the  equinox 
invariable,  this  would  happen  at  intervals  precisely  equal  to 
the  duration  of  the  sidereal  year ;  but,  in  fact,  owing  to  the 
slow  conical  motion  of  the  earth's  axis  described  in  art.  317  , 
the  equinox  retreats  on  the  ecliptic,  and  meets  the  advancing 
sun  somewhat  before  the  whole  sidereal  circuit  is  completed. 
The  annual  retreat  of  the  equinox  is  50"*!,  and  this  arc  is 
described  by  the  sun  in  the  ecliptic  in  20m  19s*9.  By  so 
much  shorter,  then,  is  the  periodical  return  of  our  seasons 
than  the  true  sidereal  revolution  of  the  earth  round  the  sun. 
As  the  latter  period,  or  sidereal  year,  is  equal  to  365d  6h  9™ 
9S,6,  it  follows,  then,  that  the  former  must  be  only  365d  5h 
48m  49s,7  ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  tropical  year. 

(384.)  We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  longer  axis  of 
the  ellipse  described  by  the  earth  has  a  slow  motion  of  ll"^ 
per  annum  in  advance.  From  this  it  results,  that  when  the 
earth,  setting  out  from  the  perihelion,  has  completed  one 
sidereal  period,  the  perihelion  will  have  moved  forward  by 

*  When,  however,  the  place  of  the  sun  is  spoken  of,  the  old  usage  prevails. 
Thus,  if  we  say  "the  sun  is  in  Aries,"  it  would  he  interpreted  to  mean  between 
0°  and  30°  of  longitude.  So,  also,  "  the  first  point  of  Aries"  is  still  understood 
to  mean  the  vernal,  and  '•  the  first  point  of  Libra,"  the  autumnal  equinox  ;  and 
«o  in  a  few  other  cases. 


TROPICAL    ANP-    ANOMALISTIC    YEARS.  243 

11"*8,  which  arc  must  be  described  by  the  earth  before  it  can 
again  reach  the  perihelion.  In  so  doing,  it  occupies  4m  39**7, 
and  this  must  therefore  be  added  to  the  sidereal  period,  to 
give  the  interval  between  two  consecutive  returns  to  the 
perihelion.  This  interval,  then,  is  365d  6h  13m498'3*,  and  is 
what  is  called  the  anomalistic  year.  All  these  periods  have  their 
uses  in  astronomy  ;  but  that  in  which  mankind  in  general  are 
most  interested  is  the  tropical  year,  on  which  the  return  of  the 
seasons  depends,  and  which  we  thus  perceive  to  be  a  compound 
phenomenon,  depending  chiefly  and  directly  on  the  annual 
revolution  of  the  earth  round  the  sun,  but  subordinately  also, 
and  indirectly,  on  its  rotation  round  its  own  axis,  which  is 
what  occasions  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  ;  thus  afford- 
ing an  instructive  example  of  the  way  in  which  a  motion, 
once  admitted  in  any  part  of  our  system,  may  be  traced  in 
its  influence  on  others  with  which  at  first  sight  it  could  not 
possibly  be  supposed  to  have  any  thing  to  do. 

(385.)  As  a  rough  consideration  of  the  appearance  of  the 
earth  points  out  the  general  roundness  of  its  form,  and  more 
exact  inquiry  has  led  us  first  to  the  discovery  of  its  elliptic 
figure,  and,  in  the  further  progress  of  refinement,  to  the  per- 
ception of  minuter  local  deviations  from  that  figure  ;  so,  in 
investigating  the  solar  motions,  the  first  notion  we  obtain 
is  that  of  an  orbit,  generally  speaking,  round,  and  not  far  from 
a  circle,  which,  on  more  careful  and  exact  examination,  proves 
to  be  anjellipse  of  small  excentricitv.  and  described  in  con- 
formity with  certain  laws,  as  above  stated.  Still  minuter 
enquiry,  however,  detects  yet  smaller  deviations  again  from 
this  form  and  from  these  laws,  of  which  we  have  a  specimen 
in  the  slow  motion  of  the  axis  of  the  orbit  spoken  of  in  art. 
372. ;  and  which  are  generally  comprehended  under  the  name 
of  perturbations  and  secular  inequalities.  Of  these  deviations, 
and  their  causes,  we  shall  speak  hereafter  at  length.  It  is  the 
triumph  of  physical  astronomy  to  have  rendered  a  complete 
account  of  them  all,  and  to  have  left  nothing  unexplained, 

*  These  numbers,  as  well  as  most  of  the  other  numerical  data  of  our  system, 
«rt  taken  f-oin  Mr.  Baily's  Astronomical  Table*  and  Formula. 

B2 


// 


244  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

either  in  the  motions  of  the  sun  or  in  those  of  any  other 
of  the  bodies  of  our  system.  But  the  nature  of  this  explana- 
tion cannot  be  understood  till  we  have  developed  the  law  of 
gravitation,  and  carried  it  into  its  more  direct  consequences. 
This  will  be  the  object  of  our  three  following  chapters ;  in 
which  we  shall  take  advantage  of  the  proximity  of  the  moon, 
and  its  immediate  connection  with  and  dependence  on  the 
earth,  to  render  it,  as  it  were,  a  stepping-stone  to  the  general 
explanation  of  the  planetary  movements.  We  shall  conclude 
this  by  describing  what  is  known  of  the  physical  constitution 
oi  the  sun. 

(386.)  When  viewed  through  powerful  telescopes,  provided 
with  coloured  glasses,  to  take  off  the  heat,  which  would 
otherwise  injure  our  eyes,  the  sun  is  observed  to  have  fre- 
quently large  and  perfectly  black  spots  upon  it,  surrounded 
with  a  kind  of  border,  less  completely  dark,  called  a  pe- 
numbra. Some  of  these  are  represented  at  a,  b,  c,  d,  in 
Plate  I.  fig.  2.,  at  the  end  of  this  volume.  They  are,  how- 
ever, not  permanent.  When  watched  from  day  to  day,  or 
even  from  hour  to  hour,  they  appear  to  enlarge  or  contract, 
to  change  their  forms,  and  at  length  to  disappear  altogether, 
or  to  break  out  anew  in  parts  of  the  surface  where  none 
were  before.  In  such  cases  of  disappearance,  the  central 
dark  spot  always  contracts  into  a  point,  and  vanishes  before 
the  border.  Occasionally  they  bi-eak  up,  or  divide  into  two 
or  more,  and  in  those  cases  offer  every  evidence  of  that 
extreme  mobility  which  belongs  only  to  the  fluid  state,  and 
of  that  excessively  violent  agitation  which  seems  only  com- 
patible with  the  atmospheric  or  gaseous  state  of  matter. 
The  scale  on  which  their  movements  take  place  is  immense. 
A  single  second  of  angular  measure,  as  seen  from  the  earth, 
corresponds  on  the  sun's  disc  to  461  miles;  and  a  circle  of 
this  diameter  (containing  therefore  nearly  167000  square 
miles)  is  the  least  space  which  can  be  distinctly  discerned  on 
the  sun  as  a  visible  area.  Spots  have  been  observed,  however, 
whose  linear  diameter  has  been  upwards  of  45000  miles*; 

*  Mayer,  Obs.  Mar.  15.  1758.  "  Ingens  macula  in  sole  conspiciebutur, 
cujus  diameters  A  diam.  solis." 


PHYSICAL    CONSTITUTION   OF    THE    SUN.  245 

and  even,  if  some  records  are  to  be  trusted,  of  very  much 
greater  extent.*  That  such  a  spot  should  close  up  in  six 
weeks'  time  (for  they  seldom  last  much  longer),  its  borders 
must  approach  at  the  rate  of  more  than  1000  miles  a  day. 

(387.)  Many  other  circumstances  tend  to  corroborate  this 
view  of  the  subject.  The  part  of  the  sun's  disc  not  occupied 
by  spots  is  far  from  uniformly  bright.  Its  ground  is  finely 
mottled  with  an  appearance  of  minute,  dark  dots,  or  pores, 
which,  when  attentively  watched,  are  found  to  be  in  a  con- 
stant state  of  change.  There  is  nothing  which  represents  so 
faithfully  this  appearance  as  the  slow  subsidence  of  some 
flocculent  chemical  precipitates  in  a  transparent  fluid,  when 
viewed  perpendicularly  from  above:  so  faithfully,  indeed, 
that  it  is  hardly  possible  not  to  be  impressed  with  the  idea  of 
a  luminous  medium  intermixed,  but  not  confounded,  with  a 
transparent  and  non-luminous  atmosphere,  either  floating  as 
clouds  in  our  air,  or  pervading  it  in  vast  sheets  and  columns 
like  flame,  or  the  streamers  of  our  northern  lights,  directed  in 
lines  perpendicular  to  the  surface.!  [See  §  (387  a,  6,  and 
cc)  Note  G]. 

*  Half  the  sun's  disc  is  said  in  certain  ancient  annals  to  have  been  obscured 
by  spots.  This  is  monstrous —  but  on  at  least  two  occasions  before  the  inven- 
tion of  telescopes  spots  have  been  seen  with  the  naked  eye.  M.  Gautier  (  Bibl. 
Univ.  de  Geneve,  July  and  Aug.  1852)  mentions  as  one  of  the  largest  spots  on 
record,  that  observed  by  Sir  W.  Herschel,  in  1779,  which  he  there  states  to  have 
been  470"  in  diameter,  or  15*7  times  that  of  the  earth.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
verify  the  Station.  The  great  spot  of  1779  mentioned  by  Sic  W.  H.  (l'hil. 
Tr.  1795)  as  having  been  seen  with  the  naked  eye,  consisted,  he  says,  of  two 
parts,  the  largest  of  which  "  measured  1'  8"06  in  diameter,  which  is  equal  in 
length  to  more  than  31000  miles."  "  Both  together,"  he  adds,  "  must  certainly 
have  extended  above  50000."  This  corresponds  to  1  IS"  which  is  not  a  fourth 
part  of  M.  Gautier's  quantity  ;  moreover,  470"  on  the  sun's  disc  corresponds,  not 
to  15-7,  but  to  27 '3  diameters  of  the  earth. — {Note  added  in  1858.) 

f  The  light  emanating  immediately  from  the  sHn  shows  no  sign  of  polariza- 
tion whether  radiating  from  the  central  or  circumferential  portions  of  its  disc. 
This  has  been  adduced  as  affording  a  direct  experimental  proof  of  the  gaseous 
nature  of  the  surface  from  which  its  light  proceeds.  It  is  argued  that  the  light 
emitted  by  incandescent  solid  or  fluid  terrestrial  bodies  at  great  obliquities  to 
their  surfaces,  is  always  found  to  be  partially  polarized  in  a  plane  perpendicular 
to  that  in  which  the  angle  of  emanation  lies,  and  that  consequently  such  cannot 
be  the  nature  of  the  solar  surface.  In  former  editions  of  this  work,  1  have 
passed  this  argument  sub  silentio,  and  should  not  have  thought  it  necessary  now 
to  enter  a  protest  against  its  vulidity  (resting  as  it  does  on  authority  of  one  of  the 
greatest  names  in  optical  science),  but  that  1  find  it  prominently  put  forward  and 
•epeated  and  strongly  insisted  on  in  recent  works  of  conspicuous  rneiit.  (  Kos- 
moi,  passim,  especially  vol.  iii.  pp.  47.,  284.,  and  notes  99.,  483.  transl.;  Gautier 
on  the  Sun,  Bibl.  Unir.  1852;  Vaughan,  Hep.  Brit.  Assoc.  1857;  Atherueuiu, 
No.  1560,   &c.  &c. )      The  fallacy   consists  in   the  assumption   that    the   xuriku* 


246  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(388.)  Lastly,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  great  spots,  or  ex- 
tensive groups  of  them,  large  spaces  of  the  surface  are  often 
observed  to  be  covered  with  strongly  marked  curved  or 
branching  streaks,  more  luminous  than  the  rest,  called  faculce, 
and  among  these,  if  not  already  existing,  spots  frequently 
break  out.  They  may,  perhaps,  be  regarded  with  most  pro- 
bability as  the  ridges  of  immense  waves  in  the  luminous 
regions  of  the  sun's  atmosphere,  indicative  of  violent  agitation 
in  their  neighbourhood.  They  are  most  commonly,  and  best 
seen,  towards  the  borders  of  the  visible  disc,  and  their 
appearance  is  as  represented  in  Plate  I.  fig.  1. 

(389.)  But  what  are  the  spots?  Many  fanciful  notions 
have  been  broached  on  this  subject,  but  only  one  seems  to 
have  any  degree  of  physical  probability,  viz.  that  they  are 
the  dark,  or  at  least  comparatively  dark,  solid  body  of  the 
sun  itself,  laid  bare  to  our  view  by  those  immense  fluctuations 
in  the  luminous  regions  of  its  atmosphere,  to  which  it  appears 
to  be  subject.  Respecting  the  manner  in  which  this  dis- 
closure takes  place,  different  ideas  again  have  been  advocated. 
Lalande  (art.  3240.)  suggests,  that  eminences  in  the  nature 
of  mountains  are  actually  laid  bare,  and  project  above  the 
luminous  ocean,  appearing  black  above  it,  while  their  shoal- 
ing declivities  produce  the  penumbrae,  where  the  luminous 
fluid  is  less  deep.  A  fatal  objection  to  this  theory  is  the 
uniform  shade  of  the  penumbra  and  its  sharp  termination, 
both  inwards,  where  it  joins  the  spot,  and  outwards,  where 

from  which  the  light  emanates  at  the  borders  of  the  sun  is  necessarily  very 
oblique  to  the  visual  ray  by  which  we  see  it  ;  which,  though  true  of  the  general 
surface  regarded  as  a  portion  of  a  sphere  880000  miles  in  diameter,  is  not  so  of 
each  particular  square  foot  or  square  inch  which,  not  being  obscured  from  sight 
by  intervening  protuberances,  may  send  out  rays  to  reach  the  eye  of  a  terres- 
trial spectator.  Supposing  the  sun  to  be  an  incandescent  solid  not  more  rough 
than  the  earth  or  the  moon,  it  is  obvious  that  whether  from  the  centre  or  from  the 
borders,  the  light  by  which  we  see  it  must  consist  of  a  mixture  of  rays  emer- 
gent trom  the  local  surface  at  every  possible  angle  of  obliquity  and  in  every 
possible  plane  without  the  smallest  preference.  A  luminous  portion  of  the  sun's 
surface  occupying  the  ten  thousandth  part  of  a  square  second,  would  correspond 
to  a  sectional  area  of  the  visual  beam  upwards  of  twenty  square  miles  in  extent, 
admitting  every  variety  of  plain,  precipice,  slope,  or  rugged  ground.  The 
general  surface  of  a  forest  seen  on  the  horizon  is  parallel  to  the  mathematical 
horizon,  but  who  would  assert  that  the  ray  by  which  its  extreme  visible  leaf  in 
Been,  necessarily  emanates  from  that  leaf  at  any  one  obliquity  or  in  any  ono 
plane  of  emergence  rather  than  any  other? — (Note  added  in  1858.) 


NATURE    OF    THE    SUN'S   SPOTS.  247 

it  borders  on  the  bright  surface.     A  more  probable  view  has 

been  taken  by  Sir  William  Herschel*,  who  considers  the 

luminous  strata  of  the  atmosphere  to  be  sustained  far  above 

the  level  of  the  solid  body  by  a  transparent  elastic  medium, 

carrying  on  its  upper  surface  (or  rather,  to  avoid  the  former 

objection,  at  some  considerably  lower  level  within  its  depth)  a 

cloudy  stratum  which,  being  strongly  illuminated  from  above, 

reflects  a  considerable  portion  of  the  light  to  our  eyes,  and 

forms  a  penumbra,  while  the 

solid  body  shaded  by  the  clouds 

reflects  none.  (See  Jig.)     The 

temporary  removal  of  both  the 

strata,  but  more  of  the  upper 

than  the   lower,   he   supposes 

effected  by  powerful  upward 

currents    of   the    atmosphere, 

arising,  perhaps,  from  spiracles 

in   the    body,    or    from   local 

agitations. 

(389  a.)  Such  was  the  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  ap- 
pearance and  constitution  of  the  solar  spots  at  the  time  when 
this  work  first  issued  from  the  press.  But  in  1851,  a  further 
step  towards  penetrating  the  mystery  of  their  nature  was 
made  by  that  excellent  and  indefatigable  observer  Mr. 
Dawes,  who  availing  himself  of  the  ingenious  contrivance 
described  in  (art.  204  e.)  has  been  enabled  to  scrutinize  the 
interior  of  the  penumbra?  of  the  spots,  under  high  magnifying 
powers,  in  perfect  security  and  with  all  the  advantage 
which  the  absence  of  extraneous  glare  confers  on  the  exami- 
nation of  feebly  illuminated  objects.  So  viewed,  he  has 
found  the  blacker  portions  occupying  the  middle  of  the  pe- 
numbra, and  which  to  former  observers  appeared  so  dark 
and  so  uniform  as  to  lead  them  to  believe  it  to  be  the  sun's 
actual  surface  seen  through  an  aperture  in  an  exterior  en- 
velope— to  be,  itself,  only  an  additional  and  inferior  stratum 
of  very  feebly  luminous  (or  illuminated)  matter,  which  he 
has  called  "  the  cloudy  stratum,"  which  again  in  its  turn  is 

*   Phil.  Trans.  1801. 


248  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

frequently  seen  to  be  pierced  with  a  smaller  and  usually 
much  more  rounded  aperture,  which  would  seem  at  length 
to  afford  a  view  of  the  real  solar  surface  of  most  intense 
blackness.  Figs.  4.  5.  PL  I.,  represent  spots  so  seen  on 
23rd  December,  1851,  and  17th  January,  1852.  In  tracing 
the  changes  in  the  spots,  from  day  to  day,  Mr.  Dawes  has 
also  been  led  to  conclude,  that,  in  many  instances,  they  have 
a  movement  of  rotation  about  their  own  centers.  This  was 
particularly  remarkable  in  the  spot  of  17th  January,  which 
between  that  date  and  23rd  January  had  revolved  in  its 
own  plane  through  an  angle  of  more  than  90°;  the  "  cloudy 
stratum,'*  with  its  central  aperture,  presenting  itself  under 
the  aspect  represented  at  b  fig.  5.,  instead  of  that  at  a, 
which  it  originally  had,  its  general  form  remaining  all  the 
while  unchanged. 

(390.)  When  the  spots  are  attentively  watched,  their 
situation  on  the  disc  of  the  sun  is  observed  to  change.  They 
advance  regularly  towards  its  western  limb  or  border,  where 
they  disappear,  and  are  replaced  by  others  which  enter  at  the 
eastern  limb,  and  which,  pursuing  their  respective  courses, 
in  their  turn  disappear  at  the  western.  The  apparent 
rapidity  of  this  movement  is  not  uniform,  as  it  would  be  were 
the  spots  dark  bodies  passing,  by  an  independent  motion  of 
their  own,  between  the  earth  and  the  sun ;  but  is  swiftest  in 
the  middle  of  their  paths  across  the  disc,  and  very  slow  at  its 
borders.  This  is  precisely  what  would  be  the  case  supposing 
them  to  appertain  to  and  make  part  of  the  visible  surface  of 
the  sun's  globe,  and  to  be  carried  round  by  a  uniform  rota- 
tion of  that  globe  on  its  axis,  so  that  each  spot  should  de- 
scribe a  circle  parallel  to  the  sun's  equator,  rendered  elliptic 
by  the  effect  of  perspective.  Their  apparent  paths  also 
across  the  disc  conform  to  this  view  of  their  nature,  being, 
generally  speaking,  ellipses,  much  elongated,  concentric  with 
the  sun's  disc,  each  having  one  of  its  chords  for  its  longer 
axis,  and  all  these  axes  parallel  to  each  other.  At  two 
periods  of  the  year  only  do  the  spots  appear  to  describe 
straight  lines,  viz.  on  and  near  to  the  4th  of  June  and  5th 
of  December,  on  which   days,  therefore,  the  plane  of  the 


OF    THE    SUN'S    ROTATION   ON   ITS    AXIS.  249 

circle,  which  a  spot  situated  on  the  sun's  equator  describes 
(and  consequently,  the  plane  of  that  equator  itself),  passes 
through  the  earth.  Hence  it  is  obvious,  that  the  plane  of 
the  sun's  equator  is  inclined  to  that  of  the  ecliptic,  and 
intersects  it  in  a  line  which  passes  through  the  place  of  the 
earth  on  these  days.  The  situation  of  this  line,  or  the  line 
of  the  nodes  of  the  sun's  equator  as  it  is  called,  is,  therefore, 
defined  by  the  longitudes  of  the  earth  as  seen  from  the  sun 
at  those  epochs,  which,  according  to  Mr.  Carrington,  are  re- 
spectively 73°  40'  and  253°  40'  (  =  73°  40'+  180°)  for  1850, 
being,  of  course,  diametrically  opposite  in  direction. 

(391.)  The  inclination  of  the  sun's  axis  (that  of  the  plane 
of  its  equator)  to  the  ecliptic  is  determined  by  ascertaining 
the  proportion  of  the  longer  and  the  shorter  diameter  of  the 
apparent  ellipse  described  by  any  remarkable,  well-defined 
spot;  in  order  to  do  which,  its  apparent  place  on  the  sun's  disc 
must  be  very  precisely  ascertained  by  micrometric  measures, 
repeated  from  day  to  day  as  long  as  it  continues  visible, 
(usually  about  12  or  13  days,  according  to  the  magnitude  of 
the  spots,  which  always  vanish  by  the  effect  of  foreshortening 
before  they  attain  the  actual  border  of  the  disc  —  but  the 
larger  spots  being  traceable  closer  to  the  limb  than  the 
smaller.*)  The  reduction  of  such  observations,  or  the  con- 
clusion from  them  of  the  element  in  question,  is  complicated 
with  the  effect  of  the  earth's  motion  in  the  interval  of  the 
observations,  and  with  its  situation  in  the  ecliptic,  with  respect 
to  the  line  of  nodes.  For  simplicity,  we  will  suppose  the 
earth  situated  as  it  is  on  the  4th  of  March,  in  a  line  at 
right  angles  to  that  of  the  nodes,  i.  e.,  in  the  heliocentric 
longitude  163°  40',  and  to  remain  there  stationary  during  the 
whole  passage  of  a  spot  across  the  disc.  In  this  case  the  axis 
of  rotation  of  the  sun  will  be  situated  in  a  plane  passing 
through  the  earth  and  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic.  Suppose  C  to  represent  the  sun's  centre,  P  C  p  its 
axis,  EC  the  line  of  sight,  PNQiVpS  a  section  of  the  sun 
passing  through  the   earth,  and  Q  a  spot  situated  on  its 

*  The  groat  spot  of  December,  1719,  is  stated  to  have  been  seen  as  a  noteb 
in  the  limb  of  the  sum 


250 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


equator,  and  in  that  plane,  and  consequently  in  the  middle  of 
its  apparent  path  across  the  disc     If  the  axis  of  rotation 


were  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic,  as  N  S,  this  spot  would  be 
at  A,  and  would  be  seen  projected  on  C,  the  centre  of  the  sun. 
It  is  actually  at  Q,  projected  upon  D,  at  an  apparent  distance 
C  D  to  the  north  of  the  centre,  which  is  the  apparent  smaller 
semi-axis  of  the  ellipse  described  by  the  spot,  which  being 

C  D 

known  by  micrometric  measurement,  the  value  of  j^-^?  or  the 

'  CN 

cosine  of  Q  C  N,  the  inclination  of  the  sun's  equator  becomes 
known,  C  N  being  the  apparent  semi-diameter  of  the  sun  at 
that  time.  At  this  epoch,  moreover,  the  northern  half  of  the 
circle  described  by  the  spot  is  visible  (the  southern  passing 
behind  the  body  of  the  sun),  and  the  south  pole  p  of  the  sun  is 
within  the  visible  hemisphere.  This  is  the  case  in  the  whole 
interval  from  December  5th  to  June  4th,  during  which  the 
visual  ray  falls  upon  the  southern  side  of  the  sun's  equator. 
The  contrary  happens  in  the  other  half  year,  from  June  4th 
to  December  5th,  and  this  is  what  is  understood  when  we  say 
that  the  ascending  node  (denoted  &  )  of  the  sun's  equator  lies 
in  73°  40'  longitude — a  spot  on  the  equator  passing  that 
node  being  then  in  the  act  of  ascending  from  the  southern  to 
the  northern  side  of  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic — such  being 
the  conventional  language  of  astronomers  in  speaking  of 
these  matters. 


OF   THE   SUN'S   SPOTS.  251 

(392.)  If  the  observations  are  made  at  other  seasons  (which, 
however,  are  the  less  favourable  for  this  purpose  the  more 
remote  they  are  from  the  epochs  here  assigned);  when, 
moreover,  as  in  strictness  is  necessary,  the  motion  of  the 
earth  in  the  interval  of  the  measures  is  allowed  for  (as  for  a 
change  of  the  point  of  sight) ;  the  calculations  requisite  to 
deduce  the  situation  of  the  axis  in  space,  and  the  duration  of 
the  revolution  around  it,  become  much  more  intricate,  and  it 
would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work  to  enter  into  them.* 
According  to  Mr.  Carrington's  determination,  the  inclina- 
tion of  the  sun's  equator  to  the  ecliptic  is  about  7°  15'  (its 
nodes  being  as  above  stated),  and  the  period  of  rotation  25 
days  9  hours  7  minutes  ;  the  corresponding  synodic  period 
being  27  days  6  hours  36  minutes.f 

(393.)  The  region  of  the  spots  is  confined,  generally  speak- 
ing, within  about  25°  on  either  side  of  the  sun's  equator; 
beyond  30°  they  are  very  rarely  seen ;  in  the  polar  regions, 
never.  The  actual  equator  of  the  sun  is  also  less  frequently 
visited  by  spots  than  the  adjacent  zones  on  either  side,  and  a 
very  material  difference  in  their  frequency  and  magnitude 
subsists  in  its  northern  and  southern  hemisphere,  those  on  the 
northern  preponderating  in  both  respects.  The  zone  com- 
prised between  the  11th  and  15th  degree  to  the  northward  of 
the  equator  is  particularly  fertile  in  large  and  durable  spots. 
These  circumstances,  as  well  as  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
a  more  or  less  regular  arrangement  of  the  spots,  when  nu- 
merous, in  the  manner  of  belts  parallel  to  the  equator,  point 
evidently  to  physical  peculiarities  in  certain  parts  of  the 
sun's  body  more  favourable  than  in  others  to  the  production 
of  the  spots,  on  the  one  hand ;  and  on  the  other,  to  a  general 
influence  of  its  rotation  on  its  axis  as  a  determining  cause  of 
their  distribution  and  arrangement,  and  would  appear  indi- 
cative of  a  system  of  movements  in  the  fluids  which  con- 

•  See  the  theory  in  Lalande's  Astronomy,  art  S258.,  and  the  formula;  of 
computation  in  a  paper  by  Petersen,  Schumacher's  Nachrichten,  No.  419. 

f  These  periods  are  those  of  a  spot  in  heliographic  latitude  15°  N.  or  S.  of 
the  sun's  equator.  Owing  to  solar  atmospheric  drift,  the  periods  of  rotation 
deduced  from  observations  of  spots  in  high  or  low  heliographic  latitudes  differ 
considerably.      Sec  Note  (G)  §  (387,  c  c.) 


252  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

etitute  its  luminous  surface  bearing  no  remote  analogy  to 
our  trade  winds  —  from  whatever  cause  arising.  (See  art- 
239.  et  seq.) 

(394.)  The  duration  of  individual  spots  is  commonly  not 
great ;  some  are  formed  and  disappear  within  the  limit  of  a 
single  transit  across  the  disc  —  but  such  are  for  the  most 
part  small  and  insignificant.  Frequently  they  make  one  oi 
two  revolutions,  being  recognized  at  their  reappearance  by 
their  situation  with  respect  to  the  equator,  their  configurations 
inter  se,  their  size,  or  other  peculiarities,  as  well  as  by  the  in- 
terval elapsing  between  their  disappearance  at  one  limb  and 
reappearance  on  the  other.  In  a  few  rare  cases,  however, 
they  have  been  watched  round  many  revolutions.  The  great 
spot  of  1779  appeared  during  six  months,  and  one  and  the 
same  groupe  was  observed  in  1840  by  Schwabe  to  return 
eight  times.*  It  has  been  surmised,  with  considerable  appa- 
rent probability,  that  some  spots,  at  least,  are  generated  again 
and  again,  at  distant  intervals  of  time,  over  the  same  identical 
points  of  the  sun's  body  (as  hurricanes,  for  example,  are  known 
to  affect  given  localities  on  the  earth's  surface,  and  to  pursue 
definite  tracks).  The  uncertainty  which  still  prevails  with 
respect  to  the  exact  duration  of  its  rotation  renders  it  very 
difficult  to  obtain  convincing  evidence  of  this ;  nor,  indeed, 
can  it  be  expected,  until  by  bringing  together  into  one  con- 
nected view  the  recorded  state  of  the  sun's  surface  during  a 
very  long  period  of  time,  and  comparing  together  remarkable 
spots  which  have  appeared  on  the  same  parallel,  some  precise 
periodic  time  shall  be  found  which  shall  exactly  conciliate 
numerous  and  well- characterized  appearances.  The  inquiry 
is  one  of  singular  interest,  as  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  the  supply  of  light  and  heat  afforded  to  our  globe 
stands  in  intimate  connexion  with  those  processes  which  are 
taking  place  on  the  solar  surface,  and  to  which  the  spots  in 
some  way  or  other  owe  their  origin. 

(394  a.)  Meanwhile  M.  Schwabe,  of  Dessau,  by  compar- 

*  Schum.  Nach.  No.  4 IB.  p.  150.  The  recent  papers  of  Biela,  Capocci, 
Schwabe,  I'HstorfT  and  Schmidt,  in  that  collection,  will  be  found  highly 
interesting. 


PERIODICITY    OF    THE    SUN'S   SPOTS.  253 

ing  together  the  records  of  the  general  state  of  the  sun's 
surface  in  respect  of  the  abundance  and  paucity  of  spots 
exhibited  by  it  from  1826  to  1850,  has  been  led  to  a  highly 
remarkable  conclusion,  viz.  that  their  degree  of  copiousness 
is  subject  to  a  law  of  periodicity ;  alternate  minima  and 
maxima  recurring  at  nearly  equal  intervals.  The  interval 
from  minimum  to  minimum,  as  well  as  could  be  ascertained 
from  the  moderate  interval  embraced  by  the  observations 
compared  was  provisionally  estimated  by  M.  Schwabe  at 
about  ten  years.  More  recently,  M.  Wolf,  of  Berne*,  from  a 
careful  assemblage  and  discussion  of  all  the  recorded  obser- 
vations of  spots  which  could  be  collected  from  their  first 
telescopic  discovery  (by  Fabricius  and  Harriot,  in  1610)  to 
the  present  time,  while  fully  confirming  their  periodicity, 
has  fixed  upon  the  somewhat  longer  period,  from  minimum  to 
minimum,  of  1  ly,l  1,  being  exactly  at  the  rate  of  nine  periods 
per  century,  the  last  year  of  each  century  ( 1700,  1800,  &c.) 
being  a  year  of  minimum.  In  the  minima  there  is  for  the  most 
part  an  extreme  paucity,  and  sometimes  an  entire  absence  of 
spots,  f  The  maxima  (in  which  they  are  often  so  copious  that 
50  or  100  have  been  counted  at  once  on  the  disc)  do  not  ap- 
pear to  fall  exactly  in  the  middle  year  between  the  minima, 
but  rather  earlier,  about  the  fifth,  fourth,  or  even  the  third 
year  of  the  period.  What  is  extremely  remarkable,  and 
must  certainly  be  received  as  strongly  corroborative,  both  of 
the  general  fact  of  periodicity  and  of  the  correctness  of  M. 
Wolf's  period,  is,  that  we  find  recorded  in  history  by  chroni- 
clers and  annalists  on  several  occasions  before  the  invention 
of  telescopes,  the  appearance  of  spots,  or  groups  of  spots,  so 
considerable  as  to  have  become  matter  of  vulgar  observation, 
as  for  instance  in  the  years  a.d.  807,  840,  1096,  and  1607  J, 
and  several  others  in  which,  though  no  spots  are  recorded,  a 
great  deficiency  in  the  sun's  light  has  been  remarked.  Thus 
in  the  annals  of  the  year  a.d.  536,  the  sun  is  said  to  have 
suffered  a  great  diminution  of  light,  which  continued  fourteen 

•  Rudolf  Wolf.    Transactions  of  Society  of  Nat.  Phil.    Berne.    1852. 
t   As  in  1856. 

t  Those  spot*  were  taken  for  planets  seen  on  the  sun  ;  that  of  840  for 
Venus  j  those  of  807  and  1607  for  Mercury. 


254  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

months.  From  October,  a.d.  626,  to  the  following  June,  a 
defalcation  of  light  to  the  extent  of  one-half  is  recorded ;  and 
in  A.D.  1547,  during  three  days,  the  sun  is  said  to  have  been 
so  darkened  that  stars  were  seen  in  the  day-time.  Now  of 
all  these  instances,  supposing  them  all  to  have  been  owing  to 
spots,  either  unusually  large  or  numerous,  there  are  only 
two,  those  of  a.d.  807  and  1 607,  which  deviate  so  much  as 
two  years  from  the  epochs  of  maximum  fixed  as  above. 

(394  b.)  Sir  W.  Herschel  (Ph.  Tr.  1801),  considering  the 
appearance  of  abundant  spots  on  the  sun's  disc  as  evidence 
of  an  agitated  state  of  its  gaseous  envelope,  and  regarding 
the  extrication  of  light  and  heat  as  the  results  of  chemical 
processes  likely  to  be  promoted  by  the  more  intimate  mix- 
ture of  heterogeneous  materials  having  mutual  affinities,  has 
attempted  to  show,  though  from  very  imperfect  records  (such 
as  alone  could  be  procured  by  him  at  that  date)  that  years 
of  remarkably  abundant  or  deficient  spots  have  been  also 
remarkable  respectively  for  their  high  or  low  general  tempe- 
rature, and  especially  for  abundant  and  deficient  harvests. 
The  point  has  been  inquired  into  by  M.  Gautier  *,  who  from 
an  assemblage  of  meteorological  averages  obtained  in  thirty- 
three  stations  in  Europe,  and  twenty-nine  in  America  during 
eleven  years  of  observation,  finds  a  trifling  preponderance 
(0°*11  Fahr.)  in  the  opposite  direction.  On  the  other  hand 
M.  Wolf,  in  the  memoir  above  cited,  from  an  examination  ol 
the  Chronicles  of  Zurich  from  the  year  a.d.  1000  to  a.d.  1800, 
is  led  to  a  conclusion  in  accordance  with  this  speculation, 
and  considers  them  as  affording  decisive  evidence  "  that  years 
rich  in  solar  spots  are  in  general  drier  and  more  fruitful 
than  those  of  an  opposite  character,  while  the  latter  are 
wetter  and  more  stormy  than  the  former." 

(394  c.)  Although  more  properly  belonging  to  the  domain 
ot  general  physics  than  of  astronomy,  it  is  impossible  to 
omit  mentioning  here  the  singular  coincidence  of  this  period 
of  the  recurrence  of  the  solar  spots  with  that  of  those  great 
disturbances  in  the  magnetic  system  of  the  earth  to  which 
the  epithet  of  "  magnetic  storms"  has  been  affixed.     These 

*  Bibl.  Univ.  de  Geneve.     1844. 


EXTERIOR    ATMOSPHERE    OF    THE    SUN.  255 

disturbances,  during  which  the  magnetic  needle  is  greatly 
and  universally  agitated  (not  in  a  particular  limited  locality, 
but  at  one  and  the  same  instant  of  time  over  whole  conti- 
nents, or  even  over  the  whole  earth),  are  found,  so  far  as 
observation  has  hitherto  extended,  to  maintain  a  parallel  both 
in  respect  of  their  frequency  of  occurrence  and  intensity  in 
successive  years  with  the  abundance  and  magnitude  of  the 
spots  in  the  same  years,  too  close  to  be  regarded  as  fortuit- 
ous. The  coincidence  of  the  epochs  of  maxima  and  minima 
in  the  two  series  of  phenomena  amounts  indeed  to  identity, 
a  fact  evidently  of  most  important  significance,  but  which 
neither  astronomical  nor  magnetic  science  is  yet  sufficiently 
advanced  to  interpret. 

(395.)  Above  the  luminous  surface  of  the  sun,  and  the 
region  in  which  the  spots  reside,  there  are  strong  indications 
of  the  existence  of  a  gaseous  atmosphere  having  a  somewhat 
imperfect  transparency.  When  the  whole  disc  of  the  sun  is 
seen  at  once  through  a  telescope  magnifying  moderately 
enough  to  allow  it,  and  with  a  darkening  glass  such  as  to 
suffer  it  to  be  contemplated  with  perfect  comfort,  it  is  very 
evident  that  the  borders  of  the  disc  are  much  less  luminous 
than  the  center.  That  this  is  no  illusion  is  shown  by  project- 
ing the  sun's  image  undarkened  and  moderately  magnified, 
so  as  to  occupy  a  circle  two  or  three  inches  in  diameter,  on  a 
.meet  of  white  paper,  taking  care  to  have  it  well  in  focus, 
when  the  same  appearance  will  be  observed.*  This  can  only 
arise  from  the  circumferential  rays  having  undergone  the 
absorptive  action  of  a  much  greater  thickness  of  some  imper- 
fectly transparent  envelope  (due  to  greater  obliquity  of  their 
passage  through  it)  than  the  central. — But  a  still  more  con- 
vincing and  indeed  decisive  evidence  is  offered  by  the  phaeno- 

•  This  has  been  denied  by  Arago  on  the  evidence  of  certain  phenomena  ob- 
served with  his  "  polariscope ; "  but  the  fact  is  so  palpable,  that  it  is  matter  of 
some  astonishment  that  it  could  ever  fail  to  strike  the  most  superficial  observer. 
The  matter  has  been  placed  beyond  a  doubt,  however,  by  direct  experiments 
both  photometric  and  thermic.  The  details  of  the  latter  by  Sig.  Secchi  will  be 
found  in  Astron.  Nashr.  Nos.  806.  833,  and  go  to  prove  that  the  calorific  radia- 
tion of  the  center  of  the  sun's  disc  is  nearly  double  of  that  from  its  borders,  and 
that  the  equatorial  regions  are  somewhat  hotter  than  the  polar  (Comptes  Ren- 
du*   Aug.  26th,  18.-3'2). — (XoU  added  1858.) 


256  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

mena  attending  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun.  Such  eclipses 
^as  will  be  shown  hereafter)  are  produced  by  the  interposition 
of  the  dark  body  of  the  moon  between  the  earth  and  sun, 
the  moon  being  large  enough  to  cover  and  surpass,  by  a 
very  small  breadth,  the  whole  disc  of  the  sun.  Now  when 
this  takes  place,  were  there  no  vaporous  atmosphere  capable 
of  reflecting  any  light  about  the  sun,  the  sky  ought  to  appear 
totally  dark,  since  (as  will  hereafter  abundantly  appear)  there 
is  not  the  smallest  reason  for  believing  the  moon  to  have  any 
atmosphere  capable  of  doing  so.  So  far,  however,  is  this 
from  being  the  case,  that  a  bright  ring  or  corona  of  light  is 
seen,  fading  gradually  away,  as  represented  in  PI.  I.  fig.  3., 
which  (in  cases  where  the  moon  is  not  centrally  superposed 
on  the  sun)  is  observed  to  be  concentric  with  the  latter,  not 
the  former  body.  This  corona  was  beautifully  seen  in  the 
eclipse  of  July  7.  1842,  and  with  this  most  remarkable 
addition — witnessed  by  every  spectator  in  Pavia,  Milan, 
Vienna,  and  elsewhere  :  three  distinct  and  very  conspicuous 
rose-coloured  protuberances  (as  represented  in  the  figure  cited) 
were  seen  to  project  beyond  the  dark  limb  of  the  moon, 
likened  by  some  to  flames,  by  others  to  mountains,  but  which 
their  enormous  magnitude  (for  to  have  been  seen  at  all  by 
the  naked  eye  their  height  must  have  exceeded  40,000  miles), 
and  their  faint  degree  of  illumination,  clearly  prove  to  have 
been  cloudy  masses  of  the  most  excessive  tenuity,  and  which 
doubtless  owed  their  support,  and  probably  their  existence,  to 
such  an  atmosphere  as  we  are  now  speaking  of.  In  the 
total  eclipse  of  July  28.  1851,  similar  rose-coloured  protu- 
berances were  observed,  one  in  particular  of  a  form  quite 
decisive  as  to  their  cloudy  nature,  rising  straight  up  verti- 


cally from  the  edge  of  the  disc,  and  then  suddenly  turning 
off  at  a  right  angle  (as  in  the  annexed  figure)  which  repre- 


TEMPERATURE    OF    THE    SUN'S   SURFACE.  257 

seats  the  appearance  as  seen  by  Prof.  Schmidt,  at  llasten- 
burg,  just  as  a  column  of  smoke  rising  in  calm  air  is  often 
seen  to  be  drifted  oft'  horizontally  when  it  has  attained 
such  a  height  as  to  bring  it  into  an  upper  current  of  wind. 
To  complete  the  resemblance,  a  detached  and  perfectly  in- 
sulated mass  B  of  the  same  rosy  colour  was  observed  at  some 
distance  from  the  drifted  train  A,  which  was  connected  with 
another  mass  C,  by  a  narrow  red  band  or  streak  D. 

(395  a.)  The  existence  of  such  an  atmosphere  superior  to 
the  luminous  envelope  being  admitted,  affords  an  easy  ex- 
planation of  the  faculae,  considered  as  vast  waves  in  the  pho- 
tosphere (art.  388.).  In  an  atmosphere  consisting  of  strata 
gradually  decreasing  in  density,  any  cause  of  undulation 
acting  on  the  inferior  strata  will  throw  them  up  to  a  vastly 
greater  height,  and  therefore  produce  far  greater  waves  in 
them  than  would  arise  from  the  same  cause  acting  on  the 
surface  of  a  definite  ocean  of  liquid  matter,  by  reason  of 
their  being  partially  sustained  against  gravity,  leaving  their 
inertia  free  to  carry  them  up  to  a  higher  level.  The  experi- 
ment is  easily  tried  in  oil  floating  on  water,  or  in  saline 
solutions  increasing  in  density  downwards,  and  is  at  once 
amusing  and  instructive.      [See  Note  (O)  §  (395  b  b.)~\ 

(396.)  That  the  temperature  at  the  visible  surface  of  the 
sun  cannot  be  otherwise  than  very  elevated,  much  more  so 
than  any  artificial  heat  produced  in  our  furnaces,  or  by  che- 
mical or  galvanic  processes,  we  have  indications  of  several 
distinct  kinds  :  1st,  From  the  law  of  decrease  of  radiant  heat 
and  light,  which,  being  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances, 
it  follows,  that  the  heat  received  on  a  given  area  exposed  at 
the  distance  of  the  earth,  and  on  an  equal  area  at  the  visible 
surface  of  the  sun,  must  be  in  the  proportion  of  the  area  of 
the  sky  occupied  by  the  sun's  appai*ent  disc  to  the  whole 
hemisphere,  or  as  1  to  about  92,000.  A  far  less  intensity  of 
solar  radiation,  collected  in  the  locus  of  a  burning  glass,  SB& 
fices  to  dissipate  gold  and  platina  in  vapour.  2dly,  From  the 
facility  with  which  the  calorific  rays  of  the  sun  traverse  glass, 
a  property  which  is  found  to  belong  to  the  heat  of  artificial 

S 


258  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

fires  in  the  direct  proportion  of  their  intensity.*  3dly,  From 
the  fact,  that  the  most  vivid  flames  disappear,  and  the  most 
intensely  ignited  solids  appear  only  as  black  spots  on  the  disc 
of  the  sun  when  held  between  it  and  the  eye.f  From  the 
last  remark  it  follows,  that  the  body  of  the  sun,  however  dark 
it  may  appear  when  seen  through  its  spots,  may,  nevertheless, 
be  in  a  state  of  most  intense  ignition.  It  does  not,  however, 
follow  of  necessity  that  it  must  be  so.  The  contrary  is  at 
least  physically  possible.  A  perfectly  reflective  canopy  would 
effectually  defend  it  from  the  radiation  of  the  luminous  regions 
above  its  atmosphere,  and  no  heat  wouLd  be  conducted  down- 
wards through  a  gaseous  medium  increasing  rapidly  in  density. 
That  the  penumbral  clouds  are  highly  reflective,  the  fact  of 
their  visibility  in  such  a  situation  can  leave  no  doubt. 

(397.)  As  the  magnitude  of  the  sun  has  been  measured, 
and  (as  we  shall  hereafter  see)  its  weight,  or  quantity  of  pon- 
derable matter,  ascertained,  so  also  attempts  have  been  made, 
and  not  wholly  without  success,  from  the  heat  actually  com- 
municated by  its  rays  to  given  surfaces  of  material  bodies 
exposed  to  their  vertical  action  on  the  earth's  surface,  to  esti- 
mate the  total  expenditure  of  heat  by  that  luminary  in  a  given 
time.  The  result  of  such  experiments  has  been  thus  an- 
nounced. Supposing  a  cylinder  of  ice  45  miles  in  diameter,  to 
be  continually  darted  into  the  sun  with  the  velocity  of  light,  and 
that  the  water  produced  by  its  fusion  were  continually  carried 
off,  the  heat  now  given  off  constantly  by  radiation  would  then 
be  wholly  expended  in  its  liquefaction,  on  the  one  hand,  so  as 
to  leave  no  radiant  surplus;  while  on  the  other,  the  actual 
temperature  at  its  surface  would  undergo  no  diminution.^ 

*  By  direct  measurement  with  the  actinometer.  I  find  that  out  of  1000 
calorific  solar  rays,  816  penetrate  a  sheet  of  plate  glass  0-12  inch  thick;  and 
that  of  1000  rays  which  have  passed  through  one  such  plate,  859  are  capable 
of  passing  through  another.      H.  1827. 

f  The  ball  of  ignited  quicklime,  in  Lieutenant  Drummond's  oxy-hydrogen 
lamp,  gives  the  nearest  imitation  of  the  solar  splendour  which  has  yet  been 
produced.  The  appearance  of  this  against  the  sun  was,  however,  as  described 
in  an  imperfect  trial  at  which  I  was  present.  The  experiment  ought  to  be 
repeated  under  favourable  circumstances.  —  Note  to  the.  ed.  of  183!J.  According 
to  the  more  recent  experiments  of  Messrs.  Fizeau  and  Foticault,  the  intensity 
of  the  light  at  the  surface  of  Drummond's  lime-ball  is  only  one- 146th  part  of 
that  at  the  surface  of  the  sun  ! — (Note  added  1858.) 

\  "  Results  of  Astronomical  Observations  at  the  (ape  of  Good  Hope,"  p.  444. 


AMOUNT   OP    IIEAT   GIVEN   OUT   BY    THE    SUN         250 

(397  a.)  Another  mode  of  expressing  the  heat  generated 
and  radiated  off  from  the  sun's  surface,  well  calculated  to  im- 
press us  with  an  overwhelming  idea  of  the  tremendous  ener- 
gies there  constantly  in  action,  is  that  employed  by  Pro- 
fessor Thomson,  who  estimates  the  dynamical  effect  which 
would  be  produced  in  our  manufactories  by  a  consumption  of 
fuel  competent  to  evolve  the  heat  given  out  by  each  individual 
square  yard  of  that  surface,  at  63000  horse-power,  to  main- 
tain which  would  require  the  combustion  of  13500  pounds 
of  coal  per  hour.* 

(398.)  This  immense  escape  of  heat  by  radiation,  we  may 
remark,  will  fully  explain  the  constant  state  of  tumultuous 
agitation  in  which  the  fluids  composing  the  visible  surface  are 
maintained,  and  the  continual  generation  and  filling  in  of  the 
pores,  without  having  recourse  to  internal  causes.  The  mode 
of  action  here  alluded  to  is  perfectly  represented  to  the  eye 
in  the  disturbed  subsidence  of  a  precipitate,  as  described  in 
art  387.,  when  the  fluid  from  which  it  subsides  is  warm,  and 
losing  heat  from  its  surface. 

(399.)  The  sun's  rays  are  the  ultimate  source  of  almost 
every  motion  which  takes  place  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
By  its  heat  are  produced  all  winds,  and  those  disturbances  in 
the  electric  equilibrium  of  the  atmosphere  which  give  rise  to 
the  phenomena  of  lightning,  and  probably  also  to  those  of 
terrestrial  magnetism  and  the  aurora.  By  their  vivifying  action 
vegetables  are  enabled  to  draw  support  from  inorganic  matter, 


*  Se»  Trans.  R.  S.  Edin.  xxi.  p.  69.  "  On  the  Mechanical  Energies  of  the 
Solar  System,"  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  Prof.  Nat  Phil.,  Glasgow.  The  Pro- 
fessor grounds  this  estimate  on  M.  Pouillet's  determination  of  the  amount  of 
solar  radiation  and  Mr.  Joule's  estimate  of  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  a  ceu- 
tigrade  thermal  unit.  The  author  of  this  work  found  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  by  experiments  made  on  six  summer  days,  from  December  '23rd,  18»fi, 
to  January  9th,  1837,  the  sun  being  nearly  vertical  in  each  experiment,  that 
in  that  latitude  at  midsummer,  at  noon,  and  at  140  feet  above  the  sea  level, 
the  solar  radiation  is  competent  to  melt  an  inch  in  thickness  from  a  sheet  of 
be  exposed  perpendicularly  to  its  rays  (if  wholly  so  employed)  in  2h.  12™. 
42'.  Estimating  the  heat  absorbed  in  traversing  our  atmosphere  at  one-third  of 
the  total  quantity  incident  on  it,  this  gives,  all  reductions  made,  43 '39  feet  in 
thickness  of  ice  per  minute  melted  at  the  sun's  surface.  M.  Pouillet's  experi- 
ments (made  in  June,  I  837),  give  1 1  "80  metres  or  38-7  feet  per  minute.  Fortv 
feet  may  therefore  he  taken  as  a  probable  mean,  and  from  this  the  result  iu  (art. 
397.  )  is  calculated. 

S  2 


'«J(»0  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

and  become,  in  their  turn,  the  support  of  animals  and  of  man, 
and  the  sources  of  those  great  deposits  of  dynamical  efficiency 
which  are  laid  up  for  human  use  in  our  coal  strata.*  By  them 
the  waters  of  the  sea  are  made  to  circulate  in  vapour  through 
the  air,  and  irrigate  the  land,  producing  springs  and  rivers.  By 
them  are  produced  all  disturbances  of  the  chemical  equilibrium 
of  the  elements  of  nature,  which,  by  a  series  of  compositions 
and  decompositions,  give  rise  to  new  products,  and  originate 
a  transfer  of  materials.  Even  the  slow  degradation  of  the 
solid  constituents  of  the  surface,  in  which  its  chief  geological 
changes  consist,  is  almost  entirely  due,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the 
abrasion  of  wind  and  rain,  and  the  alternation  of  heat  and 
frost ;  on  the  other,  to  the  continual  beating  of  the  sea  waves, 
agitated  by  winds,  the  results  of  solar  radiation.  Tidal  action 
(itself  partly  due  to  the  sun's  agency)  exercises  here  a  com- 
paratively slight  influence.  The  effect  of  oceanic  currents 
(mainly  originating  in  that  influence),  though  slight  in  abrasion, 
is  powerful  in  diffusing  and  transporting  the  matter  abraded; 
and  when  we  consider  the  immense  transfer  of  matter  so  pro- 
duced, the  increase  of  pressure  over  large  spaces  in  the  bed 
of  the  ocean,  and  diminution  over  corresponding  portions  of 
the  land,  we  are  not  at  a  loss  to  perceive  how  the  elastic 
power  of  subterranean  fires,  thus  repressed  on  the  one  hand 
and  relieved  on  the  other,  may  break  forth  in  points  where  the 
resistance  is  barely  adequate  to  their  retention,  and  thus  bring 
the  phenomena  of  even  volcanic  activity  under  the  general 
law  of  solar  influence. f 

(400.)  The  great  mystery,  however,  is  to  conceive  how  so 
enormous  a  conflagration  (if  such  it  be)  can  be  kept  up. 
Every  discovery  in  chemical  science  here  leaves  us  completely 
at  a  loss,  or  rather,  seems  to  remove  farther  the  prospect  of 
probable  explanation.  If  conjecture  might  be  hazarded,  we 
should  look  rather  to  the  known  possibility  of  an  indefinite 
generation  of  heat  by  friction,  or  to  its  excitement  by  the 

•  So  in  the  edition  of  1833.     The  celebrated  engineer  Stephenson  is  generally, 
but  en.meously.  cited  as  the  originator  of  this  remark, 
t  So  in  the  edition  of  183a 


TROBABLF.    ORIGIN   OF    SOLAR   RADIATION.  261 

electric  discharge,  than  to  any  actual  combustion  of  ponderable 
fuel,  whether  solid  or  gaseous,  for  the  origin  of  the  solar 
radiation.*  Photographic  representations  of  the  spots  have 
been  made  with  much  success  by  Mr.  DelaRue,\vith  a"pho- 
tohelioscope  "  at  Kew  :  also  by  the  Rev.  W.  Selwyn,  Canon 
of  Ely,  &c. 

•  Electricity  traversing  excessively  rarefied  air  or  vapours  gives  out  light, 
and,  doubtless,  also  heat.  May  not  a  continual  current  of  electric  matter  be 
constantly  circulating  in  the  sun's  immediate  neighbourhood,  or  traversing  the 
planetary  spaces,  and  exciting,  in  the  upper  regions  of  its  atmosphere,  those 
phaenomena  of  which,  on  however  diminutive  a  scale,  we  have  yet  an  unequivocal 
manifestation  in  our  aurora  borealis.  The  possible  analogy  of  the  solar  light 
to  that  of  the  aurora  has  been  distinctly  insisted  on  by  the  late  Sir  W.  Herschel, 
in  his  paper  already  cited.  It  would  be  a  highly  curious  subject  of  experi- 
mental enquiry,  how  far  a  mere  reduplication  of  sheets  of  flame,  at  a  distance 
one  behind  the  other  (by  which  their  light  might  be  brought  to  any  required 
intensity),  would  communicate  to  the  heat  of  the  resulting  compound  ray  the 
penetrating  character  which  distinguishes  the  solar  calorific  rays.  We  may  also 
ohserve  that  the  tranquillity  of  the  sun's  polar,  as  compared  with  its  equatorial 
regions  (if  its  spots  be  really  atmospheric),  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  its  ro- 
tation on  its  axis  only,  but  must  arise  from  some  cause  external  to  the  luminous 
surface  of  the  sun,  as  we  see  the  belts  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  and  our  trade- 
winds,  arise  from  a  cause  external  to  these  planets,  combining  itself  with  their 
rotation  which  alone  can  produce  no  motions  when  once  the  form  of  equilibrium 
is  attained. 

The  prismatic  analysis  of  the  solar  beam  exhibits  in  the  spectrum  a  series  of 
"  fixed  lines,"  totally  unlike  those  which  belong  to  the  light  of  any  known  ter- 
restrial flame.  This  may  hereafter  lead  us  to  a  clearer  insight  into  its  origin. 
But,  before  we  can  draw  any  conclusions  from  such  an  indication,  we  must 
recollect,  that  previous  to  reaching  us  it  has  undergone  the  whole  absorptive 
action  of  our  atmosphere,  as  well  as  of  the  sun's.  Of  the  latter  we  know  no- 
thing, and  may  conjecture  every  thing  ;  but  of  the  blue  colour  of  the  former  we 
are  sure  ;  and  if  this  be  an  inherent  (i.  e.  an  absorptive)  colour,  the  air  must  be 
expected  to  act  on  the  spectrum  after  the  analogy  of  other  coloured  media,  which 
often  (and  especially  light  blue  media)  leave  unabsorbed  portions  separated  by 
nark  intervals.  It  deserves  enquiry,  therefore,  whether  some  or  all  the  fixed 
lines  observed  by  Wollaston  and  Fraunhofer  may  not  have  their  origin  in  our 
own  atmosphere.  Experiments  made  on  lofty  mountains,  or  the  cars  of  bal- 
loons, on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  with  reflected  beams  which  have  been 
made  to  traverse  several  miles  of  additional  air  near  the  surface,  «  ould  decide 
this  point  The  absorptive  effect  of  the  sun's  atmosphere,  and  possibly  also  of 
the  medium  surrounding  it  (whatever  it  be)  which  resists  the  motion!  of  comets, 
cannot  be  thus  eliminated.  —  Note  to  the  edition  of  1N33.  The  idea  of  referring 
the  origin  of  the  solar  heat  to  friction  has  been  worked  out  into  au  elaborate 
theory  by  Prof.  Thomson,  in  his  paper  already  cited,  of  which  some  account  will 
be  given  in  a  more  advanced  portion  of  this  work.  (1858.)  The  recent  re- 
markable results  of  what  is  called  "  Spectrum  Analysis"  afford  a  curious 
commentary  on  this  note.     (1868.)     [See  note  (M.)     (1865.)] 


Note  on  Art.  (394.  a.)— The  year  1856  was  remarkable  for  the  absence  of 
spots  in  the  sun  (in  exact  accordance  with  Wolf's  period);  during  1H57  the 
phase  of  increased  activity  came  on;  and  the  present  year  (1858)  is  ushered  in 
with  a  magnificent  display  >f  spots  in  the  sun's  southern  hemisphere. —  S«le 
MU,d  Jan.  4.   1S58.) 


2«2  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OF  THE  MOON. ITS  SIDEREAL  PERIOD.  —  ITS  APPARENT  DIAMETER. 

ITS     PARALLAX     DISTANCE,     AND      REAL     DIAMETER  FIRST 

APPROXIMATION  TO  ITS  ORBIT AN  ELLIPSE  ABOUT  THE  EARTH 

IN  THE  FOCUS.  —  ITS  EXCENTRICITY  AND  INCLINATION MOTION 

OF   ITS   NODES    AND   APSIDES.  OF     OCCULTATIONS    AND     SOLAR 

ECLIPSES  GENERALLY.  LIMITS    WITHIN  WHICH  THEY  ARE    POS- 
SIBLE.   THEY  PROVE  THE  MOON  TO  BE  AN  OPAQUE  SOLID. ITS 

LIGHT   DERIVED   FROM   THE    SUN.  —  ITS    PHASES. SYNODIC    RE- 
VOLUTION OR   LUNAR   MONTH. HARVEST   MOON. OF  ECLIPSES 

MORE  PARTICULARLY. THEIR  PHENOMENA. THEIR  PERIODICAL 

RECURRENCE.  —  PHYSICAL    CONSTITUTION    OF     THE    MOON.  ITS 

MOUNTAINS   AND   OTHER  SUPERFICIAL  FEATURES.  INDICATIONS 

OF  FORMER  VOLCANIC  ACTIVITY. ITS  ATMOSPHERE. CLIMATE. 

RADIATION    OF    HEAT    FROM  ITS  SURFACE. ROTATION  ON  ITS 

OWN    AXIS.  —  LIBRATION.  APPEARANCE   OF  THE  EARTH  FROM 

IT. PROBABLE   ELONGATION    OF    THE    MOON'S     FIGURE    IN    THE 

DIRECTION  OF  THE  EARTH. — ITS  HABITABIL1TY  NOT    IMPOSSIBLE. 
—CHARTS,   MODELS,    AND   PHOTOGRAPHS   OF   ITS   SURFACE. 

(401.)  The  moon,  like  the  sun,  appears  to  advance  among 
the  stars  with  a  movement  contrary  to  the  general  diurnal 
motion  of  the  heavens,  but  much  more  rapid,  so  as  to  be 
very  readily  perceived  (as  we  have  before  observed)  by  a 
few  hours'  cursory  attention  on  any  moonlight  night.  By 
this  continual  advance,  which,  though  sometimes  quicker, 
sometimes  slower,  is  never  intermitted  or  reversed,  it  makes 
the  tour  of  the  heavens  in  a  mean  or  average  period  of  27d 
7h  43m  115,5,  returning,  in  that  time,  to  a  position  among 
the  stars  nearly  coincident  with  that  it  had  before,  and  which 
would  be  exactly  so,  but  for  reasons  presently  to  be  stated. 

(402.)  The  moon,  then,  like  the  sun,  apparently  describes 
an  orbit  round  the  earth,  and  this  orbit  cannot  be  very 
different  from  a  circle,  because  the  apparent  angular  diameter 
of  the  full  moon  is  not  liable  to  any  great  extent  of  variation. 

(403.)  The  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  is  con- 


DISTANCE    AND   MAGNITUDE    OP    THE    MOON.         263 

eluded  from  its  horizontal  parallax,  which  may  be  found 
either  directly,  by  observations  at  remote  geographical  sta- 
tions, exactly  similar  to  those  described  in  art.  355.,  in  the 
case  of  the  sun,  or  by  means  of  the  phenomena  called  occul- 
tations,  from  which  also  its  apparent  diameter  is  most  rea- 
dily and  correctly  found.  From  such  observations  it  re- 
sults that  the  mean  or  average  value  of  the  moon's  horizon- 
tal parallax  is  57'2"*325  *,  and  the  mean  distance  of  the  center 
of  the  moon  from  that  of  the  earth  is  60*255  of  the  earth's 
equatorial  radii,  or  about  238793  miles,  taking  with  Mr. 
Adams  57'  2"*325  for  the  mean  horizontal  parallax.  This 
distance,  great  as  it  is,  is  little  more  than  one-fourth  of  the 
diameter  of  the  sun's  body,  so  that  the  globe  of  the  sun 
would  nearly  twice  include  the  whole  orbit  of  the  moon ; 
a  consideration  wonderfully  calculated  to  raise  our  ideas  of 
that  stupendous  luminary  I 

(404.)  The  distance  of  the  moon's  center  from  an  observer 
at  any  station  on  the  earth's  surface,  compared  with  its 
apparent  angular  diameter  as  measured  from  that  station,  will 
give  its  real  or  linear  diameter.  Now,  the  former  distance 
is  easily  calculated  when  the  distance  from  the  earth's  center 
is  known,  and  the  apparent  zenith  distance  of  the  moon  also 
determined  by  observation  ;  for  if  we  turn  to  the  figure  of 
art.  339.,  and  suppose  S  the  moon,  A  the  station,  and  C  the 
earth's  center,  the  distance  S  C,  and  the  earth's  radius  C  A, 
two  sides  of  the  triangle  ACS  are  given,  and  the  angle 
CAS,  which  is  the  supplement  of  Z  A  S,  the  observed 
zenith  distance,  whence  it  is  easy  to  find  A  S,  the  moon's 
distance  from  A.  From  such  observations  and  calculations 
it  results,  that  the  real  diameter  of  the  moon  is  2160  miles, 
or  about  0'2729  of  that  of  the  earth,  whence  it  follows  that, 
the  bulk  of  the  latter  being  considered  as  1,  that  of  the 
former  will  be  0-0204,  or  about  -Jy.  The  difference  of  the 
apparent  diameter  of  the  moon,  as  seen  from  the  earth's  cen- 
ter and  from  any  point  of  its  surface,  is  technically  called  the 
augmentation  of  the  apparent  diameter,  and   its   maximum 

•  This  result,  recently  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Adams,  coincides  almost  precisely 
with  that  assigned  by  Henderson,  viz.  oT  2" -31. 


284  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

occurs  when  the  moon  is  in  the  zenith  of  the  spectator.  Her 
mean  angular  diameter,  as  seen  from  the  center,  is  31'  7", 
and  is  always  =  0545  x  her  horizontal  parallax. 

(405.)  By  a  series  of  observations,  such  as  described  in 
art.  403.,  if  continued  during  one  or  more  revolutions  of  the 
moon,  its  real  distance  may  be  ascertained  at  every  point  of 
its  orbit ;  and  if  at  the  same  time  its  apparent,  [daces  in  the 
heavens  be  observed,  and  reduced  by  means  of  its  parallax 
to  the  earth's  center,  their  angular  intervals  will  become 
known,  so  that  the  path  of  the  moon  may  then  be  laid  down 
on  a  chart  supposed  to  represent  the  plane  in  which  its  orbit 
lies,  just  as  was  explained  in  the  case  of  the  solar  ellipse 
(art.  349.).  Now,  when  this  is  done,  it  is  found  that,  neg- 
lecting certain  small,  though  very  perceptible  deviations  of 
which  a  satisfactory  account  will  hereafter  be  rendered,  the 
form  of  the  apparent  orbit,  like  that  of  the  sun,  is  elliptic, 
but  considerably  more  eccentric,  the  eccentricity  amounting 
to  0*05484  of  the  mean  distance,  or  the  major  semi-axis  of  the 
ellipse,  and  the  earth's  center  being  situated  in  its  focus. 

(406.)  The  plane  in  which  this  orbit  lies  is  not  the  ecliptic, 
however,  but  is  inclined  to  it  at  an  angle  of  5°  8'  48",  which 
is  called  the  inclination  of  the  lunar  orbit,  and  intersects  it  in 
two  opposite  points,  which  are  called  its  nodes  —  the  ascend- 
ing node  being  that  in  which  the  moon  passes  from  the 
southern  side  of  the  ecliptic  to  the  northern,  and  the  descend' 
ing  the  reverse.  The  points  of  the  orbit  at  which  the  moon 
is  nearest  to,  and  farthest  from,  the  earth,  are  called  respec- 
tively its  perigee  and  apogee,  and  the  line  joining  them  and 
the  earth  the  line  of  apsides. 

(407.)  There  are,  however,  several  remarkable  circum- 
stances which  interrupt  the  closeness  of  the  analogy,  which 
cannot  fail  to  strike  the  reader,  between  the  motion  of  the 
moon  around  the  earth,  and  of  the  earth  around  the  sun.  In 
the  latter  case,  the  ellipse  described  remains,  during  a  great 
many  revolutions,  unaltered  in  its  position  and  dimensions ; 
or,  at  least,  the  changes  which  it  undergoes  are  not  percep- 
tible but  in  a  course  of  very  nice  observations,  which  have 
disclosed,  it  is  true,  the  existence  of  "  perturbations,"  but  of 


MOTION    OF    THE   MOON'S    NODES.  205 

bo  minute  an  order,  that,  in  ordinary  parlance,  and  for 
common  purposes,  we  may  leave  them  unconsidered.  But 
this  cannot  be  done  in  the  case  of  the  moon.  Even  in  a 
single  revolution,  its  deviation  from  a  perfect  ellipse  is  very 
sensible.  It  does  not  return  to  the  same  exact  position 
among  the  stars  from  which  it  set  out,  thereby  indicating  a 
continual  change  in  the  plane  of  its  orbit.  And,  in  effect, 
if  we  trace  by  observation,  from  month  to  month,  the  point 
where  it  traverses  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  find  that  the  nodes 
of  its  orbit  are  in  a  continual  state  of  retreat  upon  the  ecliptic. 
Suppose  O  to  be  the  earth,  and  A  b  a  d  that  portion  of  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic  which  is  intersected  by  the  moon,  in  its 
alternate  passages  through  it,  from  south  to  north,  and  vice 
ri'/sd ;  and  let  A  B  C  D  E  F  be  a  portion  of  the  moon's 
orbit,  embracing  a  complete  sidereal  revolution.  Suppose  it 
to  set  out  from  the  ascending  node, 

A  ;  then,  if  the  orbit  lay  all  in  ^- — — — ^ 

one  plane,  passing  through  O,  it        /-'''  "^f 

would  have  a,  the  opposite  point   a  LjF~  — -^"^    \  \a 

in  the  ecliptic,  for  its  descending      \y^y^  P 

node ;  after  passing  which,  it  would  reg^-^T^?^ 

again  ascend  at  A.      But,  in  fact, 

its  real  path  carries  it  not  to  a,  but  along  a  certain  curve, 
A  B  C,  to  C,  a  point  in  the  ecliptic  less  than  180°  distant 
from  A;  so  that  the  angle  A  O  C,  or  the  arc  of  longi- 
tude described  between  the  ascending  and  the  descending 
node,  is  somewhat  less  than  180°.  It  then  pursues  its 
course  below  the  ecliptic,  along  the  curve  C  D  E,  and 
rises  again  above  it,  not  at  the  point  c,  diametrically  opposite 
to  C,  but  at  a  point  E,  less  advanced  in  longitude.  On  the 
whole,  then,  the  arc  described  in  longitude  between  two 
consecutive  passages  from  south  to  north,  through  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic,  falls  short  of  360°  by  the  angle  A  O  E ;  or, 
in  other  words,  the  ascending  node  appears  to  have  retreated 
in  one  lunation  on  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  by  that  amount. 
To  complete  a  sidereal  revolution,  then,  it  must  still  go  on  to 
describe   an   arc,  E   F,    on  its  orbit,  which  will  no  longer, 


266  OUTLINES    OF    ASTltONOMY. 

however,  bring  it  exactly  back  to  A,  but  to  a  point  some- 
what above  it,  or  having  north  latitude. 

(408.)  The  actual  amount  of  this  retreat  of  the  moon's 
node  is  about  3'  10//,64  per  diem,  on  an  average,  and  in  a 
period  of  6793*39  mean  solar  days,  or  about  18*6  years,  the 
ascending  node  is  carried  round  in  a  direction  contrary  to  the 
moon's  motion  in  its  orbit  (or  from  east  to  west)  over  a  whole 
circumference  of  the  ecliptic.  Of  course,  in  the  middle  of 
this  period  the  position  of  the  orbit  must  have  been  precisely 
reversed  from  what  it  was  at  the  beginning.  Its  apparent 
path,  then,  will  lie  among  totally  different  stars  and  con- 
stellations at  different  parts  of  this  period  ;  and  this  kind  of 
spiral  revolution  being  continually  kept  up,  it  will,  at  one 
time  or  other,  cover  with  its  disc  every  point  of  the  heavens 
within  that  limit  of  latitude  or  distance  from  the  ecliptic 
which  its  inclination  permits ;  that  is  to  say,  a  belt  or  zone 
of  the  heavens,  of  10°  18'  in  breadth,  having  the  ecliptic  for 
its  middle  line.  Nevertheless,  it  still  remains  true  that  the 
actual  place  of  the  moon,  in  consequence  of  this  motion, 
deviates  in  a  single  revolution  very  little  from  what  it  would 
be  were  the  nodes  at  rest.  Supposing  the  moon  to  set  out 
from  its  node  A,  its  latitude,  when  it  comes  to  F,  having 
completed  a  revolution  in  longitude,  will  not  exceed  8' : 
which,  though  small  in  a  single  revolution,  accumulates  in  its 
effect  in  a  succession  of  many  :  it  is  to  account  for,  and  re- 
present geometrically,  this  deviation,  that  the  motion  of  the 
nodes  is  devised. 

(409.)  The  moon's  orbit,  then,  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  an 
ellipse  returning  into  itself,  by  reason  of  the  variation  of 
the  plane  in  which  it  lies,  and  the  motion  of  its  nodes.  But 
even  laying  aside  this  consideration,  the  axis  of  the  ellipse 
is  itself  constantly  changing  its  direction  in  space,  as  has 
been  already  stated  of  the  solar  ellipse,  but  much  more 
rapidly ;  making  a  complete  revolution,  in  the  same  direction 
with  the  moon's  own  motion,  in  3232*5753  mean  solar  days, 
or  about  nine  years,  being  about  3°  of  angular  motion  in  a 
whole  revolution  of  the  moon.  This  is  the  phenomenon  known 
by  the  name  of  the  revolution  of  the  moon's  apsides.     Its 


ECLIPSES    OF    THE    SUN.  2f>7 

cause  will  be  hereafter  explained.  Its  immediate  effect  is 
to  produce  a  variation  in  the  moon's  distance  from  the  earth, 
which  is  not  included  in  the  laws  of  exact  elliptic  motion. 
In  a  single  revolution  of  the  moon,  this  variation  of  distance  is 
trifling ;  but  in  the  course  of  many  it  becomes  considerable,  as 
is  easily  seen,  if  we  consider  that  in  four  years  and  a  half  the 
position  of  the  axis  will  be  completely  reversed,  and  the  apo- 
gee of  the  moon  will  occur  where  the  perigee  occurred  before. 

(410.)  The  best  way  to  form  a  distinct  conception  of  the 
moon's  motion  is  to  regard  it  as  describing  an  ellipse  about 
the  earth  in  the  focus,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  regard  this 
ellipse  itself  to  be  in  a  twofold  state  of  revolution;  1st,  in  its 
own  plane,  by  a  continual  advance  of  its  axis  in  that  plane  ; 
and  2dly,  by  a  continual  tilting  motion  of  the  plane  itself, 
exactly  similar  to,  but  much  more  rapid  than,  that  of  the 
earth's  equator  produced  by  the  conical  motion  of  its  axis, 
described  in  art  317. 

(411.)  As  the  moon  is  at  a  very  moderate  distance  from 
us  (astronomically  speaking),  and  is  in  fact  our  nearest 
neighbour,  while  the  sun  and  stars  are  in  comparison  immensely 
beyond  it,  it  must  of  necessity  happen,  that  at  one  time  or 
other  it  must  pass  over  and  occult  or  eclipse  every  star  and 
planet  within  the  zone  above  described  (and,  as  seen  from  the 
surface  of  earth,  even  somewhat  beyond  it,  by  reason  of 
parallax,  which  may  throw  it  apparently  nearly  a  degree 
cither  way  from  its  place  as  seen  from  the  centre,  according 
to  the  observer's  station).  Nor  is  the  sun  itself  exempt 
from  being  thus  hidden,  whenever  any  part  of  the  moon's 
disc,  in  this  her  tortuous  course,  comes  to  overlap  any  part 
of  the  space  occupied  in  the  heavens  by  that  luminary.  On 
these  occasions  is  exhibited  the  most  striking  and  impressive 
of  all  the  occasional  phenomena  of  astronomy,  an  eclipse  of  the 
sun,  in  which  a  greater  or  less  portion,  or  even  in  some  rare 
conjunctures  the  whole,  of  its  disc  is  obscured,  and,  as  it 
wore,  obliterated,  by  the  superposition  of  that  of  the  moon, 
which  appears  upon  it  as  a  circularly-terminated  black  spot, 
producing  a  temporary  diminution  of  daylight,  or  even 
nocturnal  darkness,  so  that  the  stars  appear  as  if  at  midnight. 


268  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY 

In  other  cases,  when,  at  the  moment  that  the  moon  is  centrally 
super  posed  on  the  sun,  it  so  happens  that  her  distance  from  the 
earth  is  such  as  to  render  her  angular  diameter  less  than  the 
sun's,  the  very  singular  phenomenon  of  an  annular  solar  eclipse 
takes  place,  when  the  edge  of  the  sun  appears  for  a  few 
minutes  as  a  narrow  ring  of  light  projecting  on  all  sides 
beyond  the  dark  circle  occupied  by  the  moon  in  its  centre. 

(412.)  A  solar  eclipse  can  only  happen  when  the  sun  and 
moon  are  in  conjunction,  that  is  to  say,  have  the  same,  or 
nearly  the  same,  position  in  the  heavens,  or  the  same  lon- 
gitude. It  appears  by  art.  409.  that  this  condition  can  only 
be  fulfilled  at  the  time  of  a  new  moon,  though  it  by  no  means 
follows,  that  at  every  conjunction  there  must  be  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun.  If  the  lunar  orbit  coincided  with  the  ecliptic,  this 
would  be  the  case,  but  as  it  is  inclined  to  it  at  an  angle  of 
upwards  of  5°,  it  is  evident  that  the  conjunction,  or  equality 
of  longitudes,  may  take  place  when  the  moon  is  in  the  part 
of  her  orbit  too  remote  from  the  ecliptic  to  permit  the  discs 
to  meet  and  overlap.  It  is  easy,  however,  to  assign  the 
limits  within  which  an  eclipse  is  possible.  To  this  end  we 
must  consider,  that,  by  the  effect  of  parallax,  the  moon's 
apparent  edge  may  be  thrown  in  any  dim  tion,  according  to 
a  spectator's  geographical  station,  by  any  amount  not  exceed- 
ing her  horizontal  parallax,  and  the  same  holds  good  of  the  sun, 
so  that  there  is  a  displacement  to  the  extent  of  the  difference 
of  the  two  parallaxes.  Now,  this  comes  to  the  same  (so  far 
as  the  possibility  of  an  eclipse  is  concerned)  as  if  the  apparent 
diameter  of  the  moon,  seen  from  the  earth's  centre,  were 
dilated  by  twice  the  difference  of  their  horizontal  parallaxes ; 
for  if,  when  so  dilated,  it  can  touch  or  overlap  the  sun,  there 
must  be  an  eclipse  at  some  part  or  other  of  the  earth's  surface. 
If,  then,  at  the  moment  of  the  nearest  conjunction,  the  geo- 
centric distance  of  the  centres  of  the  two  luminaries  do  uot 
exceed  the  sum  of  their  semidiameters  and  of  the  last  men- 
tioned difference,  there  will  be  an  eclipse.  The  sum  is,  at  its 
maximum,  about  1°  34"  26'.  In  the  spherical  triangle  SNM, 
then,  in  which  S  is  the  sun's  centre,  M  the  moon's,  SNthe 


SOLAR    ECLIPTIC    LIMITS.  *2f>9 

ecliptic,  M  N  the  moon's  orbit,  and  N  the  node,  we  may 
suppose  the  angle  NSM  a  right 
angle,  SM*1°  34'  26",  and  the 
angle  M  N  S  =  5°  8' 48",  the  in- 
clination of  the  orbit.  Hence  we 
calculate  SN,  which  comes  out 
16°  58'.  If,  then,  at  the  moment  Sv 
of  the  new  moon,  the  moon's  node  is  farther  from  the  sun 
in  longitude  than  this  limit,  there  can  be  no  eclipse ;  if 
within,  there  may,  and  probably  will,  at  some  part  or  other 
of  the  earth.  To  ascertain  precisely  whether  there  will  or 
not,  and,  if  there  be,  how  great  will  be  the  part  eclipsed, 
the  solar  and  lunar  tables  must  be  consulted,  the  place  of 
the  node  and  the  semidiameters  exactly  ascertained,  and  the 
local  parallax,  and  apparent  augmentation  of  the  moon's 
diameter  due  to  the  difference  of  her  distance  from  the 
observer  and  from  the  center  of  the  earth  (which  may 
amount  to  a  sixtieth  part  of  her  horizontal  diameter),  de- 
termined; after  which  it  is  easy,  from  the  above  considerations, 
to  calculate  the  amount  overlapped  of  the  two  discs,  and 
their  moment  of  contact. 

(413.)  The  calculation  of  the  occultation  of  a  star  depends 
on  similar  considerations.  An  occultation  is  possible,  when 
the  moon's  course,  as  seen  from  the  earth's  centre,  carries  her 
within  a  distance  from  the  star  equal  to  the  sum  of  her 
semidiameter  and  horizontal  parallax ;  and  it  will  happen  at 
any  particular  spot,  when  her  apparent  path,  as  seen  from 
that  spot,  carries  her  center  within  a  distance  equal  to  the 
sum  of  her  augmented  semidiameter  and  actual  parallax.  The 
details  of  these  calculations,  which  are  somewhat  troublesome, 
must  be  sought  elsewhere.* 

(414.)  The  phenomenon  of  a  solar  eclipse  and  of  an  occul- 
tation are  highly  interesting  and  instructive  in  a  physical 
point  of  view.  They  teach  us  that  the  moon  is  an  opaque 
body,  terminated  by  a  real  and  sharply  defined  surface  in- 

*  Woodhouse's  Astronomy,  vol.  i.  See  also  Trans.  Ast.  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  325. 
See  also  Prof  Loomis's  Introduction  to  Practical  Astronomy,  in  which  every 
detail  of  the  calculation  will  he  found  illuttratcd  by  numerical  examples. 


270  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

tercepting  light  like  a  solid.  They  prove  to  us,  also,  that  at 
those  times  when  we  cannot  see  the  moon,  she  really  exists,  and 
pursues  her  course,  and  that  when  we  see  her  only  as  a 
crescent,  however  narrow,  the  whole  globular  body  is  there, 
filling  up  the  deficient  outline,  though  unseen.  For  occulta- 
tions  take  place  indifferently  at  the  dark  and  bright,  the 
visible  and  invisible  outline,  whichever  happens  to  be  towards 
the  direction  in  which  the  moon  is  moving ;  with  this  only 
difference,  that  a  star  occulted  by  the  bright  limb,  if  the 
phenomenon  be  watched  witli  a  telescope,  gives  notice,  by 
its  gradual  approach  to  the  visible  edge,  when  to  expect  its 
disappearance,  while,  if  occulted  at  the  dark  limb,  if  the 
moon,  at  least,  be  more  than  a  few  days  old,  it  is,  as  it  were, 
extinguished  in  mid-air,  without  notice  or  visible  cause  for 
its  disappearance,  which,  as  it  happens  instantaneously,  and 
without  the  slightest  previous  diminution  of  its  light,  is 
always  surprising;  and,  if  the  star  be  a  large  and  bright  one, 
even  startling  from  its  suddenness.  The  re-appearance  of 
the  star,  too,  when  the  moon  has  passed  over  it,  takes  place 
in  those  cases  when  the  bright  side  of  the  moon  is  foremost, 
not  at  the  concave  outline  of  the  crescent,  but  at  the 
invisible  outline  of  the  complete  circle,  and  is  scarcely  less 
surprising,  from  its  suddenness,  than  its  disappearance  in 
the  other  case.* 

(415.)  The  existence  of  the  complete  circle  of  the  disc, 
even  when  the  moon  is  not  full,  does  not,  however,  rest  only 
on  the  evidence  of  occultations  and  eclipses.     It  m;iy  be 

*  There  is  an  optical  illusion  of  a  very  strange  and  unaccountable  nature 
which  has  often  been  remarked  in  occultations.  The  star  appears  to  advance 
actually  upon  and  within  the  edge  of  the  disc  before  it  disappears,  and  that 
sometimes  to  a  considerable  depth.  I  have  never  myself  witnessed  this  singular 
effect,  but  it  rests  on  most  unequivocal  testimony.  I  have  called  it  an  optical 
illusion  ;  but  it  is  barely  possible  that  a  star  may  shine  on  such  occasions  through 
deep  fissures  in  the  substance  of  the  moon.  The  occultations  of  close  double 
itars  ought  to  be  narrowly  watched,  to  see  whether  both  individuals  are  thus 
projected,  as  well  as  for  other  purposes  connected  with  their  theory.  1  will  only 
hint  at  one,  viz.  that  a  double  star,  too  close  to  be  seen  divided  with  any  telescope, 
may  yet  be  detected  to  be  double  by  the  mode  of  its  disappearance.  Should  a 
considerable  star,  for  instance,  instead  of  undergoing  instantaneous  and  complete 
extinction,  go  out  by  two  distinct  steps,  following  close  upon  each  other'  first 
losing  a  portion,  then  the  whole  remainder  of  its  light,  we  may  be  sure  it  is  a 
double  star,  though  we  cannot  see  the  individuals  separately. —  Nut*  .'.;  iht 
i' tit.  of  IS:', 3. 


TILE    CRESCENT    MOON.  271 

seen,  when  the  moon  is  crescent  or  waning,  a  few  days  before 
and  after  the  new  moon,  with  the  naked  eye,  as  a  pale  round 
body,  to  which  the  crescent  seems  attached,  and  somewhat 
projecting  beyond  its  outline  (which  is  an  optical  illusion 
arising  from  the  greater  intensity  of  its  light).  The  cause 
of  this  appearance  will  presently  be  explained.  Meanwhile 
the  fact  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  moon  is  not  inherently 
luminous  like  the  sun,  but  that  her  light  is  of  an  adventitious 
nature.  And  its  crescent  form,  increasing  regularly  from 
a  narrow  semicircular  line  to  a  complete  circular  disc,  cor- 
responds to  the  appearance  a  globe  would  present,  one 
hemisphere  of  which  was  black,  the  other  white,  when 
differently  turned  towards  the  eye,  so  as  to  present  a  greater 
or  less  portion  of  each.  The  obvious  conclusion  from  this  is, 
that  the  moon  is  such  a  globe,  one  half  of  which  is  brightened 
by  the  rays  of  some  luminary  sufficiently  distant  to  enlighten 
the  complete  hemisphere,  and  sufficiently  intense  to  give  it 
the  degree  of  splendour  we  see.  Now,  the  sun  alone  is 
competent  to  such  an  effect.  Its  distance  and  light  suffice ; 
and,  moreover,  it  is  invariably  observed  that,  when  a  crescent, 
the  bright  edge  is  towards  the  sun,  and  that  in  proportion  as 
the  moon  in  her  monthly  course  becomes  more  and  more 
distant  from  the  sun,  the  breadth  of  the  crescent  increases, 
and  vice  versa. 

(416.)  The  sun's  distance  being  23984  radii  of  the  earth, 
and  the  moon's  only  60,  the  former  is  nearly  400  times  the 
latter.  Lines,  therefore,  drawn  from  the  sun  to  every  part 
of  the  moon's  orbit  may  be  regarded  as  very  nearly  parallel.* 
Suppose,  now,  O  to  be  the  earth,  A  BCD,  &c.  various 
positions  of  the  moon  in  its  orbit,  and  S  the  sun,  at  the  vast 
distance  above  stated;  as  is  shown,  then,  in  the  figure,  the 
hemisphere  of  the  lunar  globe  turned  towards  it  (on  the 
right)  will  be  bright,  the  opposite  dark,  wherever  it  may 
stand  in  its  orbit.  Now,  in  the  position  A,  when  in  con- 
junction with  the  sun,  the  dark  part  is  entirely  turned 
towards  O,  and  the  bright  from  it.     In  this  case,  then,  the 

*  The  angle  subtended  by  the  moon's  orbit,  as  seen  from  the  sun  (in  the  mtiuj 
Hate  of  tilings),  is  only  17'  12". 


272  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

moon  is  not  seen,  it  is  new  moon.     When  the  moon  has  come 
to  C,  half  the  bright  and  half  the  dark  hemisphere  are  pre- 

ft 


sented  to  O,  and  the  same  in  the  opposite  situation  G :  these 
are  the  first  and  third  quarters  of  the  moon.  Lastly,  when 
it  E,  the  whole  bright  face  is  towards  the  earth,  the  whole 
dark  side  from  it,  and  it  is  then  seen  wholly  bright  or  full 
moon.  In  the  intermediate  positions  BDF1I,  the  portions 
of  the  bright  face  presented  to  O  will  be  at  first  less  than 
half  the  visible  surface,  then  greater,  and  finally  less  again, 
till  it  vanishes  altogether,  as  it  comes  round  again  to  A. 

(417.)  These  monthly  changes  of  appearance,  or  phases, 
as  they  are  called,  arise,  then,  from  the  moon,  an  opaque 
body,  being  illuminated  on  one  side  by  the  sun,  and  reflecting 
from  it,  in  all  directions,  a  portion  of  the  light  so  received. 
Nor  let  it  be  thought  surprising  that  a  solid  substance  thus 
illuminated  should  appear  to  shine  and  again  illuminate  the 
earth.  It  is  no  more  than  a  white  cloud  does  standing  off 
upon  the  clear  blue  sky.  By  day,  the  moon  can  hardly  be 
distinguished  in  brightness  from  such  a  cloud ;  and,  in  the 
dusk  of  the  evening,  clouds  catching  the  last  rays  of  the  sun 
appear  with  a  dazzling  splendour,  not  inferior  to  the  seeming 
brightness  of  the  moon  at  night.*  That  the  earth  sends  also 
such  a  light  to  the  moon,  only  probably  more  powerful  by 

*  The  actual  illumination  of  the  lunar  surface  is  not  much  superior  to  that  of 
weathered  sandsione  rock  in  full  sunshine.  I  have  frequently  compared  the 
moon  setting  behind  the  grey  perpendicular  facade  of  the  Table  Mountain, 
illuminated  by  the  sun  just  risen  in  the  opposite  quarter  of  the  horizon,  when  it 
has  scarcely  been  distinguishable  in  brightness  from  the  rock  in  contact  with  it. 
The  sun  and  moon  being  nearly  at  equal  altitudes  and  the  atmosphere  perfectly 
free  from  cloud  or  vapour,  its  effect  is  alike  on  both  luminaries.  (II.  lo48.) 


THE    MOON'S    SYNODIC    KEVOLL1  [ON.  273 

reason  of  its  greater  apparent  size*,  is  agreeable  to  optical 
principles,  and  explains  the  appearance  of  the  dark  portion 
of  the  young  or  waning  moon  completing  its  crescent  (art. 
413).  For,  when  the  moon  is  nearly  new  to  the  earth,  the 
latter  (so  to  speak)  is  nearly  full  to  the  former;  it  then 
illuminates  its  dark  half  by  strong  earth-light;  and  it  is  a 
portion  of  this,  reflected  back  again,  which  makes  it  visible 
to  us  in  the  twilight  sky.  As  the  moon  gains  age,  the  earth 
offers  it  a  less  portion  of  its  bright  side,  and  the  phenomenon 
in  question  dies  away.  The  light  of  the  full  moon  is  esti- 
mated by  Botiguer  on  the  result  of  photometric  comparisons, 
as  only  one  300000th  part  of  that  of  the  sun. 

(418.)  The  lunar  month  is  determined  by  the  recurrence 
of  its  phases:  it  reckons  from  new  moon  to  new  moon;  that 
is,  from  leaving  its  conjunction  with  the  sun  to  its  return  to 
conjunction.  If  the  sun  stood  still,  like  a  fixed  star,  the 
interval  between  two  conjunctions  would  be  the  same  as  the 
period  of  the  moon's  sidereal  revolution  (art.  401.);  but,  as 
the  sun  apparently  advances  in  the  heavens  in  the  same 
direction  with  the  moon,  only  slower,  the  latter  has  more 
than  a  complete  sidereal  period  to  perform  to  come  up  with 
the  sun  again,  and  will  require  for  it  a  longer  time,  which  is 
the  lunar  month,  or,  as  it  is  generally  termed  in  astronomy,  a 
synodical  period.  The  difference  is  easily  calculated  by  con- 
sidering that  the  superfluous  arc  (whatever  it  be)  is  described, 
by  the  sun  with  the  velocity  of  0o,98565  -per  diem,  in  the  same 
time  that  the  moon  describes  that  arc  plus  a  complete  revolu- 
tion, with  her  velocity  of  130, 17640  per  diem;  and,  the  times 
of  description  being  identical,  the  spaces  are  to  each  other  in 
the  proportion  of  the  velocities.  Let  V  and  v  be  the  mean 
angular  daily  motions  of  the  sun  and  moon  as  above,  x  the 
superfluous  arc;  then  V  :  v  : :  360° -rx  :  x\  and  V  —  v  :  w  : : 

360°  :  x,  whence  x  is  found;  and  -  =the  time  in  days  in  which 

v  * 

'-?fiO° 
the  sun  describes  the  arc  x,  that  is,  the  synodical  periods  -^ 

•  The  apparent  diameter  of  the  moon  is  32'  from  the  earth  ;  that  of  the  earth 
r«»Mi  from  the  moon  is  twice  her  horizontal  parallax,  or  1°  54'.  The  apparent 
surfaces  therefore,  are  as  (114)*.  (32)%  or  as  13  :    1  nearly. 

T 


274  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

__  r  .p    -|.  p      are  tjie  peri0(^c  times  of  each  separately, 

p-T 
which  reduced  to  numbers,  gives,  29d'530589  =  29d  12h  44m 
28-87. 

(419.)  Supposing  the  position  of  the  nodes  .of  the  moon's 
orbit  to  permit  it,  when  the  moon  stands  at  A  (or  at  the  new 
moon),  it  will  intercept  a  part  or  the  whole  of  the  sun's  rays, 
and  cause  a  solar  eclipse.  On  the  other  hand,  when  at  E 
(or  at  the  full  moon),  the  earth  O  will  intercept  the  rays  of 
the  sun,  and  cast  a  shadow  on  the  moon,  thereby  causing  a 
lunar  eclipse.  And  this  is  consonant  to  fact,  such  eclipses 
never  happening  but  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon.  But, 
what  is  still  more  remarkable,  as  confirmatory  of  the  position 
of  the  earth's  sphericity,  this  shadow,  which  we  plainly  see 
to  enter  upon  and,  as  it  were,  eat  away  the  disc  of  the  moon, 
is  always  terminated  by  a  circular  outline,  though,  from  the 
greater  size  of  the  circle,  it  is  only  partially  seen  at  any  one 
time.  Now,  a  body  which  always  casts  a  circular  shadow 
must  itself  be  spherical. 

(420.)  Eclipses  of  the  sun  are  best  understood  by  re- 
garding the  sun  and  moon  as  two  independent  luminaries, 
each  moving  according  to  known  laws,  and  viewed  from  the 
earth  ;  but  it  is  also  instructive  to  consider  eclipses  generally 
as  arising  from  the  shadow  of  one  body  thrown  on  another  by 
a  luminary  much  larger  than  either.     Suppose,  then,  A  B  to 


represent  the  sun,  and  C  D  a  spherical  body,  whether  earth 
or  moon,  illuminated  by  it.  If  we  join  and  prolong  A  C,  B  D  ; 
since  A  B  is  greater  than  C  D,  those  lines  will  meet  in  a  point 
E,  more  or  less  distant  from  the  body  C  D,  according  to  its 


SOLAU    AND    LUNAR    ECLIPSES.  275 

size,  and  within  the  space  C  E  D  (which  represents  a  cone, 
since  C  D  and  A  B  are  spheres),  there  will  be  a  total  shadow. 
This  shadow  is  called  the  umbra,  and  a  spectator  situated 
within  it  can  see  no  part  of  the  sun's  disc.  Beyond  the 
umbra  are  two  diverging  spaces  (or  rather,  a  portion  of  a 
single  conical  space,  having  K  for  its  vertex),  where  if  a 
spectator  be  situated,  as  at  M,  he  will  see  a  portion  only 
(A  O  N  P)  of  the  sun's  surface,  the  rest  (B  O  N  P)  being 
obscured  by  the  earth.  He  will,  therefore,  receive  only 
partial  sunshine;  and  the  more,  the  nearer  he  is  to  the 
exterior  borders  of  that  cone  which  is  called  the  penumbra. 
Beyond  this  he  will  see  the  whole  sun,  and  be  in  full  illu- 
mination. All  these  circumstances  may  be  perfectly  well 
shown  by  holding  a  small  globe  up  in  the  sun,  and  receiving 
its  shadow  at  different  distances  on  a  sheet  of  paper. 

(421.)  In  a  lunar  eclipse  (represented  in  the  upper  figure), 
the  moon  is  seen  to  enter*  the  penumbra  first,  and  by 
degrees,  get  involved  in  the  umbra,  the  former  bordering 
the  latter  like  a  smoky  haze.  At  this  period  of  the  eclipse, 
and  while  yet  a  considerable  part  of  the  moon  remains  un- 
obscured,  the  portion  involved  in  the  umbra  is  invisible  to 
the  naked  eye,  though  still  perceptible  in  a  telescope,  and  of 
a  dark  grey  hue.  But  as  the  eclipse  advances,  and  the 
enlightened  part  diminishes  in  extent,  and  grows  gradually 
more  and  more  obscured  by  the  advance  of  the  penumbra, 
the  eye,  relieved  from  its  glare,  becomes  more  sensible  to 
feeble  impressions  of  light  and  colour ;  and  phamomena  of  a 
remarkable  and  instructive  character  begin  to  be  developed. 
The  umbra  is  seen  to  be  very  far  from  totally  dark ;  and  in 
its  faint  illumination  it  exhibits  a  gradation  of  colour,  being 
bluish,  or  even  (by  contrast)  somewhat  greenish,  towards 
the  borders  for  a  space  of  about  4'  or  5'  of  apparent  angular 
breadth  inwards,  thence  passing,  by  delicate  but  rapid  gra- 
dation, through  rose  red  to  a  fiery  or  copper-coloured  glow, 
like  that  of  dull  red-hot  iron.  As  the  eclipse  proceeds  this 
glow  spreads  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  moon,  which  then 

*  The  actual  contact  with  the  pemiirthra  is  never  seen  ;  the  defalcation  of 
light  conies  on  so  very  trradually  that  it  is  not  till  when  already  deeply  immersed, 
thst  it  is  perceived  to  he  sensibly  datkened, 

T    i 


276 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONoMV. 


becomes  on  some  occasions  so  strongly  illuminated,  as  to  cast 
a  very  sensible  shadow,  and  allow  the  spots  on  its  surface  to 
be  perfectly  well  distinguished  through  a  telescope. 

(422.)  The  cause  of  these  singular,  and  sometimes  very 
beautiful  appearances,  is  the  refraction  of  the  sun's  light  in 
passing  through  our  atmosphere,  which  at  the  same  time 
becomes  coloured  with  the  hues  of  sunset  by  the  absorption 
of  more  or  less  of  the  violet  and  blue  rays,  as  it  passes 
through  strata  nearer  or  more  remote  from  the  earth's  surface, 
and  therefore,  more  or  less  loaded  with  vapour.  To  show  this, 
let  A  D  a  be  a  section  of  the  cone  of  the  umbra,  and  F  B  hf 


of  the  penumbra,  through  their  common  axis  D  E  S,  passing 
through  the  centers  E  S  of  the  earth  and  sun,  and  let  KMi 
be  a  section  of  these  cones  at  a  distance  E  M  from  E,  equal 
to  the  radius  of  the  moon's  orbit,  or  60  radii  of  the  earth.* 
Taking  this  radius  for  unity,  since  E  S,  the  distance  of  the 
sun,  is  23984,  and  the  semidiameter  of  the  sun  111  such 
units,  we  readily  calculate  D  E  =  218,  D  M=158,  for  the 

*  The  figure  is  unavoidably  drawn  out  of  all  proportion,  and  the  angles 
violently  exaggerated.  The  reader  should  try  to  draw  the  figure  in  its  true 
proportions. 


PHENOMENA    OF    A   LUNAR    ECLIPSE.  277 

distances  at  which  the  apex  of  the  geometrical  umbra  liea 
behind  the  earth  and  the  moon  respectively.  We  also  find 
for  the  measure  of  the  angle  E  D  B,  15'  46",  and  therefore 
D  B  E-89°  44'  14",  whence  also  we  get  M  C  (the  linear 
semidinmeter  of  the  umbra)  =  0'725  (or  in  miles  2868),  and 
the  angle  C  E  M,  its  apparent  angular  semidiameter  as  seen 
from  E  =  41'  32".  And  instituting  similar  calculations  for 
the  geometrical  penumbra  we  get  M  K=  1*280(5064  miles), 
and  K  E  M  1°  13'  20" ;  and  it  may  be  well  to  remember 
that  the  doubles  of  these  angles,  or  the  mean  angular  diame- 
ters of  the  umbra  and  penumbra,  are  described  by  the  moon 
with  its  mean  velocity  in  2h  46m,  and  4h  56™  respectively, 
which  are  therefore  the  respective  durations  of  the  total  and 
partial  obscuration  of  any  one  point  of  the  moon's  disc  in 
traversing  centrally  the  geometrical  shadow. 

(423.)  Were  the  earth  devoid  of  atmosphere,  the  whole  of 
the  phenomena  of  a  lunar  eclipse  would  consist  in  these 
partial  or  total  obscurations.  Within  the  space  C  c  the 
whole  of  the  light,  and  within  K  C  and  c  k  a  greater  or  less 
portion  of  it  would  be  intercepted  by  the  solid  body  B  b 
of  the  earth.  The  refracting  atmosphere,  however,  extends 
from  B  b,  to  a  certain  unknown,  but  very  small  distance 
B  H,  b  h,  which,  acting  as  a  convex  lens,  of  gradually  (and 
very  rapidly)  decreasing  density,  disperses  all  that  com- 
paratively small  portion  of  light  which  falls  upon  it  over  a 
space  bounded  externally  by  H  g,  parallel  and  very  nearly 
coincident  with  B  F,  and  internally  by  a  line  B  z,  the  former 
representing  the  extreme  exterior  ray  from  the  limb  a  of  the 
sun,  the  latter,  the  extreme  interior  ray  from  the  limb  A. 
To  avoid  complication,  however,  we  will  trace  only  the 
courses  of  rays  which  just  graze  the  surface  at  B,  viz. :  B  z 
from  the  upper  border,  A,  and  B  v  from  the  lower,  a,  of  the 
sun.  Each  of  these  rays  is  bent  inwards  from  its  original 
course  by  double  the  amount  of  the  horizontal  refraction 
^33')  i.  e.  by  1°  6',  because,  in  passing  from  B  out  of  the 
atmosphere,  it  undergoes  a  deviation  equal  to  that  at  entering, 
and  in  the  same  direction.  Instead,  therefore,  of  pursuing 
the  courses  B  D,  B  F,  these  rays  respectively  will  occupy 


278  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  positions  B  z  y,  B  u,  making,  with  the  aforesaid  lines,  the 
angles  D  B  y,  F  B  v,  each  1°  6'.  Now  we  have  found 
D  B  E  =  89°  44'  14"  and  therefore  FBE(  =  DBE  + 
angular  diam.  of  ©  )  =  90°  ]  6'  1 7"  ;  consequently  the  angles 
E  B  y  and  E  B  v  will  be  respectively  88°  38'  14"  and 
89°  10'  17",  from  which  we  conclude  E  2  =  42-04  and  E  v  = 
69*14  ;  the  former  falling  short  of  the  moon's  orbit  by  17*96, 
and  the  latter  surpassing  it  by  9'14  radii  of  the  earth. 

(424.)  The  penumbra,  therefore,  of  rays  refracted  at  B, 
will  be  spread  over  the  space  »By,  that  at  H  over  g  H  d, 
and  at  the  intermediate  points,  over  similar  intermediate 
spaces,  and  through  this  compound  of  superposed  penumbra 
the  moon  passes  during  the  whole  of  its  path  through  the 
geometrical  shadow,  never  attaining  the  absolute  umbra  B  z  b 
at  all.  Without  going  into  detail  as  to  the  intensity  of 
the  refracted  rays,  it  is  evident  that  the  totality  of  light  so 
thrown  into  the  shadow  is  to  that  which  the  earth  intercepts, 
as  the  area  of  a  circular  section  of  the  atmosphere  to  that  of 
a  diametrical  section  of  the  earth  itself,  and,  therefore,  at  all 
events  but  feeble.  And  it  is  still  further  enfeebled  by  actual 
clouds  suspended  in  that  portion  of  the  air  which  forms  the 
visible  border  of  the  earth's  disc  as  seen  from  the  moon,  as 
well  as  by  the  general  want  of  transparency  caused  by  in- 
visible vapour,  which  is  especially  effective  in  the  lowermost 
strata,  within  three  or  four  miles  of  the  surface,  and  which 
will  impart  to  all  the  rays  they  transmit  the  ruddy  hue  of 
sunset,  only  of  double  the  depth  of  tint  which  we  admire  in 
our  glowing  sunsets,  by  reason  of  the  rays  having  to  traverse 
twice  as  great  a  thickness  of  atmosphere.  This  redness  will 
be  most,  intense  at  the  points  x,  y,  of  the  moon's  path  through 
the  umbra,  and  will  thence  degrade  very  rapidly  outwardly, 
over  the  spaces  x  C,  y  c,  less  so  inwardly,  over  xy.  And  at 
C,  c,  its  hue  will  be  mingled  with  the  bluish  or  greenish 
light  which  the  atmosphere  scatters  by  irregular  dispersion, 
or  in  other  words  by  our  twilight  (art.  44.).  Nor  will  the 
phamomenon  be  uniformly  conspicuous  at  all  times.  Sup- 
posing a  generally  and  deeply  clouded  state  of  the  atmosphere 
around  the  edjxe  of  the  earth's  disc  visible  from  the  moou 


PHENOMENA   OF    A    LUNAR    ECLIPSE.  279 

(;.  e.  around  that  great  circle  of  the  earth,  in  which,  at  the 
moment  the  sun  is  in  the  horizon,)  little  or  no  refracted  light 
may  raach  the  moon.*  Supposing  that  circle  partly  clouded 
and  partly  clear,  patches  of  red  light  corresponding  to  the 
clear  portions  will  be  thrown  into  the  umbra,  and  may  give 
rise  to  various  and  changeable  distributions  of  light  on  the 
eclipsed  discf;  while,  if  entirely  clear,  the  eclipse  will  be 
remarkable  for  the  conspicuousness  of  the  moon  during  the 
whole  or  a  part  of  its  immersion  in  the  umbra.  J 

(425.)  Owing  to  the  great  size  of  the  earth,  the  cone  of  its 
umbra  always  projects  far  beyond  the  moon ;  so  that,  if,  at 
the  time  of  a  lunar  eclipse,  the  moon's  path  be  properly 
directed,  it  is  sure  to  pass  through  the  umbra.  This  is  not, 
however,  the  case  in  solar  eclipses.  It  so  happens,  from  the 
adjustment  of  the  size  and  distance  of  the  moon,  that  the 
extremity  of  her  umbra  always  falls  near  the  earth,  but  some- 
times attains  and  sometimes  falls  short  of  its  surface.  In  the 
former  case  (represented  in  the  lower  figure,  art.  420.)  a  black 
spot,  surrounded  by  a  fainter  shadow,  is  formed,  beyond 
which  there  is  no  eclipse  on  any  part  of  the  earth,  but  within 
which  there  may  be  either  a  total  or  partial  one,  as  the 
spectator  is  within  the  umbra  or  ■penumbra.  When  the  apex 
of  the  umbra  falls  on  the  surface,  the  moon  at  that  point  will 
appear,  for  an  instant,  to  just  cover  the  sun ;  but,  when  it 
falls  short,  there  will  be  no  total  eclipse  on  any  part  of  the 
earth ;  but  a  spectator,  situated  in  or  near  the  prolongation 
of  the  axis  of  the  cone,  will  see  the  whole  of  the  moon  on 
the  sun,  although  not  large  enough  to  cover  it,  i.  e.  he  will 
witness  an  annular  eclipse,  a  phenomenon  to  which  much 
interest  is  attached  by  reason  of  some  curious  optical  pheno- 
mena first  observed  by  Mr.  Baily  at  the  moments  of  the 
forming   and  breaking   of  the  annulus,  like  beads  of  light 

•  As  in  the  eclipses  of  June  5.  1620,  April  25.  1642.  Lalande,  Ast.  1769. 
Also  December  9.  1601,  and  June  10.  1816,  on  which  occasions  the  moon  was 
totally  invisible  even  in  telescopes. 

t   As  in  the  eclipse  of  Oct.  13.  1837,  observed  by  the  author. 

J  As  in  that  of  March  19.  1848,  when  the  moon  is  described  as  giving  ''good 
light  "  during  more  than  an  hour  after  its  total  immersion,  and  some  persons 
even  doubted  its  being  eclipsed.     (Notices  of  K.  Ast.  Sot-,  viii.  p.  132.^ 


280  OUTLINKS   OF    ASTKONOMY. 

alternating  with  black  thready  elongations  of  the  moon's 
limb,  known  by  the  name  of  "  Baily's  beads." 

(426.)  Owing  to  a  remarkable  enough  adjustment  of  the 
periods  in  which  the  moon's  synodical  revolution,  and  that  of 
her  nodes,  are  performed,  eclipses  return  after  a  certain 
period,  very  nearly  in  the  same  order  and  of  the  same 
magnitude.  For  223  of  the  moon's  mean  synodical  revolu- 
tions, or  lunations,  as  they  are  called,  will  be  found  to  occupy 
6535*32  days,  and  nineteen  complete  synodical  revolutions 
of  the  node  to  occupy  6585*78.  The  difference  in  the  mean 
position  of  the  node,  then,  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  223 
lunations,  is  nearly  insensible;  so  that  a  recurrence  of  all 
eclipses  within  that  interval  must  take  place.  Accordingly, 
this  period  of  223  lunations,  or  eighteen  years  and  ten  days, 
is  a  very  important  one  in  the  calculation  of  eclipses  It  is 
supposed  to  have  been  known  to  the  Chaldeans,  the  earliest 
astronomers,  the  regular  return  of  eclipses  having  been 
known  as  a  physical  fact  for  ages  before  their  exact  theory 
was  understood.  In  this  period  there  occur  ordinarily  70 
eclipses,  29  of  the  moon,  and  41  of  the  sun,  visible  in  some 
part  of  the  earth.  Seven  eclipses  of  either  sun  or  moon  at 
most,  and  two  at  least  (both  of  the  sun),  may  occur  in  a 
year. 

(427.)  The  commencement,  duration,  and  magnitude  of  a 
lunar  eclipse  are  much  more  easily  calculated  than  those  of  a 
solar,  being  independent  of  the  position  of  the  spectator  on 
the  earth's  surface,  and  the  same  as  if  viewed  from  its  centre. 
The  common  center  of  the  umbra  and  penumbra  lies  always 
in  the  ecliptic,  at  a  point  opposite  to  the  sun,  and  the  path 
described  by  the  moon  in  passing  through  it  is  its  true  orbit 
as  it  stands  at  the  moment  of  the  full  moon.  In  this  orbit, 
its  position,  at  every  instant,  is  known  from  the  lunar  tables 
and  ephemeris ;  and  all  we  have,  therefore,  to  ascertain,  is, 
the  moment  when  the  distance  between  the  moon's  center  and 
the  center  of  the  shadow  is  exactly  equal  to  the  sum  of  the 
semidiameters  of  the  moon  and  penumbra,  or  of  the  moon  and 
umbra,  to  know  when  it  enters  upon  and  leaves  them  re- 
spectively.   No  lunar  eclipse  can  take  place,  if,  at  the  moment 


HARVEST    MOON.  281 

of  the  full  moon,  the  sun  be  at  a  greater  angular  distance 
from  the  node  of  the  moon's  orbit  than  11°  21',  meaning  by 
an  eclipse  the  immersion  of  any  part  of  the  moon  in  the 
umbra,  as  its  contact  with  the  penumbra  cannot  be  observed 
(see  note  to  art.  421.). 

(428.)  The  dimensions  of  the  shadow,  at  the  place  where 
it  crosses  the  moon's  path,  require  us  to  know  the  distances 
of  the  sun  and  moon  at  the  time.  These  are  variable ;  but 
are  calculated  and  set  down,  as  well  as  their  semidiameters, 
for  every  day,  in  the  ephemeris,  so  that  none  of  the  data  are 
wanting.  The  sun's  distance  is  easily  calculated  from  its 
elliptic  oi'bit;  but  the  moon's  is  a  matter  of  more  difficulty, 
by  reason  of  the  progressive  motion  of  the  axis  of  the  lunar 
orbit.  (Art.  409.)  Both,  however,  are  readily  obtained 
from  the  ephemeris  for  every  day ;  the  sun's  distance  being 
given  explicitly  and  the  moon's  implicitly,  from  her  tabu- 
lated apparent  diameter. 

(428  «.)  It  deserves  to  be  mentioned  that  the  moon  may 
be  seen  eclipsed  while  the  sun  is  yet  above  the  horizon  by  a 
spectator  properly  situated,  so  that  both  luminaries  being 
on  his  mathematical  horizon  shall  be  raised  above  it  by 
refraction,  which  (art.  43.)  exceeds  the  apparent  diameter 
of  either.  This  singular  conjuncture  of  circumstances  is 
said  to  have  been  observed  from  Montmartre,  near  Paris, 
by  the  assembled  academicians  of  that  city  in  a.  d.  1668. 

(428  b.)  The  full  moon  which  happens  on  or  nearest  to  the 
2l8t  of  September  is  called  the  harvest  moon,  because  it 
rises  from  night  to  night,  after  the  full,  more  nearly  after 
sunset  than  any  other  full  moon  in  the  year,  and  is  therefore 
favourable  for  evening  work  in  carrying  in  the  late  crops. 
Suppose  the  full  moon  to  happen  on  that  day  (the  time  of 
the  autumnal  equinox)  the  sun  is  then  entering  Libra,  and 
the  moon  Aries,  the  former  setting  due  west,  the  latter 
rising  due  east;  the  southern  half  of  the  ecliptic  is  then 
entirely  above  and  the  northern  below  the  horizon,  and  the 
ecliptic  itself  makes  then  the  least  possible  angle  with  the 
horizon.  In  advancing  then  12°,  or  one  day's  motion,  along 
the  ecliptic  (or  along  its  own  orbit,  which  is  not  much  in- 


282  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

clined  to  it)  it  will  become  less  depressed  below  the  horizon, 
and  have,  therefore,  a  less  hour  angle  to  travel  over  by  the 
diurnal  motion  after  sunset  the  next  night  to  bring  it  into 
view  than  at  any  other  time.  The  most  favourable  harvest 
moon  is  when  the  full  moon,  falling  on  the  21st  of  September, 
happens  at  the  same  time  to  be  in  the  ascending  node  of  her 
orbit,  which  then  coincides  with  the  vernal  equinox. 

(429.)  The  physical  constitution  of  the  moon  is  better 
known  to  us  than  that  of  any  other  heavenly  body.  By  the 
aid  of  telescopes,  we  discern  inequalities  in  its  surface  which 
can  be  no  other  than  mountains  and  valleys,  —  for  this  plain 
reason,  that  we  see  the  shadows  cast  by  the  former  in  the 
exact  proportion  as  to  length  which  they  ought  to  have,  when 
we  take  into  account  the  inclination  of  the  sun's  rays  to  that 
part  of  the  moon's  surface  on  which  they  stand.  The  convex 
outline  of  the  limb  turned  towards  the  sun  is  always  circular, 
and  very  nearly  smooth ;  but  the  opposite  border  of  the  en- 
lightened part,  which  (were  the  moon  a  perfect  sphere) 
ought  to  be  an  exact  and  sharply  defined  ellipse,  is  always 
observed  to  be  extremely  ragged,  and  indented  with  deep 
recesses  and  prominent  points.  The  mountains  near  this  edge 
cast  long  black  shadows,  as  they  should  evidently  do,  when 
we  consider  that  the  sun  is  in  the  act  of  rising  or  setting  to 
the  parts  of  the  moon  so  circumstanced.  But  as  the  en- 
lightened edge  advances  beyond  them,  i.  e.  as  the  sun  to  them 
gains  altitude,  their  shadows  shorten  ;  and  at  the  full  moon, 
when  all  the  light  falls  in  our  line  of  sight,  no  shadows  are 
seen  on  any  part  of  her  surface.  From  micrometrical  mea- 
sures of  the  lengths  of  the  shadows  of  the  more  conspicuous 
mountains,  taken  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances, 
the  heights  of  many  of  them  have  been  calculated.  Messrs. 
Beer  and  Maedler,  in  their  elaborate  work,  entitled  "Der 
Mond,"  have  given  a  list  of  heights  resulting  from  such 
measurements,  for  no  less  than  1095  lunar  mountains,  among 
which  occur  all  degrees  of  elevation  up  to  3569  toises 
(22,823  British  feet),  or  about  1400  feet  higher  than  Chim- 
borazo  in  the  Andes.  The  existence  of  such  mountains  is 
further  corroborated  by  their  appearance,  as  small  points  or 
islands  of  light  beyond  the  extreme  edge  of  the  enlightened 


PHYSICAL    CONSTITUTION    OF    THE    MOON.  2W3 

part,  which  are  their  tops  catching  the  sun-beams  before  the 
intermediate  plain,  and  which,  as  the  light  advances,  at  length 
connect  themselves  with  it,  and  appear  as  prominences  from 
the  general  edge. 

(430.)  The  generality  of  the  lunar  mountains  present  a 
striking  uniformity  and  singularity  of  aspect.  They  are 
wonderfully  numerous,  especially  towards  the  southern  portion 
of  the  disc,  occupying  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  surface, 
and  almost  universally  of  an  exactly  circular  or  cup-shaped 
form,  foreshortened,  however,  into  ellipses  towards  the  limb; 
but  the  larger  have  for  the  most  part  flat  bottoms  within, 
from  which  rises  centrally  a  small,  steep,  conical  hill.  They 
offer,  in  short,  in  its  highest  perfection,  the  true  volcanic 
character,  as  it  may  be  seen  in  the  crater  of  Vesuvius,  and  in 
a  map  of  the  volcanic  districts  of  the  Campi  Phlegraei*  or 
the  Puy  de  D6me,  but  with  this  remarkable  peculiarity, 
viz. :  that  the  bottoms  of  many  of  the  craters  are  very  deeply 
depressed  below  the  general  surface  of  the  moon,  the  internal 
depth  being  often  twice  or  three  times  the  external  height. 
In  some  of  the  principal  ones,  decisive  marks  of  volcanic 
stratification,  arising  from  successive  deposits  of  ejected  matter, 
and  evident  indications  of  lava  currents  streaming  outwards 
in  all  directions,  may  be  clearly  traced  with  powerful  tele- 
scopes. (See  PL  V.  fig.  2.)f  In  Lord  Rosse's  magnificent 
reflector,  the  flat  bottom  of  the  crater  called  Albategnius  is 
seen  to  be  strewed  with  blocks  not  visible  in  inferior  tele- 
scopes, while  the  exterior  of  another  (Aristillus)  is  all  hatched 
over  with  deep  gullies  radiating  towards  its  center.  What 
is,  moreover,  extremely  singular  in  the  geology  of  the  moon 
is,  that,  although  nothing  having  the  character  of  seas  can 
be  traced,  (for  the  dusky  spots,  which  are  commonly  called 
seas,  when  closely  examined,  present  appearances  incom- 
patible with  the  supposition  of  deep  water,)  yet  there  are 
large  regions  perfectly  level,  and  apparently  of  a  decided 
alluvial  character ;  as  there  are  also  here  and  there,  chain- 
of  mountains  whose  appearance  suggests  no  suspicion  of 
volcanic  origin.     \_See  (430  a)  in  Note  HJ. 

•  See  Breislak's  map  of  the  environs  of  Naples,  and  IVsmari-st's  of  Auvcrgnc 
t  From  a  drawing  taken  with  a  reflector  of  twenty  feet  focal  length  (h). 


284  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(431.)  We  perceive  on  the  moon  no  clouds,  nor  any  otlier 
decisive  indications  of  an  atmosphere.  Were  there  any,  it 
could  not  fail  to  be  perceived  in  the  occultations  of  stars  and 
the  phaenomena  of  solar  eclipses,  as  well  as  in  a  great  variety 
of  other  phaenomena.  The  moon's  diameter,  for  example,  as 
measured  micrometrically,  and  as  estimated  by  the  interval 
between  the  disappearance  and  reappearance  of  a  star  in  an 
occulta tion,  ought  to  differ  by  twice  the  horizontal  refraction 
at  the  moon's  surface.  Xo  appreciable  difference  being  per- 
ceived, we  are  entitled  to  conclude  the  non-existence  of  any 
atmosphere  at  its  edge  dense  enough  to  cause  a  refraction  of 
1"  i.  e.  having  one  1980th  part  of  the  density  of  the  earth's 
atmosphere.  In  a  solar  eclipse,  the  existence  of  any  sensible 
refracting  atmosphere  in  the  moon,  would  enable  us  to  trace 
the  limb  of  the  latter  beyond  the  cusps,  externally  to  the 
sun's  disc,  by  a  narrow,  but  brilliant  line  of  light,  extending 
to  some  distance  along  its  edge.  No  such  phaenomenon  is 
seen.  Very  faint  stars  ought  to  be  extinguished  before 
occultation,  were  any  appretiable  amount  of  vapour  suspended 
near  the  surface  of  the  moon.  But  such  is  not  the  ca?e ; 
when  occulted  at  the  bright  edge,  indeed,  the  light  of  the 
moon  extinguishes  small  stars,  and  even  at  the  dark  limb,  the 
glare  in  the  sky  caused  by  the  near  presence  of  the  moon, 
renders  the  occultation  of  very  minute  stars  unobservable.  But 
during  the  continuance  of  a  total  lunar  eclipse,  stars  of  the 
tenth  and  eleventh  magnitude  are  seen  to  come  up  to  the 
limb,  and  undergo  sudden  extinction  as  well  as  those  of  greater 
brightness.*  Hence,  the  climate  of  the  moon  must  be  very 
extraordinary  ;  the  alternation  being  that  of  unmitigated  and 
burning  sunshine  fiercer  than  an  equatorial  noon,  continued 
for  a  whole  fortnight,  and  the  keenest  severity  of  frost,  far 
exceeding  that  of  our  polar  winters,  for  an  equal  time.  Such 
a  disposition  of  things  must  produce  a  constant  transfer  of 
whatever  moisture  may  exist  on  its  surface,  from  the  point 
beneath  the  sun  to  that  opposite,  by  distillation  in  vacuo  after 
the  manner  of  the  little  instrument  called  a  cryophorus.  The 
consequence  must  be  absolute  aridity  below  the  vertical  sun, 

*   As  observed  bv  mvsclf  in  the  eclipse  of  Oct    13.  1SS7 


CLIMATE    AND   HEAT    OF    THE    MOON.  285 

constant  accretion  of  hoar  frost  in  the  opposite  region,  and, 
perhaps,  a  narrow  zone  of  running  water  at  the  borders  of 
the  enlightened  hemisphere.*  It  is  possible,  then,  that  evapo- 
ration on  the  one  hand,  and  condensation  on  the  other,  may 
to  a  certain  extent  preserve  an  equilibrium  of  temperature, 
and  mitigate  the  extreme  severity  of  both  climates ;  but  this 
process,  which  would  imply  the  continual  generation  and 
destruction  of  an  atmosphere  of  aqueous  vapour,  must,  in  con- 
formity with  what  has  been  said  above  of  a  lunar  atmosphere, 
be  confined  within  very  narrow  limits. 

(432.)  Though  the  surface  of  the  full  moon  exposed  to  us 
must  necessarily  be  very  much  heated, —  ■possibly  to  a  degree 
much  exceeding  that  of  boiling  water,  —  yet  we  feel  no  heat 
from  it,  and  even  in  the  focus  of  large  reflectors,  it  fails  to 
affect  the  thermometer.  No  doubt,  therefore,  its  heat,  (con- 
formably to  what  is  observed  of  that  of  bodies  heated  below 
the  point  of  luminosity,)  is  much  more  readily  absorbed  in 
traversing  transparent,  media  than  direct  solar  heat,  and  is 
extinguished  in  the  upper  regions  of  our  atmosphere,  never 
reaching  the  surface  of  the  earth  at  all.  Some  probability 
is  given  to  this  by  the  tendency  to  disappearance  of  clouds 
under  the  full  moon,  a  meteorological  fact,  (for  as  such  we 
think  it  fully  entitled  to  rank  f,)  for  which  it  is  necessary  to 
seek  a  cause,  and  for  which  no  other  rational  explanation 
seems  to  offer.  As  for  any  other  influence  of  the  moon  on 
the  weather,  we  have  no  decisive  evidence  in  its  favour. 

(433.)  A  circle  of  one  second  in  diameter,  as  seen  from  the 
earth,  on  the  surface  of  the  moon,  contains  about  a  square 
mile.  Telescopes,  therefore,  must  yet  be  greatly  improved, 
before  we  could  expect  to  see  signs  of  inhabitants,  as  manifested 
by  edifices  or  by  changes  on  the  surface  of  the  soil.  It  should, 
however,  be  observed,  that,  owing  to  the  small  density  of  the 

•  So  in  ed.  of  J  8S3 

f  From  my  own  observations,  made  quite  independently  of  any  know, 
ledge  of  such  a  tendency  having  been  observed  by  others.  Humboldt,  however, 
in  his  Personal  Narrative,  s peals  of  it  as  well  known  to  the  pilots  and  seamen 
of  Spanish  Aniciica. 

M.  Arago  has  shown,  from  a  comparison  of  rain,  registered  as  having  fallen 
during  a  long  period,  that  a  slight  preponderance  in  respect  of  quantity  falls 
near  the  new  moon  over  that  which  falls  near  the  full.  This  would  be  a  natural 
and  necessary  consequence  of  a  preponderance  of  a  cloudless  sky  about  »he  full, 
and  forms,  therefore,  part  and  parcel  of  the  same  meteorological  fact 


286  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

materials  of  the  moon,  and  the  comparatively  feeble  gravitation 
of  bodies  on  her  surface,  muscular  force  would  there  go  six 
times  as  far  in  overcoming  the  weight  of  materials  as  on  the 
earth.  Owing  to  the  want  of  air,  however,  it  seems  im- 
possible that  any  form  of  life,  analogous  to  those  on  earth,  can 
subsist  there.  No  appearance  indicating  vegetation,  or  the 
slightest  variation  of  surface,  which  can,  in  our  opinion,  fairly 
be  ascribed  to  change  of  season,  can  any  where  be  discerned. 

(434.)  The  lunar  summer  and  winter  arise,  in  fact,  from 
the  rotation  of  the  moon  on  its  own  axis,  the  period  of  which 
rotation  is  exactly  equal  to  its  sidereal  revolution  about  the 
earth,  and  is  performed  in  a  plane  1°  30'  11"  inclined  to  the 
ecliptic,  whose  ascending  node  is  always  precisely  coincident 
with  the  descending  node  of  the  lunar  orbit.  So  that  the  axis 
of  rotation  describes  a  conical  surface  about  the  pole  of  the 
ecliptic  in  one  revolution  of  the  node.  The  remarkable 
coincidence  of  the  two  rotations,  that  about  the  axis  and 
that  about  the  earth,  which  at  first  sight  would  seem  per- 
fectly distinct,  has  been  asserted  (but  we  think  somewhat 
too  hastily*)  to  be  a  consequence  of  the  general  laws  to  be 
explained  hereafter.  Be  that  how  it  may,  it  is  the  cause 
why  we  always  see  the  same  face  of  the  moon,  and  have  no 
knowledge  of  the  other  side.f 

(435.)  The  moon's  rotation  on  her  axis  is  uniform  ;  but 
since  her  motion  in  her  orbit  (like  that  of  the  sun)  is  not  so, 
we  are  enabled  to  look  a  few  degrees  round  the  equatorial 
parts  of  her  visible  border,  on  the  eastern  or  western  side, 
according  to  circumstances ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  line 
joining  the  centers  of  the  earth  and  moon  fluctuates  a  little 
in  its  position,  from  its  mean  or  average  intersection  with  her 
surface,  to  the  east  or  westward.     And,  moreover,  since  the 

*  See  Edinburgh  Review,  No.  175.  p.  192. 

f  Strange  to  say,  there  are  persons  who  find  it  difficult  to  regard  as  a  rotation 
on  its  own  axis,  that  peculiarity  of  the  moon's  motion  which  consists  in  its 
keeping  the  same  face  always  towards  the  earth.  Should  any  of  our  readers  he 
in  this  predicament,  we  recommend  him  to  plant  a  staff  upright  in  the  ground, 
and,  grasping  it  with  both  hands,  walk  round  it,  keeping  as  close  to  it  as  possible, 
with  his  face  always  turned  towards  it ;  when  the  unmistakeable  sensation  of 
giddiness  will  effectually  satisfy  him  of  the  fact  of  his  rotation  on  his  own  axis, 
or  he  may  walk  round  a  tree,  always  facing  it,  and  carrying  a  compass  in  his 
hand,  and  while  watching  the  needle  during  a  few  circuits  endeavour  to  per- 
tuaiii'  himself  that  he  does  not  turn  upon  his  own  center. 


ATPEARANCE   OF    THE    EARTH    FROM    THE    MOON.        287 

axis  about  which  she  revolves  is  neither  exactly  perpendicular 
to  her  orbit,  nor  holds  an  invariable  direction  in  space,  her 
poles  come  alternately  into  view  for  a  small  space  at  the  edges 
of  her  disc.  These  phenomena  are  known  by  the  name  of 
librations.  In  consequence  of  these  two  distinct  kinds  of 
libration,  the  same  identieal  point  of  the  moon's  surface  is  not 
always  the  center  of  her  disc,  and  we  therefore  get  sight  of  a 
zone  of  a  few  degrees  in  breadth  on  all  sides  of  the  border, 
beyond  an  exact  hemisphere. 

(436.)  If  there  be  inhabitants  in  the  side  of  the  moon 
turned  towards  us,  the  earth  must  present  to  them  the  extra- 
ordinary appearance  of  a  moon  of  nearly  2°  in  diameter, 
exhibiting  phases  complementary  to  those  which  we  see  the 
moon  to  do,  but  immovably  fixed  in  their  shy,  (or,  at  least, 
changing  its  apparent  place  only  by  the  small  amount  of  the 
libration,)  while  the  stars  must  seem  to  pass  slowly  beside 
and  behind  it.  It  will  appear  clouded  with  variable  spots, 
and  belted  with  equatorial  and  tropical  zones  corresponding 
to  our  trade-winds  ;  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether,  in  their 
perpetual  change,  the  outlines  of  our  continents  and  seas  can 
ever  be  clearly  discerned.  During  a  solar  eclipse,  the  earth's 
atmosphere  will  become  visible  as  a  narrow,  but  bright, 
luminous  ring  of  a  ruddy  colour,  where  it  rests  on  the  earth, 
gradually  passing  into  faint  blue,  encircling  the  whole  or  part 
of  the  dark  disc  of  the  earth,  the  remainder  being  dark  and 
ragged  with  clouds. 

(436  a.)  On  the  subject  of  the  moon's  habitability,  the 
complete  absence  of  air  noticed  in  art.  (431.),  if  general  over 
her  whole  surface,  would  of  course  be  decisive.  Some  con- 
siderations of  a  contrary  nature,  however,  suggest  them- 
selves in  consequence  of  a  remark  lately  made  by  Prof. 
Hansen,  viz.,  that  the  fact  of  the  moon  turning  always  the 
same  face  towards  the  earth  is  in  all  probability  the  result  of 
an  elongation  of  its  figure  in  the  direction  of  a  line  joining 
the  centers  of  both  the  bodies  acting  conjointly  with  a  non- 
coinctdence  of  its  center  of  gravity  with  its  center  of  symmetry. 
To  the  middle  of  the  length  of  a  stick,  loaded  with  a  heavy 
weight  at  one  end  and  a  light  one  at  the  other,  attach  a 
string,  and  swing  it  round.  The  heavy  weight  will  assume  and 


288  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

maintain  a  position  in  the  circulation  of  the  joint  mass  farther 
from  the  hand  than  the  lighter.  This  is  not  improbably 
what  takes  place  in  the  moon.  Anticipating  to  a  certain 
extent  what  he  will  find  more  fully  detailed  in  the  next 
chapter,  the  reader  may  consider  the  moon  as  retained  in  her 
orbit  about  the  earth  by  some  coercing  power  analogous  to 
that  which  the  hand  exerts  on  the  compound  mass  above 
described  through  the  string.  Suppose,  then,  its  globe  made 
up  of  materials  not  homogeneous,  and  so  disposed  in  its 
interior  that  some  considerable  preponderance  of  weight 
should  exist  excentrically  situated :  then  it  will  be  easily 
apprehended  that  the  portion  of  its  surface  nearer  to  that 
heavier  portion  of  its  solid  content,  under  all  the  circum- 
stances of  a  rotation  so  adjusted,  will  permanently  occupy 
the  situation  most  remote  from  the  earth.  Let  us  now  con- 
sider what  may  be  expected  to  be  the  distribution  of  air, 
water,  or  other  fluid  on  the  surface  of  such  a  globe,  suppos- 
ing its  quantity  not  sufficient  to  cover  and  drown  the  whole 
mass.  It  will  run  towards  the  lowest  place,  that  is  to  say, 
not  the  nearest  to  the  center  of  figure  or  to  the  central  point 
ot  the  mere  space  occupied  by  the  moon,  but  to  the  center  of 
the  mass,  or  what  is  called  in  mechanics  the  center  of  gravity. 
There  will  be  formed  there  an  ocean,  of  more  or  less  extent 
according  to  the  quantity  of  fluid,  directly  over  the  heavier 
nucleus,  while  the  lighter  portion  of  the  solid  material  will 
stand  out  as  a  continent  on  the  opposite  side.  And  the 
height  above  the  level  of  such  ocean  to  which  it  will  project 
will  be  greater,  the  greater  the  excentricity  of  the  center  of 
gravity.  Suppose  then  that  in  the  case  of  the  moon  this 
excentricity  should  amount  to  some  thirty  or  forty  miles, 
such  would  be  the  general  elevation  of  the  lunar  land  (or  the 
portion  turned  earthwards)  above  its  ocean,  so  that  the  whole 
of  that  portion  of  the  moon  we  see  would  in  fact  come  to  be 
regarded  as  a  mountainous  elevation  above  the  sea  level. 

(436  b.)  In  what  regards  its  assumption  of  a  definite  level, 
air  obeys  precisely  the  same  hydrostatical  laws  as  water.  The 
lunar  atmosphere  would  rest  upon  the  lunar  ocean,  and  form 
in  its  Taasin  a  lake  of  air,  whose  upper  portions  at  an  altitude 
euch  as  we  an;  now  contemplating,  would  be  of  excessive 


POSSIBLE    HABITABIL1TY    OF    THE    MOON.  28S 

tenuity,  especially  should  the  lunar  provision  of  air  be  less 
abundant  in  proportion  than  our  own.  It  by  no  means 
follows,  then,  from  the  absence  of  visible  indications  of  water 
or  air  on  this  side  of  the  moon,  that  the  other  is  equally 
destitute  of  them,  and  equally  unritted  for  maintaining 
animal  or  vegetable  life.  Some  slight  approach  to  such  a 
state  of  things  actually  obtains  on  the  earth  itself.  Nearly 
:ill  the  land  is  collected  in  one  of  its  hemispheres,  and  much 
the  larger  portion  of  the  sea  in  the  opposite  (art.  284.).  There 
is  evidently  an  excess  of  heavy  material  vertically  beneath 
the  middle  of  the  Pacific ;  while  not  very  remote  from  the 
point  of  the  globe  diametrically  opposite  rises  the  great 
table-land  of  India,  and  the  Himalaya  chain,  on  the  summits 
of  which  the  air  has  not  more  than  a  third  of  the  density  it 
has  on  the  sea-level,  and  from  which  animated  existence  is 
for  ever  excluded. 

(437.)  The  best  charts  of  the  lunar  surface  are  those  of 
Cassini,  of  Russel  (engraved  from  drawings,  made  by  the  aid 
of  a  seven  feet  reflecting  telescope,)  the  seleno-topographical 
charts  of  Lohrmann,  and  the  very  elaborate  projection  of  Beer 
and  Maedler  accompanying  their  work  already  cited.  Madame 
Witte,  a  Hanoverian  lady,  has  recently  succeeded  in  pro- 
ducing from  her  own  observations,  aided  by  Maedler's  charts, 
more  than  one  complete  model  of  the  whole  visible  lunar 
hemisphere,  of  the  most  perfect  kind,  the  result  of  incredible 
diligence  and  assiduity.  Single  craters  have  also  been 
modelled  on  a  large  scale,  both  by  her  and  Mr.  Nasmyth. 
Still  more  recently  (1851  — 1863),  photography  has  been 
applied  with  success  to  the  exact  delineation  of  the  lunar 
surface,  by  Mr.  Whipple,  using  for  this  purpose  the  great 
Fraunhofer  equatorial  of  the  Observatory  at  Cambridge, 
U.S. ;  by  Mr.  Hartnup,  with  the  equatorial  of  the  Liverpool 
Observatory  ;  but  more  especially  by  Mr.  Dela Rue, with  an 
equatorially  mounted  Newtonian  reflector  of  13  inches 
aperture  and  10  feet  focal  length.*    [See  §  (437a)  in  Note  I.] 


D 


88U  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRO NOMY. 


CHAPTER  VIIT. 

OV     TERRESTRIAL   GRAVITY. OF    THE    LAW     OP     UNIVERSAL    GRA- 
VITATION. —  PATHS     OF     PROJECTILES  ;       APPARENT  REAL  — 

THE    MOON    RETAINED    IN    HER    ORBIT    BY    GRAVITY.  —  ITS    LAW 

OF    DIMINUTION. — LAWS  OF    ELLIPTIC   MOTION. ORBIT    OF    THE 

EARTH  ROUND  THE  SUN  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THESE  LAWS. — 
MASSES  OF  THE  EARTH  AND  SUN  COMPARED.  —  DENSITY  OF  THE 
SUN.  —  FORCE  OF  GRAVITY  AT  ITS  SURFACE.  —  DISTURBING 
EFFECT    OF    THE    SUN    ON    THE    MOON'S    MOTION. 

(438.)  The  reader  has  now  been  made  acquainted  with  the 
chief  phenomena  of  the  motions  of  the  earth  in  its  orbit 
round  the  sun,  and  of  the  moon  about  the  earth.  —  We  come 
next  to  speak  of  the  physical  cause  which  maintains  and 
perpetuates  these  motions,  and  causes  the  massive  bodies  so 
revolving  to  deviate  continually  from  the  directions  they 
would  naturally  seek  to  follow,  in  pursuance  of  the  first  law 
of  motion*,  and  bend  their  courses  into  curves  concave  to 
their  centers. 

(439.)  Whatever  attempts  may  have  been  made  by  meta 
physical  writers  to  reason  away  the  connection  of  cause  and 
effect,  and  fritter  it  down  into  the  unsatisfactory  relation  of 
habitual  sequence  f,  it  is  certain  that  the  conception  of  some 
more  real  and  intimate  connection  is  quite  as  strongly  im- 
pressed upon  the  human  mind  as  that  of  the  existence  of  an 
external  world,  —  the  vindication  of  whose  reality  has  (strange 

•   Princip.  Lex.  i. 

f  See  Brown  "On  Cause  and  Effect," — a  work  of  great  acuteness  and  subtlety 
of  reasoning  on  some  points,  but  in  which  the  whole  train  of  argument  is 
ritiated  by  one  enormous  oversight ;  the  omission,  namely,  of  a  distinct  and  im- 
mediate personal  consciousness  of  causation  in  his  enumeration  of  that  sequence  of 
events,  by  which  the  volition  of  the  mind  is  made  to  terminate  in  the  motion  of 
material  objects.  I  mean  the  consciousness  of  effort,  accompanied  with  intention 
thereby  to  accomplish  an  end,  as  a  thing  entirely  distinct  from  mere  desire  or 
volition  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  mere  spasmodic  contraction  of  muscles  on 
the  other,      Brown,  3d  edit.  Edin    1818,  p.  47.      (Note  to  edition  of  1833.) 


OF    TERRESTRIAL    GRAVITY.  2f»  1 

to  say)  been  regarded  m  an  achievement  of  no  common  merit 
in  the  annals  of  tins  branch  of  philosophy.  It  is  our  own 
immediate  consciousness  of  effort,  when  we  exert  force  to  put 
matter  in  motion,  or  to  oppose  and  neutralize  force,  which 
gives  us  this  internal  conviction  of  power  and  causation  so  far 
as  it  refers  to  the  material  world,  and  compels  us  to  believe 
that  whenever  we  see  material  objects  put  in  motion  from 
a  state  of  rest,  or  deflected  from  their  rectilinear  paths  and 
changed  in  their  velocities  if  already  in  motion,  it  is  in  conse- 
quence of  such  an  effort  somehow  exerted,  though  not  accom- 
panied with  our  consciousness.  That  such  an  effort  should  be 
exerted  with  success  through  an  interposed  space,  is  no  doubt 
difficult  to  conceive.  But  the  difficulty  is  no  way  alleviated 
by  the  interposition  of  any  kind  of  material  communication. 
The  action  of  mind  on  matter  admits  of  no  explanation  in 
words  or  elucidation  by  parallels.  We  know  it  as  a  fact,  but 
are  utterly  incapable  of  analysing  it  as  a  process. 

(440.)  All  bodies  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  when 
raised  into  the  air  and  quietly  abandoned,  descend  to  the 
earth's  surface  in  lines  perpendicular  to  it.  They  are  there- 
fore urged  thereto  by  a  force  or  effort,  which  it  is  but  reason- 
able to  regard  as  the  direct  or  indirect  result  of  a  consciousness 
and  a  will  existing  somewhere,  though  beyond  our  power  to 
trace,  wrhich  force  we  term  gravity,  and  whose  tendency  or 
direction,  as  universal  experience  teaches,  is  towards  the 
earth's  center ;  or  rather,  to  speak  strictly,  with  reference  to 
its  spheroidal  figure,  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  still  water. 
But  if  we  cast  a  body  obliquely  into  the  air,  this  tendency, 
though  not  extinguished  or  diminished,  is  materially  modified 
in  its  ultimate  effect.  The  upward  impetus  we  give  the  stone 
is.  it  is  true,  after  a  time  destroyed,  and  a  downward  one 
communicated  to  it,  which  ultimately  brings  it  to  the  surface, 
where  it  is  opposed  in  its  further  progress,  and  brought  to 
rest.  But  all  the  while  it  has  been  continually  deflected  01 
bent  aside  from  its  rectilinear  progress,  and  made  to  describe 
n  curved  line  concave  to  the  earth's  center  :  and  having  a 
highest  point,  vertex,  or  apogee,  just  as  the  moon  h:is  in  its  orbit, 
where  the  direction  of  its  motion  is  perpendicular  to  the  radiu? 

(441.)   When  the  stone  which   we  fling  obliquely  upward* 

v  9 


292  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

meets  and  is  stopped  in  its  descent  by  the  earth's  surface,  its 
motion  is  not  towards  the  center,  but  inclined  to  the  earth's 
radius  at  the  same  angle  as  when  it  quitted  our  hand.  As 
we  are  sure  that,  if  not  stopped  by  the  resistance  of  the  earth, 
it  would  continue  to  descend,  and  that  obliquely,  what  pre- 
sumption, we  may  ask,  is  there  that  it  would  ever  reach  the 
center  towards  which  its  motion,  in  no  part  of  its  visible 
course,  was  ever  directed  ?  What  reason  have  Ave  to  believe 
that  it  might  not  rather  circulate  round  it,  as  the  moon  does 
round  the  earth,  returning  again  to  the  point  it  set  out  from, 
after  completing  an  elliptic  orbit  of  which  the  earth's  center 
occupies  the  lower  focus  ?  And  if  so,  is  it  not  reasonable  to 
imagine  that  the  same  force  of  gravity  may  (since  we  know 
that  it  is  exerted  at  all  accessible  heights  above  the  surface, 
and  even  in  the  highest  regions  of  the  atmosphere)  extend  as 
far  as  60  radii  of  the  earth,  or  to  the  moon  ?  and  may  not  this 
be  the  power, — for  some  power  there  must  be,  —  which  de- 
flects her  at  every  instant  from  the  tangent  of  her  orbit,  and 
keeps  her  in  the  elliptic  path  which  experience  teaches  us  she 
actually  pursues  ? 

(442.)  If  a  stone  be  whirled  round  at  the  end  of  a  string 
it  will  stretch  the  string  by  a  centrifugal  force,  which,  if  the 
speed  of  rotation  be  sufficiently  increased,  will  at  length  break 
the  string,  and  let  the  stone  escape.  However  strong  the 
string,  it  may,  by  a  sufficient  rotary  velocity  of  the  stone,  be 
brought  to  the  utmost  tension  it  will  bear  without  breaking ; 
and  if  we  know  what  weight  it  is  capable  of  carrying,  the 
velocity  necessary  for  this  purpose  is  easily  calculated.  Sup- 
pose, now,  a  string  to  connect  the  earth's  center  with  a  weight 
at  its  surface,  whose  strength  should  be  just  sufficient  to 
sustain  that  weight  suspended  from  it.  Let  us,  however, 
for  a  moment  imagine  gravity  to  have  no  existence,  and  that 
the  weight  is  made  to  revolve  with  the  limiting  velocity  which 
that  string  can  barely  counteract :  then  will  its  tension  be 
just  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  revolving  body ;  and  any 
power  which  should  continually  urge  the  body  towards  the 
center  with  a  force  equal  to  its  weight  would  perform  the 
office,   and  might  supply  the  place  of  the  string,  if  divided- 


GRAVITATION    OF    THE    MOON    TO    THE    EARTH.  293 

Divide  it  then,  and  in  its  place  let  gravity  act,  and  the  body 
will  circulate  as  before;  its  tendency  to  the  center,  or  it's 
it-right,  being  just  balanced  by  its  centrifugal  force.  Know- 
ing the  radius  of  the  earth,  we  can  calculate  by  the  principles 
of  mechanics  the  periodical  time  in  which  a  body  so  balanced 
must  circulate  to  keep  it  up;  and  this  appears  to  be  lh  23m 
22s. 

(443.)  If  we  make  the  same  calculation  for  a  body  at  the 
distance  of  the  moon,  supposing  its  weight  or  gravity  the  same 
as  at  the  earth's  surface,  we  shall  find  the  period  required  to 
be  10h  45m  30s.  The  actual  period  of  the  moon's  revolution, 
however,  is  27d  7h  43m ;  and  hence  it  is  clear  that  the  moon's 
velocity  is  not  nearly  sufficient  to  sustain  it  against  such  a 
power,  supposing  it  to  revolve  in  a  circle,  or  neglecting  (for 
the  present)  the  slight  ellipticity  of  its  orbit.  In  order  that 
a  body  at  the  distance  of  the  moon  (or  the  moon  itself)  should 
be  capable  of  keeping  its  distance  from  the  earth  by  the  out- 
ward effort  of  its  centrifugal  force,  while  yet  its  time  of 
revolution  should  be  what  the  moon's  actually  is,  it  will 
appear*  that  gravity,  instead  of  being  as  intense  as  at  the 
surface,  would  require  to  be  very  nearly  3600  times  less 
energetic ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  its  intensity  is  so  enfeebled 
by  the  remoteness  of  the  body  on  which  it  acts,  as  to  be  ca- 
pable of  producing  in  it,  in  the  same  time,  only  ^o^th  part 
of  the  motion  which  it  would  impart  to  the  same  mass  of 
matter  at  the  earth's  surface. 

(444.)  The  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth's  center 
is  very  nearly  sixty  times  the  distance  from  the  centei 
to  the  surface,  and  3600  :  1  :  :  602  :  l2;  so  that  the  pro- 
portion in  which  we  must  admit  the  earth's  gravity  to  be 
enfeebled  at  the  moon's  distance,  if  it  be  really  the  force 
which  retains  the  moon  in  her  orbit,  must  be  (at  least  in  this 
particular  instance)  that  of  the  squares  of  the  distances  at 
which  it  is  compared.  Now,  in  such  a  diminution  of  energy 
with  increase  of  distance,  there  is  nothing  prima  facie  inad- 
missible.    Emanations  from  a  center,  such  as  light  and  heat, 

*   Newton,  Princip.  b.  i.,  Prop.  4.,  Cor.  _'. 


2!)4  CUTLINJ38   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

do  really  diminish  in  intensity  by  increase  of  distance,  and 
in  this  identical  proportion;  and  though  we  cannot  certainly 
argue  much  from  this  analogy,  yet  we  do  see  that  the  power 
of  magnetic  and  electric  attractions  and  repulsions  is  actually 
enfeebled  by  distance,  and  much  more  rapidly  than  in  the 
simple  proportion  of  the  increased  distances.  The  argument 
therefore,  stands  thus  i  —  On  the  one  hand,  Gravity  is  a  real 
power,  of  whose  agency  we  have  daily  experience.  We 
know  that  it  extends  to  the  greatest  accessible  heights,  and 
far  beyond ;  and  we  see  no  reason  for  drawing  a  line  at  any 
particular  height,  and  there  asserting  that  it  must  cease 
entirely ;  though  we  have  analogies  to  lead  us  to  suppose  its 
energy  may  diminish  as  we  ascend  to  great  heights  from  the 
surface,  such  as  that  of  the  moon.  On  the  other  hand  we 
are  sure  the  moon  is  urged  towards  the  earth  by  some  power 
which  retains  her  in  her  orbit,  and  that  the  intensity  of  this 
power  is  such  as  would,  correspond  to  a  gravity,  diminished  in 
the  proportion^— otherwise  not  improbable  —  of  the  squares 
of  the  distancesX  If  gravity  be  not  that  power,  there  must 
exist  some  other  ;\md,  besides  this,  gravity  must  cease  at 
some  inferior  level,  or  the  nature  of  the  moon  must  be  different 
from  that  of  ponderableXmatter ;  —  for  if  not,  it  would  be 
urged  by  both  powers,  and  therefore  too  much  urged  and  forced 
inwards  from  her  path. 

(445.)  It  is  on  such  an  argument  that  Newton  is  under- 
stood to  have  rested,  in  the  first  instance,  and  provisionally, 
his  law  of  universal  gravitation,  which  may  be  thus  abstractly 
stated: —  "  Every  particle  of  matter  in  the  universe  attracts 
every  other  particle,  with  a  force  directly  proportioned  to 
the  mass  of  the  attracting  particle,  and  inversely  to  the  square 
of  the  distance  between  them."  In  this  abstract  and  general 
form,  however,  the  proposition  is  not  applicable  to  the  case 
before  us.  The  earth  and  moon  are  not  mere  particles,  but 
great  spherical  bodies,  and  to  such  the  general  law  does  not 
immediately  apply;  and,  before  we  can  make  it  applicable,  it 
becomes  necessary  to  enquire  what  will  be  the  force  with 
which  a  congeries  of  particles,  constituting  a  solid  mass  of 
any  assigned  figure,   will   attract  another  such   collection  of 


THE    LAW    OF    GHAVITATION.  295 

material  atoms.  This  problem  is  one  purely  dynamical,  and, 
in  this  its  general  form,  is  of  extreme  difficulty.  Fortunately 
however,  for  human  knowledge  when  the  attracting  and  at- 
tracted bodies  are  spheres,  it  admits  of  an  easy  and  direct 
solution.  Newton  himself  has  shown  (Princip.  b.  i.  prop.  75.) 
that,  in  that  case,  the  attraction  is  precisely  the  same  as  if 
the  whole  matter  of  each  sphere  were  collected  into  its  center, 
and  the  spheres  were  single  particles  there  placed;  so  that, 
in  tins  case,  the  general  law  applies  in  its  strict  wording. 
The  effect  of  the  trifling  deviation  of  the  earth  from  a  spherical 
form  is  of  too  minute  an  order  to  need  attention  at  present. 
It  is,  however,  perceptible,  and  may  be  hereafter  noticed. 

(446.)  The  next  step  in  the  Newtonian  argument  is  one 
which  divests  the  law  of  gravitation  of  its  provisional  character, 
as  derived  from  a  loose  and  superficial  consideration  of  the 
lunar  orbit  as  a  circle  described  with  an  average  or  mean 
velocity,  and  elevates  it  to  the  rank  of  a  general  and  pri- 
mordial relation  by  proving  its  applicability  to  the  state  of 
existing  nature  in  all  its  circumstances.  This  step  consists 
in  demonstrating,  as  he  has  done*  (Princip.  i.  17.  i.  75.), 
that,  under  the  influence  of  such  an  attractive  force  mutually 
urging  two  spherical  gravitating  bodies  towards  each  other, 
they  will  each,  when  moving  in  each  other's  neighbourhood, 
be  deflected  into  an  orbit  concave  towards  the  other,  and 
describe,  one  about  the  other  regarded  as  fixed,  or  both 
round  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  curves  whose  forms 
are  limited  to  those  figures  known  in  geometry  by  the 
general  name  of  conic  sections.  It  will  depend,  he  shows, 
in  any  assigned  case,  upon  the  particular  circumstances  of 
velocity,  distance,  and  direction,  which  of  these  curves  shall 
be  described,  —  whether  an  ellipse,  a  circle,  a  parabola,  or 

•  We  refer  for  these  fundamental  propositions,  as  a  point  of  duty,  to  the  im- 
mortal work  in  which  they  were  first  propounded.  It  is  impossible  for  us  in 
this  volume,  to  go  into  these  investigations:  even  did  our  limits  permit,  it  would 
be  utterly  inconsistent  with  our  plan ;  a  general  idea,  however,  of  their  conduct 
will  be  given  in  the  next  chapter.  We  trust  that  the  careful  and  attentive  study 
of  the  l'riiu-ipia  in  its  original  form  will  never  be  laid  aside,  whatever  be  the 
improvements  of  the  modern  analysis  as  respects  facility  of  calculation  and  ex. 
amnion.  From  no  other  quarter  can  a  thorough  and  complete  comprehension 
of  the  mechanism  of  our  system,  (so  far  as  the  immediate  ■cope  of  that  work 
extends,)  be  anything  like  so  well,  ami  we  may  add,  so  easily  obtained. 


'296  OUTLINKS    OF    ASTIIOXOMV. 

an  hyperbola;  but  one  or  other  it  must  be:  and  any  one  of 
any  degree  of  eccentricity  it  may  be,  according  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case;  and,  in  all  cases,  the  point  to  which 
the  motion  is  referred,  whether  it  be  the  centre  of  one  of  the 
spheres,  or  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  will  of  necessity 
be  the  focus  of  the  conic  section  described.  lie  shows, 
furthermore  (Princip.  i.  1.),  that,  in  every  case,  the  angular 
velocity  with  which  the  line  joining  their  centres  moves,  must 
be  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  their  mutual 
distance,  and  that  equal  areas  of  the  curves  described  will  be 
swept  over  by  their  line  of  junction  in  equal  times. 

(447.)  All  this  is  in  conformity  with  what  we  have  stated 
of  the  solar  and  lunar  movements.  Their  orbits  are  ellipses, 
but  of  different  degrees  of  eccentricity ;  and  this  circumstance 
already  indicates  the  general  applicability  of  the  principles 
in  question. 

(448.)  But  here  we  have  already,  by  a  natural  and  ready 
implication  (such  is  always  the  progress  of  generalization), 
taken  a  further  and  most  important  step,  almost  unperceived. 
We  have  extended  the  action  of  gravity  to  the  case  of  the 
earth  and  sun,  to  a  distance  immensely  greater  than  that  of 
the  moon,  and  to  a  body  apparently  quite  of  a  different 
nature  than  either.  Are  we  justified  in  this  ?  or,  at  all  events, 
are  there  no  modifications  introduced  by  the  change  of  data, 
if  not  into  the  general  expression,  at  least  into  the  particular 
interpretation,  of  the  law  of  gravitation  ?  Now,  the  moment 
we  come  to  numbers,  an  obvious  incongruity  strikes  us. 
When  we  calculate,  as  above,  from  the  known  distance  of 
the  sun  (art.  357.),  and  from  the  period  in  which  the  earth 
circulates  about  it  (art.  305.),  what  must  be  the  centrifugal 
force  of  the  latter  by  which  the  sun's  attraction  is  balanced, 
(and  which,  therefore,  becomes  an  exact  measure  of  the  sun's 
attractive  energy  as  exerted  on  the  earth,)  we  find  it  to  be 
immensely  greater  than  would  suffice  to  counteract  the  earth's 
attraction  on  an  equal  body  at  that  distance  —  greater  in  the 
high  proportion  of  354936  to  1.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  if 
the  earth  be  retained  in  its  orbit  about  the  sun  by  solar 
(iff/action,   conformable    in    its  rate  of  diminution   with  the 


GRAVITATION    AND    MASS    OF    THE    SUN.  297 

general  law,  this  force  must  be  no  less  than  354936  times 
more  intense  than  what  the  earth  would  be  capable  of  exerting, 
cceteris  paribus,  at  an  equal  distance. 

(449.)  What,  then,  are  we  to  understand  from  this  result  .-* 
Simply  this,  —  that  the  sun  attracts  as  a  collection  of  354936 
earths  occupying  its  place  would  do,  or,  in  other  words, 
that  the  sun  contains  354936  times  the  mass  or  quantity  of 
ponderable  matter  that  the  earth  consists  of.  Nor  let  this 
conclusion  startle  us.  We  have  only  to  recall  what  has 
been  already  shown  in  (art.  358.)  of  the  gigantic  dimen- 
sions of  this  magnificent  body,  to  perceive  that,  in  assigning 
to  it  so  vast  a  mass,  we  are  not  outstepping  a  reasonable 
proportion.  In  fact,  when  we  come  to  compare  its  mass 
with  its  bulk,  we  find  its  density*  to  be  less  than  that  of  the 
earth,  being  no  more  than  0*2543.  So  that  it  must  consist, 
in  reality,  of  far  lighter  materials,  especially  when  we  consider 
the  force  under  which  its  central  parts  must  be  condensed. 
This  consideration  renders  it  highly  probable  that  an  intense 
heat  prevails  in  its  interior  by  which  its  elasticity  is  reinforced, 
and  rendered  capable  of  resisting  this  almost  inconceivable 
pressure  without  collapsing  into  smaller  dimensions. 

(450.)  This  will  be  more  distinctly  appretiated,  if  we 
estimate,  as  we  are  now  prepared  to  do,  the  intensity  of 
gravity  at  the  sun's  surface. 

The  attraction  of  a  sphere  being  the  same  (art.  445.)  as  if 
its  whole  mass  were  collected  in  its  centre,  will,  of  course, 
be  proportional  to  the  mass  directly,  and  the  square  of  the 
distance  inversely ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  distance  is  the 
radius  of  the  sphere.  Hence  we  concludef,  that  the  in- 
tensities of  solar  and  terrestrial  gravity  at  the  surfaces  of  the 
two  globes  are  in  the  proportions  of  27*9  to  1.  A  pound  of 
terrestrial  matter  at  the  sun's  surface,  then,  would  exert  a 
pressure  equal  to  what  27*9  such  pounds  would  do  at  the 

*  The  density  of  a  material  body  is  as  the  mats  directly,  and  the  volume  in- 
versely:  hence  density  of©:  density  °f  S':  jja^^o  •  *  "<)-2543  '  I. 

354936  1 

t  Solar  gravity:  terrestrial ::  ^-^  :  ,-^^2 '.'.  27  -9  :  1;  the  respective  radii 

of  the  ma  and  tarth  being  410000,  and  400O  milei. 


298  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

earth's.  The  efficacy  of  muscular  power  to  overcome  weight 
is  therefore  proportionally  nearly  28  times  less  on  the  sun 
than  on  the  earth.  An  ordinary  man,  for  example,  would 
not  only  be  unable  to  sustain  his  own  weight  on  the  sun. 
but  would  literally  be  crushed  to  atoms  under  the  load.** 

(451.)  Henceforward,  then,  we  must  consent  to  dismiss 
all  idea  of  the  earth's  immobility,  and  transfer  that  attribute 
to  the  sun,  whose  ponderous  mass  is  calculated  to  exhaust 
the  feeble  attractions  of  such  comparative  atoms  as  the  earth 
and  moon,  without  being  perceptibly  dragged  from  its  place. 
Their  centre  of  gravity  lies,  as  we  have  already  hinted, 
almost  close  to  the  centre  of  the  solar  globe,  at  an  interval 
quite  imperceptible  from  our  distance ;  and  whether  we 
regard  the  earth's  orbit  as  being  performed  about  the  one  or 
the  other  center  makes  no  appretiable  difference  in  any  one 
phenomenon  of  astronomy. 

(452.)  It  is  in  consequence  of  the  mutual  gravitation  of 
all  the  several  parts  of  matter,  which  the  Newtonian  law 
supposes,  that  the  earth  and  moon,  while  in  the  act  of 
revolving,  monthly,  in  their  mutual  orbits  about  their  common 
center  of  gravity,  yet  continue  to  circulate,  without  parting 
company,  in  a  greater  annual  orbit  round  the  sun.  We  may 
conceive  this  motion  by  connecting  two  unequal  balls  by  a 
short  stick,  which,  at  their  common  center  of  gravity  is  sus- 
pended by  a  long  string  and  made  to  gyrate  conically  round 
a  point  vertically  below  that  of  suspension.  Their  joint  system 
will  circulate  as  one  pendulous  mass  about  this  imaginary 
center,  while  yet  they  may  go  on  circulating  round  each 
other  in  subordinate  gyrations,  as  if  the  stick  were  quite  free 
from  any  such  tie,  and  merely  hurled  through  the  air.  If 
the  earth  alone,  and  not  the  moon,  gravitated  to  the  sun,  it 
would  be  dragged  away,  and  leave  the  moon  behind  —  and 
vice  versa;  but,  acting  on  both,  they  continue  together  under 
its  attraction,  just  as  the  loose  parts  of  the  earth's  surface 
continue  to  rest  upon  it.  It  is,  then,  in  strictness,  not  the 
earth  or  the  moon  which  describes  an  ellipse  around  the  sun, 
but  their  common  center  of  gravity.     The  effect  is  to  produce 

*  A  muss  weighing  IS  stone  or  168  lbs.  on  I  he  earth  would  produce  I 
pressure  of  4<>87  lbs.  on  the  sun. 


SOLAli    DISTl  UUANCE    OF    THE    MOON'S   MOTIOX.         299 

a  small,  but  very  perceptible,  monthly  equation  in  the  suns 
apparent  motion  as  seen  from  the  earth,  wliich  is  always 
taken  into  account  in  calculating  the  sun's  place.  The 
moon's  actual  path  in  its  compound  orbit  round  the  earth 
and  sun  is  an  epieycloidal  curve  intersecting  the  orbit  of  the 
earth  twice  in  every  lunar  month,  and  alternately  within  and 
without  it.  But  as  there  are  not  more  than  twelve  such 
months  in  the  year,  and  as  the  total  departure  of  the  moon 
from  it  either  way  does  not  exceed  one  400th  part  of  the 
radius,  this  amounts  only  to  a  slight  undulation  upon  the 
earth's  ellipse,  so  slight,  indeed,  that  if  drawn  in  true  propor- 
tion on  a  large  sheet  of  paper,  no  eye  unaided  by  measurement 
with  compasses  would  detect  it.  The  real  orbit  of  the  moon 
is  everywhere  concave  towards  the  sun. 

(453.)  Here  moreover,  i.  e.  in  the  attraction  of  the  sun,  we 
have  the  key  to  all  those  differences  from  an  exact  elliptic 
movement  of  the  moon  in  her  monthly  orbit,  which  we  have 
already  noticed  (arts.  407.  409.),  viz.  to  the  retrograde  revo- 
lution of  her  node? ;  to  the  direct  circulation  of  the  axis  of 
her  ellipse ;  and  to  all  the  other  deviations  from  the  laws  of 
elliptic  motion  at  which  we  have  further  hinted.  If  the  moon 
simply  revolved  about  the  earth  under  the  influence  of  its 
gravity,  none  of  these  phenomena  would  take  place.  Its 
orbit  would  be  a  perfect  ellipse,  returning  into  itself,  and 
always  lying  in  one  and  the  same  plane.  That  it  is  not  so,  is 
a  proof  that  some  cause  disturbs  it,  and  interferes  with  the 
earth's  attraction ;  and  this  cause  is  no  other  than  the  sun's 
attraction  —  or  rather,  that  part  of  it  which  is  not  equally 
exerted  on  the  earth. 

(454.)  Suppose  two  stones,  side  by  side,  or  otherwise 
situated  with  respect  to  each  other,  to  be  let  fall  together ; 
then,  as  gravity  accelerates  them  equally,  they  will  retain 
their  relative  positions,  and  fall  together  as  if  they  formed 
one  mass.  But  suppose  gravity  to  be  rather  more  intensely 
exerted  on  one  than  the  other ;  then  would  that  one  be  rather 
more  accelerated  in  its  fall,  and  would  gradually  leave  the 
other ;  and  thus  a  relative  motion  between  them  would  ari&e 
from  the  difference  of  action,  however  slight. 


300  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(455.)  The  sun  is  about  400  times  more  remote  than  the 
moon ;  and,  in  consequence,  while  the  moon  describes  her 
monthly  orbit  round  the  earth,  her  distance  from  the  sun  is 
alternately  $^0^  Par^  £reater  and  as  much  less  than  the 
earth's.  Small  as  this  is,  it  is  yet  sufficient  to  produce  a  per- 
ceptible excess  of  attractive  tendency  of  the  moon  towards 


N©JL : 

£ 

the  sun,  above  that  of  the  earth  when  in  the  nearer  poinf  of 
her  orbit,  M,  and  a  corresponding  defect  on  the  opposite  part, 
N ;  and,  in  the  intermediate  positions,  not  only  will  a  differ- 
ence of  forces  subsist,  but  a  difference  of  directions  also  ;  since 
however  small  the  lunar  orbit  M  X,  it  is  not  a  point,  and, 
therefore,  the  lines  drawn  from  the  sun  S  to  its  several  parts 
cannot  be  regarded  as  strictly  parallel.  If,  as  we  have  al- 
ready seen,  the  force  of  the  sun  were  equally  exerted,  and  in 
parallel  directions  on  both,  no  disturbance  of  their  relative 
situations  would  take  place  ;  but  from  the  non-verification  of 
these  conditions  arises  u  disturbing  force,  oblique  to  the  line 
joining  the  moon  and  earth,  which  in  some  situations  acts  to 
accelerate,  in  others  to  retard,  her  elliptic  oibitual  motion  ;  in 
some  to  draw  the  earth  from  the  moon,  in  others  the  moon 
from  the  earth.  Again,  the  lunar  orbit,  though  very  nearly, 
is  yet  not  quite  coincident  with  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic ;  and 
hence  the  action  of  the  sun,  which  is  very  nearly  parallel  to 
the  last-mentioned  plane,  tends  to  draw  her  somewhat  out  of 
the  -plane  of  her  orbit,  and  does  actually  do  so — producing 
the  revolution  of  her  nodes,  and  other  phenomena  less  striking. 
We  are  not  yet  prepared  to  go  into  the  subject  of  these  per- 
turbations, as  they  are  called  ;  but  they  are  introduced  to  the 
reader's  notice  as  early  as  possible,  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
assuring his  mind,  should  doubts  have  arisen  as  to  the  logical 
correctness  of  our  argument,  in  consequence  of  our  temporary 
neglect  of  them  while  working  our  way  upward  to  the  law 
of  gravity  from  a  general  consideration  of  the  moon's  orbit. 


aoi 


CHAPTER  IX. 

OF    THE    SOLAR    SYSTEM. 

APl'ARENT    MOTIONS    OF    THE    PLANST8. THEIR    STATIONS    AND    RE« 

TROGRADATIONS. — THE  SUN  THEIR  NATURAL  CENTER  OF  MOTION 
INFERIOR  PLANETS. — THEIR  PHASES,  PERIODS,  ETC.  —DIMEN- 
SIONS AND  FORM  OF  THEIR  ORBITS. TRANSITS  ACROSS    THE    SUN. 

—  SUPERIOR  PLANETS.—  THEIR  DISTANCES,  PERIODS,  ETC. KEP- 

LER'S    LAWS   AND  THEIR  INTERPRETATION. ELLIPTIC    ELEMENTS 

OF    A     PLANET'S    ORBIT.  —  ITS     HELIOCENTRIC     AND   GEOCENTRIC 

PLACE EMPIRICAL  LAW  OF  PLANETARY  DISTANCES; — VIOLATED 

IN  THE  CASE  OF  NEPTUNE.  —  THE  ASTEROIDS. PHYSICAL  PE- 
CULIARITIES   OBSERVABLE    IN    EACH    OF    THE    PLANETS. 

(456.)  The  sun  and  moon  are  not  the  only  celestial  objects 
which  appear  to  have  a  motion  independent  of  that  by  which 
the  great  constellation  of  the  heavens  is  daily  carried  round 
the  earth.  Among  the  stars  there  are  several,  —  and  those 
among  the  brightest  and  most  conspicuous,  —  which,  when 
attentively  watched  from  night  to  night,  are  found  to 
change  their  relative  situations  among  the  rest ;  some  rapidly, 
others  much  more  slowly.  These  are  called  planets.  Four 
of  them  —  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  —  are  remark- 
ably large  and  brilliant ;  another,  Mercury,  is  also  visible  to 
the  naked  eye  as  a  large  star,  but,  for  a  reason  which  will 
presently  appear,  is  seldom  conspicuous:  a  sixth,  Uranus,  is 
barely  so  discernible,  while  the  rest  of  which  about  fifty  are 
already  known,  and  probably  many  more  remain  to  be  dis- 
covered, are  visible  only  through  telescopes*,  and  with  one 
exception  (that  of  Neptune)  can  only  be  known  among  the 
multitude  of  minute  stars  those  instruments  reveal  to  us  by 
watching  them  from  night  to  night  and  attending   to  their 

*  One  only,  Vosta,  is  said    to  have    bevu  once  von   In     SehrStai   with   th» 

linked  eye. 


302  (HTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

changes  of  place.  All  these  have  been  discovered  since  the 
commencement  of  the  current  century,  and  forty-five  of  them 
since  1844.  A  list  of  their  names,  discoverers,  and  the  dates 
of  their  respective  discovery  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. 
All  of  them  but  Neptune  belong  to  a  peculiar  and  very  re- 
markable class  or  favoiiy  of  plansts  to  which  the  name  of 
Asteroids  has  been  assigned. 

(457.)  The  apparent  motions  of  the  planets  are  much  more 
irregular  than  those  of  the  sun  or  moon.  Generally  speaking, 
and  comparing  their  places  at  distant  times,  they  all  advance, 
though  with  very  different  average  or  mean  velocities,  in  the 
same  direction  as  those  luminaries,  i.  e.  in  opposition  to  the 
apparent  diurnal  motion,  or  from  west  to  east :  all  of  them 
make  the  entire  tour  of  the  heavens,  though  under  very  dif- 
ferent circumstances  :  and  all  of  them,  with  the  exception  of 
certain  among  the  telescopic  planets,  are  confined  in  then- 
visible  paths  within  very  narrow  limits  on  either  side  the 
ecliptic,  and  perform  their  movements  within  that  zone  of 
the  heavens  we  have  called,  above,  the  Zodiac  (art.  303.). 

(458.)  The  obvious  conclusion  from  this  is,  that  whatever 
be,  otherwise,  the  nature  and  law  of  their  motions,  they  are 
performed  nearly  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic — that  plane,  namely, 
in  which  our  own  motion  about  the  sun  is  performed.  Hence 
it  follows,  that  we  see  their  evolutions,  not  in  plan,  but  in  sec- 
tion ;  their  real  angular  movements  and  linear  distances  being 
all  foreshortened  and  confounded  undistinguishably,  while 
only  their  deviations  from  the  ecliptic  appear  of  their  natural 
magnitude,  undiminished  by  the  effect  of  perspective. 

(459.)  The  apparent  motions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  though 
not  uniform,  do  not  deviate  very  greatly  from  uniformity  ;  a 
moderate  acceleration  and  retardation,  accountable  for  by  the 
ellipticity  of  their  orbits,  being  all  that  is  remarked  But 
the  case  is  widely  different  with  the  planets  :  sometimes  they 
advance  rapidly  ;  then  relax  in  their  apparent  speed  —  come 
to  a  momentary  stop ;  and  then  actually  reveive  their  motion, 
and  run  back  upon  their  former  course,  with  a  rapidity  at 
first  increasing,  then  diminishing,  till  the  reversed  or  retro- 
grade motion  ceases  altogether.      Another  station,  or  moment 


APPABEKl    MOTIONS   OF    THE    PLANETS.  303 

of  apparent  rest  or  indecision,  now  takes  place;  after  wluVb 
the  movement  is  again  reversed,  and  resumes  its  original  di 
rect  character.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  amount  of  direct 
motion  more  than  compensates  the  retrograde ;  and  by  the  ex- 
cess of  the  former  over  the  latter,  the  gradual  advance  of  the 
planet  from  west  to  east  is  maintained .  Thus,  supposing 
the  Zodiac  to  be  unfolded  into  a  plane  surface,  (or  repre- 
sented as  in  Mercator's  projection,  art.  283.  taking  the  ecliptic 
E  C  for  its  ground  line, )  the  track  of  a  planet  when 
mapped  down  by  observation  from  day  to  day,  will  offer  the 


appearance  PQRS,  &c.  ;  the  motion  from  P  to  Q  being 
direct,  at  Q  stationary,  from  Q  to  R  retrograde,  at  li  again 
stationary,  from  II  to  S  direct,  and  so  on. 

(460.)  In  the  midst  of  the  irregularity  and  fluctuation  of 
this  motion,  one  remarkable  feature  of  uniformity  is  observed. 
Whenever  the  planet  crosses  the  ecliptic,  as  at  N  in  the 
figure,  it  is  said  (like  the  moon)  to  be  in  its  node ;  and  as 
the  earth  necessarily  lies  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  the 
planet  cannot  be  apparently  or  uranographically  situated  in 
the  celestial  circle  so  called,  without  being  really  and  locally 
situated  in  that  plane.  The  visible  passage  of  a  planet 
through  its  node,  then,  is  a  phenomenon  indicative  of  a  cir- 
cumstance in  its  real  motion  quite  independent  of  the  station 
from  which  we  view  it.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  ascertain,  by 
observation,  when  a  planet  passes  from  the  north  to  the  south 
side  of  the  ecliptic  :  we  have  only  to  convert  its  right  ascen- 
sions and  declinations  into  longitudes  and  latitudes,  and  the 
change  from  north  to  south  latitude  on  two  successive  days 
will  advertise  ns  on  what  day  the  transition  took  place; 
while  a  simple  proportion,  grounded  on  tli"  observed  state  of 
its  motion  in  latitude  in  the  interval,  will  suffice  to  fix  the 
precise  hour  and  minute  of  its  arrival  on  the  ecliptic.  'Sow, 
this  being  done  for  several  transitions  from  side  to  side  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  their  dates  thereby  fixed,  we  find,  universally, 


304  OUTLINES    OV    ASTRONOMY. 

that  the  interval  of  time  elapsing  between  the  successive 
passages  of  each  planet  through  the  same  node  (whether  it  be 
the  ascending  or  the  descending)  is  always  alike,  whether  the 
planet  at  the  moment  of  such  passage  be  direct  or  retrograde, 
swift  or  slow,  in  its  apparent  movement. 

(461.)  Here,  then,  we  have  a  circumstance  which,  while 
it  shows  that  the  motions  of  the  planets  are  in  fact  subject  to 
certain  laws  and  fixed  periods,  may  lead  us  very  naturally  to 
suspect  that  the  apparent  irregularities  and  complexities  of 
their  movements  may  be  owing  to  our  not  seeing  them  from 
their  natural  center  (art.  338.  371.),  and  from  our  mixing  up 
with  their  own  proper  motions  movements  of  a  parallactic  kind, 
due  to  our  own  change  of  place,  in  virtue  of  the  orbital 
motion  of  the  earth  about  the  sun. 

(462.)  If  we  abandon  the  earth  as  a  center  of  the  planetary 
motions,  it  cannot  admit  of  a  moment's  hesitation  where  we 
should  place  that  center  with  the  greatest  probability  of  truth. 
It  must  surely  be  the  sun  which  is  entitled  to  the  first  trial, 
as  a  station  to  which  to  refer  to  them.  If  it  be  not  connected 
with  them  by  any  physical  relation,  it  at  least  possesses  the 
advantage,  which  the  earth  does  not,  of  comparative  immo- 
bility. But  after  what  has  been  shown  in  art.  449.,  of  the 
immense  mass  of  that  luminary,  and  of  the  office  it  performs 
to  us  as  a  quiescent  center  of  our  orbitual  motion,  nothing 
can  be  more  natural  than  to  suppose  it  may  perform  the  same 
to  other  globes  which,  like  the  earth,  may  be  revolving  round 
it ;  and  these  globes  may  be  visible  to  us  by  its  light  reflected 
from  them,  as  the  moon  is.  Now  there  many  facts  which 
give  a  strong  support  to  the  idea  that  the  planets  are  in  this 
predicament. 

(463.)  In  the  first  place,  the  planets  really  are  great 
globes,  of  a  size  commensurate  with  the  earth,  and  several 
»f  them  much  greater.  When  examined  through  powerful 
telescopes,  they  are  seen  to  be  round  bodies,  of  sensible  and 
even  of  considerable  apparent  diameter,  and  offering  distinct 
and  characteristic  peculiarities,  which  show  them  to  be  ma- 
terial masses,  each  possessing  its  individual  structure  and 
mechanism  ;  and  that,  in  one  instance  at  least,  an  exceedingly 


THE   SUN    THE    CENTER   OF    OUR    BY  STEM.  305 

artificial  and  complex  one.  ^See  the  representations  of  Mars, 
.Jupiter,  and  Saturn,  in  Plate  III.)  That  their  distances  Iron i 
us  are  great,  much  greater  than  that  of  the  moon,  and  some 
of  them  even  greater  than  that  of  the  sun,  we  infer,  1st, 
from  their  being  occulted  by  the  moon,  and  2dly,  from  the 
smallness  of  their  diurnal  parallax,  which,  even  for  the 
nearest  of  them,  when  most  favourably  situated,  does  not 
exceed  a  few  seconds,  and  for  the  remote  ones  is  almost 
imperceptible.  From  the  comparison  of  the  diurnal  parallax 
of  a  celestial  body,  with  its  apparent  semidiameter,  we  can  at 
once  estimate  its  real  size.  For  the  parallax  is,  in  fact, 
nothing  else  than  the  apparent  semidiameter  of  the  earth  as 
seen  from  the  body  in  question  (art.  339.  et  seq. );  and,  the 
intervening  distance  being  the  same,  the  real  diameters  must 
be  to  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  the  apparent  ones. 
Without  going  into  particulars,  it  will  suffice  to  state  it  as  a 
general  result  of  that  comparison,  that  the  planets  are  all  of 
them  incomparably  smaller  than  the  sun,  but  some  of  them 
as  large  as  the  earth,  and  others  much  greater. 

(464.)  The  next  fact  respecting  them  is,  that  their  dis- 
tances from  us,  as  estimated  from  the  measurement  of  their 
angular  diameters,  are  in  a  continual  state  of  change,  period- 
ically increasing  and  decreasing  within  certain  limits,  but  by 
no  means  corresponding  with  the  supposition  of  regular 
circular  or  elliptic  orbits  described  by  them  about  the  earth 
as  a  center  or  focus,  but  maintaining  a  constant  and  obvious 
relation  to  their  apparent  angular  distances  or  elongations 
from  the  sun.  For  example  ;  the  apparent  diameter  of  Mars 
is  greatest  when  in  opposition  (as  it  is  called)  to  the  sun,  i.  e. 
when  in  the  opposite  part  of  the  ecliptic,  or  when  it  comes  on 
the  meridian  at  midnight,  —  being  then  about  18", —  but 
diminishes  rapidly  from  that  amount  to  about  4",  which  is  its 
apparent  diameter  when  in  cojijunction,  or  when  seen  in 
nearly  the  same  direction  as  that  luminary.  This,  and  facta 
of  a  similar  character,  observed  with  respect  to  the  apparent 
diameters  of  the  other  planets,  clearly  point  out  the  sun  aa 
having  more  than  an  accidental  relation  to  their  movements- 

(465.)  Lastly,  certain    of  the  pknets,  (Mercury,  Venus, 

x 


306  OUTLINES  OF  ASTKOXOMY. 

and  Mars,)  when  viewed  through  telescopes,  exhibit  the 
appearance  of  phases  like  those  of  the  moon.  This  proves 
that  they  are  opaque  bodies,  shining  only  by  reflected  light, 
which  can  be  no  other  than  that  of  the  sun's ;  not  only  because 
there  is  no  other  source  of  light  external  to  them  sufficiently 
powerful,  but  because  the  appearance  and  succession  of  the 
phases  themselves  are  (like  their  visible  diameters)  intimately 
connected  with  their  elongations  from  the  sun,  as  will  pre- 
sently be  shown. 

(466.)  Accordingly  it  is  found,  that,  when  we  refer  the 
planetary  movements  to  the  sun  as  a  center,  all  that  apparent 
irregularity  which  they  otter  when  viewed  from  the  earth 
disappears  at  once,  and  resolves  itself  into  one  simple  and 
general  law,  of  which  the  earth's  motion,  as  explained  in  a 
former  chapter,  is  only  a  particular  case.  In  order  to  show 
how  this  happens,  let  us  take  the  case  of  a  single  planet, 
which  we  will  suppose  to  revolve  round  the  sun,  in  a  plane 
nearly,  but  not  quite,  coincident  with  the  ecliptic,  but 
passing  through  the  sun,  and  of  course  intersecting  the  eclip- 
tic in  a  fixed  line,  which  is  the  line  of  the  planet's  nodes. 
This  line  must  of  course  divide  its  orbit  into  two  segments; 
and  it  is  evident  that,  so  long  as  the  circumstances  of  the 
planet's  motion  remain  otherwise  unchanged,  the  times  of 
describing  these  segments  must  remain  the  same.  The  in- 
terval, then,  between  the  planet's  quitting  either  node,  and 
returning  to  the  same  node  again,  must  be  that  in  which  it 
describes  one  complete  revolution  round  the  sun,  or  its 
periodic  time  ;  and  thus  we  are  furnished  with  a  direct  method 
of  ascertaining  the  periodic  time  of  each  planet. 

(467.)  We  have  said  (art.  457.)  that  the  placets  make  the 
entire  tour  of  the  heavens  under  very  different  circumstances. 
This  must  be  explained.  Two  of  them —  Mercury  and  Venus 
—  perform  this  circuit  evidently  as  attendants  upon  the  sun, 
from  whose  vicinity  they  never  depart  beyond  a  certain  limit. 
They  are  seen  sometimes  to  the  east,  sometimes  to  the  west 
of  it.  In  the  former  case  they  appear  conspicuous  over  the 
western  horizon,  just  after  sunset,  and  are  called  evening 
star3 :  Venus,  especially,  appears  occasionally  in  this  situation 


INFERIOR    PLANETS.  307 

with  a  dazzling  lustre  ;  and  in  favourable  circumstances  may 
be  observed  to  cast  a  pretty  strong  shadow.*  When  they 
happen  to  be  to  the  west  of  the  sun,  they  rise  before  that, 
luminary  in  the  morning,  and  appear  over  the  eastern  horizon 
as  morning  stars:  they  do  not,  however,  attain  the  same 
elongation  from  the  sun.  Mercury  never  attains  a  greater 
angular  distance  from  it  than  about  29°,  while  Venus  extends 
her  excursions  on  either  side  to  about  47°.  When  they  have 
receded  from  the  sun,  eastward,  to  their  respective  distances, 
they  remain  for  a  time,  as  it  were,  immovable  with  respect 
to  it,  and  are  carried  along  with  it  in  the  ecliptic  with  a 
motion  equal  to  its  own ;  but  presently  they  begin  to  approach 
it,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same,  their  motion  in  longitude 
diminishes,  and  the  sun  gains  upon  them.  As  this  approach 
goes  on,  their  continuance  above  the  horizon  after  sunset 
becomes  daily  shorter,  till  at  length  they  set  before  the 
darkness  has  become  sufficient  to  allow  of  their  being  seen. 
For  a  time,  then,  they  are  not  seen  at  all,  unless  on  very 
rare  occasions,  when  they  are  to  be  observed  passing  across 
the  suris  disc  as  small,  round,  well-defined  black  spots,  totally 
different  in  appearance  from  the  solar  spots  (art.  386. ).  These 
phenomena  are  emphatically  called  transits  of  the  respective 
planets  across  the  sun,  and  take  place  when  the  earth 
happens  to  be  passing  the  line  of  their  nodes  while  they  are 
in  that  part  of  their  orbits,  just  as  in  the  account  we  have 
given  (art.  412.)  of  a  solar  eclipse.  After  having  thus 
continued  invisible  for  a  time,  however,  they  begin  to  appear 
on  the  other  side  of  the  sun,  at  first  showing  themselves  only 
for  a  few  minutes  before  sunrise,  and  gradually  longer  and 
longer  as  they  recede  from  him.  At  this  time  their  motion 
in  longitude  is  rapidly  retrograde.  Before  they  attain  their 
greatest  elongation,  however,  they  become  stationary  in  the 
heavens ;  but  their  recess  from  the  sun  is  still  maintained  by 
the  advance  of  that  luminary  along  the  ecliptic,  which 
continues  to  leave  them  behind,  until,  having  reversed  their 

*  It  must  be  thrown  upon  a  white  ground.  An  open  window  in  a  white- 
washed room  is  the  best  exposure.  In  this  situation  I  have  observed  not  only 
the  shadow,  but  the  diffracted  fringes  edging  its  outline.  —  H.  Sote  to  thi 
edition  of  1833.      Venus  may  often  be  «een  with  the  naked  eye  in  the  daytime. 

X  2 


M)8 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMV. 


motion,  and  become  again  direct,  they  acquire  .-mfiicient  speed 
to  commence  overtaking  him  —  at  which  moment  they  have 
their  greatest  western  elongation ;  and  thus  is  a  kind  of  oscil- 
latory movement  kept  up,  while  the  general  advance  along 
the  ecliptic  goes  on. 

(468.)  Suppose  PQ  to  be  the  ecliptic,  and  ARCD  the 
en-bit  of  one  of  these  planets,  (for  instance,  Mercury,)  seen 
almost  edgewise  by  an  eye  situated  very  nearly  in  its  plane ; 
!S,  the  sun,  its  centre  ;  and  A,  B,  C,D  successive  positions  of 
the  planet,  of  which  B  and  1)  arc  in  the  nodes.     If,  then,  the 


sun  S  stood  apparently  still  in  the  ecliptic,  the  planets  would 
simply  appear  to  oscillate  backwards  and  forwards  from  A  to 
C,  alternately  passing  before  and  behind  the  sun ;  and,  if  the 
eye  happened  to  lie  exactly  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  transit- 
ing his  disc  in  the  former  case,  and  being  covered  by  it  in  the 
latter.  But  as  the  sun  is  not  so  stationary,  but  apparently 
carried  along  the  ecliptic  P  Q,  let  it  be  supposed  to  move 
over  the  spaces  S  T,  T  U,  U  V,  while  the  planet  in  each  case 
executes  one  quarter  of  its  period.  Then  will  its  orbit  be 
apparently  carried  along  with  the  sun,  into  the  successive 
positions  represented  in  the  figure ;  and  while  its  real  motion 
round  the  sun  brings  it  into  the  respective  points,  B,  C,D,A, 
its  apparent  movement  in  the  heavens  will  seem  to  have  been 
along  the  wavy  or  zigzag  line  A  N  H  K.  In  this,  its  motion 
in  longitude  will  have  been  direct  in  the  parts  AN,  N  H,  and 
retrograde  in  the  parts  H  »  K ;  while  at  the  turns  of  the  zig- 
zag, as  at  H,  it  will  have  been  stationary. 

(469.)  The  only  two  planets  —  Mercury  and  Venus  — 
whose  evolutions  are  such  as  above  described,  are  called 
inferior  planets ;  their  points  of  farthest  recess  from  the  sun 
are  called  (as  above)  their  greatest  eastern  and  western  elon- 
gations ;  and  their  points  of  nearest  approach  to  it,  their 
inferior   and  superior   conjunctions, — the    former    when  the 


INFERIOR   PLANETS.  309 

planet  parses  between  the  earth  and  the  sun,  the  latter  when 
behind  the  sun. 

(470.)  In  art.  467.  we  have  traced  the  apparent  path  of  an 
inferior  planet,  by  considering  its  orbit  in  section,  or  as 
viewed  from  a  point  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  Let  us 
now  contemplate  it  in  plan,  or  as  viewed  from  a  station  above 
that  plane,  and  projected  on  it.  Suppose  then,  S  to  represent 
the  sun,  abed  the  orbit  of  Mercury,  and  A  B  C  D  a  part  of 
that  of  the  earth  —  the  direction  of  the  circulation  being  the 
same  in  both,  viz.  that  of  the  arrow. 
When  the  planet  stands  at  a,  let  the 
earth  be  situated  at  A,  in  the  direction 
of  a  tangent,  a  A,  to  its  orbit ;  then 
it  is  evident  that  it  will  appear  at  its 
yreatest  elongation  from  the  sun,  —  the 
angle  a  A  S,  which  measures  their  ap- 
parent interval  as  seen  from  A,  being 
then  greater  than  in  any  other  situation  of  a  upon  its  own 
circle. 

(471.)  Now,  this  angle  being  known  by  observation,  we 
are  hereby  furnished  with  a  ready  means  of  ascertaining,  at 
least  approximately,  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  sun, 
or  the  radius  of  its  orbit,  supposed  a  circle.  For  the  triangle 
8  A  a  is  right-angled  at  a,  and  consequently  we  have  S  a  : 
S  A  :  :  sin.  SAa:  radius,  by  which  proportion  the  radii  S  a, 
8  A  of  the  two  orbits  are  directly  compared.  If  the  orbits 
were  both  exact  circles,  this  would  of  course  be  a  perfectly 
rigorous  mode  of  proceeding:  but  (as  is  proved  by  the  inequality 
of  the  resulting  values  of  8  a  obtained  at  different  times)  this 
is  not  the  case ;  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  admit  an  excen- 
tricity  of  position,  and  a  deviation  from  the  exact  circular 
form  in  both  orbits,  to  account  for  this  difference.  Neglecting, 
however,  at  present  this  inequality,  a  mean  or  average  value 
of  S  a  may,  at  least,  be  obtained  from  the  frequent  repetition 
of  this  process  in  all  varieties  of  situation  of  the  two  bodies. 
The  calculations  being  performed,  it  is  concluded  that  the 
mean  distance  of  Mercury  from  the  sun  is  about  3H00O0O0 
miles ;  and  that  of  Venus,  similarly  derived,  about  68000000  ; 
the  radius  of  the  earth's  orbit  being  95000000. 


310  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(472.)  The  sidereal  periods  of  the  planets  may  be  obtained 
(as  before  observed),  with  a  considerable  approach  to  accuracy, 
by  observing  their  passages  through  the  nodes  of  their  orbits ; 
and  indeed,  when  a  certain  very  minute  motion  of  these  nodes 
and  the  apsides  of  their  orbits  (similar  to  that  of  the  moon's 
nodes  and  apsides,  but  incomparably  slower)  is  allowed  for, 
with  a  precision  only  limited  by  the  imperfection  of  the  ap- 
propriate observations.  By  such  observation,  so  corrected,  it 
appears  that  the  sidereal  period  of  Mercury  is  87d  23h  15m 
43 -9s ;  and  that  of  Venus,  224d  16h  49m  8  08.  These  periods, 
however,  are  widely  different  from  the  intervals  at  which  the 
successive  appearances  of  the  two  planets  at  their  eastern  and 
western  elongations  from  the  sun  are  observed  to  happen. 
Mercury  is  seen  at  its  greatest  splendour  as  an  evening  star, 
at  average  intervals  of  about  116,  and  Venus  at  intervals  of 
about  584  days.  The  difference  between  the  sidereal  and  syno- 
dical  revolutions  (art.  418.)  accounts  for  this.  Referring  again 
to  the  figure  of  art.  470.,  if  the  earth  stood  still  at  A,  while 
the  planet  advanced  in  its  orbit,  the  lapse  of  a  sidereal  period, 
which  should  bring  it  round  again  to  a,  would  also  produce  a 
similar  elongation  from  the  sun.  But,  meanwhile,  the  earth 
has  advanced  in  its  orbit  in  the  same  direction  towards  E,  and 
therefore  the  next  greatest  elongation  on  the  same  side  of  the 
sun  will  happen — not  in  the  position  a  A  of  the  two  bodies, 
but  in  some  more  advanced  position,  e  E.  The  determination 
of  this  position  depends  on  a  calculation  exactly  similar  to 
what  has  been  explained  in  the  article  referred  to ;  and 
we  need,  therefore,  only  here  state  the  resulting  synodical 
revolutions  of  the  two  planets,  which  come  out  respectively 
115-877d,  and  583'920d. 

(473.)  In  this  interval,  the  planet  will  have  described  a 
whole  revolution  plus  the  arc  ace,  and  the  earth  only  the  arc 
A  C  E  of  its  orbit.  During  its  lapse,  the  inferior  conjunction 
will  happen  when  the  earth  has  a  certain  intermediate  situa- 
tion, B,  and  the  planet  has  reached  b,  a  point  between  the 
sun  and  earth.  The  greatest  elongation  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  sun  will  happen  when  the  earth  has  come  to  C,  and 
the  planet  to  c  where  the  line  of  junction  C  e  is  a  tangent 


INFKUIOn    PLANETS.  311 

Co  the  interior  circle  on  the  opposite  side  from  M.  Lastly, 
the  superior  conjunction  will  happen  when  the  earth  arrives 
at  D,  and  the  planet  at  d  in  the  same  line  prolonged  on  the 
other  side  of  the  sun.  The  intervals  at  which  these  pheno- 
mena happen  may  easily  be  computed  from  a  knowledge  of 
the  synodical  periods  and  the  radii  of  the  orbits 

(474.)  The  circumferences  of  circles  are  in  the  proportion 
of  their  radii.  If,  then,  we  calculate  the  circumferences  of 
the  orbits  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  and  the  earth,  and  com- 
pare them  with  the  times  in  which  their  revolutions  are 
performed,  we  shall  find  that  the  actual  velocities  with  which 
they  move  in  their  orbits  differ  greatly ;  that  of  Mercury 
being  about  109360  miles  per  hour,  of  Venus  80000,  and  of 
the  earth  68040.  From  this  it  follows,  that  at  the  inferior 
conjunction,  or  at  b,  either  planet  is  moving  in  the  same  direc- 
tion as  the  earth,  but  with  a  greater  velocity  ;  it  will,  there- 
fore, leave  the  earth  behind  it :  and  the  apparent  motion  of 
the  planet  viewed  from  the  earth,  will  be  as  if  the  planet 
stood  still,  and  the  earth  moved  in  a  contrary  direction  from 
what  it  really  does.  In  this  situation,  then,  the  apparent 
motion  of  the  planet  must  be  contrary  to  the  apparent 
motion  of  the  sun  ;  and,  therefore,  retrograde.  On  the  other 
hand,  at  the  superior  conjunction,  the  real  motion  of  the 
planet  being  in  the  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  earth,  the 
relative  motion  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  planet  stood  still, 
and  the  earth  advanced  with  their  united  velocities  in  its  own 
proper  direction.  In  this  situation,  then,  the  apparent  motion 
will  be  direct.  Both  these  results  are  in  accordance  with 
observed  fact. 

(475.)  The  stationary  points  may  be  determined  by  the 
following  consideration.  At  a  or  c,  the  points  of  greatest 
elongation,  the  motion  of  the  planet  is  directly  to  or  from 
the  earth,  or  along  their  line  of  junction,  while  that  of  the 
earth  is  nearly  perpendicular  to  it.  Here,  then,  the  apparent 
motion  must  be  direct.  At  b,  the  inferior  conjunction,  we 
have  seen  that  it  must  be  retrograde,  owing  to  the  planet's 
motion  (which  is  there,  as  well  as  the  earth's,  perpendicular 
to  the  line  of  junction;  suqmssing  the  earth's.     Hence,  the 


312 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTKONOMr. 


stationary  points  ought  to  lie,  as  it  is  found  by  observation 
they  do,  between  a  and  b,  or  c  and  b,  viz.  in  such  a  position 
that  the  obliquity  of  the  planet's  motion  with  respect  to  the 
line  of  junction  shall  just  compensate  for  the  excess  of  its 
velocity,  and  cause  an  equal  advance  of  each  extremity  of 
that  line,  by  the  motion  of  the  planet  at  one  end,  and  of  the 
earth  at  the  other :  so  that,  for  an  instant  of  time,  the  whole 
line  shall  move  parallel  to  itself.  The  question  thus  proposed 
is  purely  geometrical,  and  its  solution  on  the  supposition  of 
circular  orbits  is  easy.     Let  E  e  and  P  p  represent  small 


arcs  of  the  orbits  of  the  earth  and  planet  described  contem- 
poraneously, at  the  moment  when  the  latter  appears  stationary, 
about  S,  the  sun.  Produce  p  P  and  e  E,  tangents  at  P 
and  E,  to  meet  at  R,  and  prolong  E  P  backwards  to  Q,  join 
ep.  Then  since  PE,  pe  are  parallel  we  have  by  similar 
triangles  P^  :  Ee::PR  :  RE,  and  since,  putting  v  and  V 
for  the  respective  velocities  of  the  planet  and  the  earth, 
P  p  :  E  e  : :  v  :  V ;  therefore 

p:V::PR:RE  ::  sin.  PER:  sin.  E  P  R 
::cos.  SEP:  cos.  SPQ 
::  cos.  S  E  P  :  cos.  (SEP  +  ESP) 

because  the  angles  SER  and  S P R  are  right  angles.    More- 


INFERIOR    1LANETS.     .  313 

over,  if  r  and  R  be  the  radii  of  the  respective  orbits,  we  havo 
also 

r  :  R::sin.  SEP  :  sin.  (S  E  P  +  E  S  P) 

from  which  two  relations  it  is  easy  to  deduce  the  values  of 
the  two  angles  SEP  and  ESP;  the  former  of  which  is  the 
apparent  elongation  of  the  planet  from  the  sun*,  the  latter 
the  difference  of  heliocentric  longitudes  of  the  earth  and 
planet. 

(476.)  When  we  regard  the  orbits  as  other  than  circles 
(which  they  really  are),  the  problem  becomes  somewhat  com- 
plex—  too  much  so  to  be  here  entered  upon.  It  will  suffice 
to  state  the  results  which  experience  verifies,  and  which 
assign  the  stationary  points  of  Mercury  at  from  15°  to  20° 
of  elongation  from  the  sun,  according  to  circumstances ;  and 
of  Venus,  at  an  elongation  never  varying  much  from  29°. 
The  former  continues  to  retrograde  during  about  22  days  ; 
the  latter,  about  42. 

(477.)  We  have  said  that  some  of  the  planets  exhibit  phases 
like  the  moon.  This  is  the  case  with  both  Mercury  and 
Venus ;  and  is  readily  explained  by  a  consideration  of  their 
orbits,  such  as  we  have  above  supposed  them.  In  fact,  it 
requires  little  more  than  mere  inspection  of  the  figure  annexed, 
to  show,  that  to  a  spectator 
situated  on  the  earth  E,  an 
inferior  planet,  illuminated 
by  the  sun,  and  therefore 
bright  on  the  side  next  to   "T  '*$$ 

him,  and  dark  on  that  turn- 
ed from  him,  will  appear 
full  at  the  superior  con- 
junction A ;  gibbous  (i.  e.  more  than  half  full,  like  the  moon 
between  the  first  and  second  quarter)  between  that  point  and 
the  points  B  C  of  its  greatest  elongation ;  half-mooned  at 
these  points ;   and  crescent- shaped,  or  horned,  between  these 

•   If  —  =  m  and  —  =n,  SEI'=»#,  ESP«»^,  the  equations  to  he  resolved   *rc 

r  v 

rim  (f/>-nJ<)  =  m  tin.  <f>,  and  co»  ( <t>  +  ty)  =  ncos.  ']>, which  give  cos.  <£■»     -    ~ 

■  41 


314  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY.     ' 

and  the  inferior  conjunction  D.  As  it  approaches  this  point 
the  crescent  ought  to  thin  off  till  it  vanishes  altogether,  ren- 
dering the  planet  invisible,  unless  in  those  cases  where  it 
transits  the  sun's  disc,  and  appears  on  it  as  a  black  spot.  All 
these  phenomena  are  exactly  conformable  to  observation. 

(478.)  The  variation  in  brightness  of  Venus  in  different 
parts  of  its  apparent  orbit  is  very  remarkable.  This  arises 
from  two  causes:  1st,  the  varying  proportion  of  its  visible 
illuminated  area  to  its  whole  disc ;  and,  2dly,  the  varying 
angular  diameter,  or  whole  apparent  magnitude  of  the  disc 
itself.  As  it  approaches  its  inferior  conjunction  from  its 
greater  elongation,  the  half-moon  becomes  a  crescent,  which 
thins  off ;  but  this  is  more  than  compensated,  for  some  time, 
by  the  increasing  apparent  magnitude,  in  consequence  of  its 
diminishing  distance.  Thus  the  total  light  received  from  it 
goes  on  increasing,  till  at  length  it  attains  a  maximum,  which 
takes  place  when  the  planet's  elongation  is  about  40°. 

(479.)  The  transits  of  Venus  are  of  very  rare  occurrence, 
taking  place  alternately  at  the  very  unequal  but  regularly 
recurring  intervals  of  8,  122,  8,  105,  8,  122,  &c,  years  in 
succession,  and  always  in  June  or  December.  As  astronomical 
phenomena,  they  are  extremely  important ;  since  they  afford 
the  best  and  most  exact  means  we  possess  of  ascertaining  the 
sun's  distance,  or  its  parallax.  Without  going  into  the  niceties 
of  calculation  of  this  problem,  which,  owing  to  the  great  mul- 
titude of  circumstances  to  be  attended  to,  are  extremely 
intricate,  we  shall  here  explain  its  principle,  which,  in  the 
abstract,  is  very  simple  and  obvious.  Let  E  be  the  earth, 
V  Venus,  and  S  the  sun,  and  C  D  the  portion  of  Venus's 
relative  orbit  which  she  describes  while  in  the  act  of  transiting 
the  sun's  disc.  Suppose  A  B  two  spectators  at  opposite  ex- 
tremities of  that  diameter  of  the  earth  which  is  perpendicular 
to  the  ecliptic,  and,  to  avoid  complicating  the  case,  let  us  lay 
out  of  consideration  the  earth's  rotation,  and  suppose  A,  B,  to 
retain  that  situation  during  the  whole  time  of  the  transit. 
Then,  at  any  moment  when  the  spectator  at  A  sees  the  center 
of  Venus  projected  at  a  on  the  sun's  disc,  he  at  B  will  see  it 
projected  atb.     If  then  one  or  other  spectator  could  suddenly 


TRANSITS    OF    VENUS    AND    MEKCL11Y.  315 

transport  himself  from  A  to  B,  he  would  see  Venus  suddenly 
displaced  on  the  disc  from  a  to  b  ;  and  if  he  had  any  means  of 
noting  accurately  the  place  of  the  points  on  the  disc,  either 
by  micrometrical  measures  from  its  edge,  or  by  other  means, 
he  might  ascertain  the  angular  measure  of  a  b  as  seen  from 
the  earth.     Now,  since  A  V  a,  B  V  b,  are  straight  lines,  and 


therefore  make  equal  angles  on  each  side  V,  a  b  will  be  to  A 
B  as  the  distance  of  Venus  from  the  sun  is  to  its  distance  from 
the  earth,  or  as  68  to  27,  or  nearly  as  1\  to  1 ;  a  b  therefore 
occupies  on  the  sun's  disc  a  space  2\  times  as  great  as  the 
earth's  diameter ;  and  its  angular  measure  is  therefore  equal 
to  about  '2\  times  the  earth's  apparent  diameter  at  the  distance 
of  the  sun,  or  (which  is  the  same  thing)  to  five  times  the  sun's 
horizontal  parallax  (art.  298.).  Any  error,  therefore,  which 
may  be  committed  in  measuring  a  b,  will  entail  only  one  fifth 
of  that  error  on  the  horizontal  parallax  concluded  from  it. 

(480.)  The  thing  to  be  ascertained,  therefore,  is,  in  fact, 
neither  more  nor  less  than  the  breadth  of  the  zone  PQR8, 
■pqr  s,  included  between  the  extreme  apparent  paths  of  the 
center  of  Venus  across  the  sun's  disc,  from  its  entry  on  one 
side  to  its  quitting  it  on  the  other.  The  whole  business  of 
the  observers  at  A,  B,  therefore,  resolves  itself  into  this ;  —  to 
ascertain,  with  all  possible  care  and  precision,  each  at  his  own 
station,  this  path,  —  where  it  enters,  where  it  quits,  and  what 
segment  of  the  sun's  disc  it  cuts  off.  Now,  one  of  the  most 
exact  ways  in  which  (conjoined  with  careful  micrometric 
measures)  this  can  be  done,  is  by  noting  the  time  occupied  in 
the  whole  transit :  for  the  relative  angular  motion  of  Venus 
being,  in  fact,  very  precisely  known  from  the  tables  of  her 
motion,  and  the  apparent  path  being  very  nearly  a  straight 
line,  these  times  give  us  a  measure  {on  a  very  enlarged  ieale  J 
of  the  lengths  of  the  chorda  of  the  segments  cut  off;  and  the 


316  OUTLINES    OF    ASTKONOMY. 

sun's  diameter  being  known  also  with  great  precision,  their 
versed  sines,  and  therefore  their  difference,  or  the  breadth  of 
the  zone  required,  becomes  known.  To  obtain  these  times 
correctly,  each  observer  must  ascertain  the  instants  of  ingress 
and  egress  of  the  center.  To  do  this,  he  must  note,  1st.  the 
instant  when  the  first  visible  impression  or  notch  on  the  edge 
of  the  disc  at  P  is  produced,  or  the  first  external  contact ; 
2dly,  when  the  planet  is  just  wholly  immersed,  and  the 
broken  edge  of  the  disc  just  closes  again  at  Q,  or  the  first 
internal  contact ;  and,  lastly,  he  must  make  the  same  observa- 
tions at  the  egress  at  R,  S.  The  mean  of  the  internal  and 
external  contacts,  corrected  for  the  curvature  of  the  sun 'a 
limb  in  the  intervals  of  the  respective  points  of  contact,  in- 
ternal and  external,  gives  the  entry  and  egress  of  the  planet's 
center. 

(481.)  The  modifications  introduced  into  this  process  by  the 
earth's  rotation  on  its  axis,  and  by  other  geographical  stations 
of  the  observers  thereon  than  here  supposed,  are  similar  in 
their  principles  to  those  which  enter  into  the  calculation  of  a 
solar  eclipse,  or  the  occultation  of  a  star  by  the  moon,  only 
more  refined.  Any  consideration  of  them,  however,  here, 
would  lead  us  too  far ;  but  in  the  view  we  have  taken  of  the 
subject,  it  affords  an  admirable  example  of  the  way  in  which 
minute  elements  in  astronomy  may  become  magnified  in  their 
effects,  and,  by  being  made  subject  to  measurement  on  a 
greatly  enlarged  scale,  or  by  substituting  the  measure  of  time 
for  space,  may  be  ascertained  with  a  degree  of  precision 
adequate  to  every  purpose,  by  only  watching  favourable 
opportunities,  and  taking  advantage  of  nicely  adjusted  com- 
binations of  circumstance.  So  important  has  this  observation 
appeared  to  astronomers,  that  at  the  last  transit  of  Venus,  in 
1769,  expeditions  were  fitted  out,  on  the  most  efficient  scale, 
by  the  British,  French,  Russian,  and  other  governments,  to 
the  remotest  corners  of  the  globe,  for  the  express  purpose  of 
performirg  it.  The  celebrated  expedition  of  Captain  Cook 
to  Otaheite  was  one  of  them.  The  general  result  of  all  the 
observations  made  on  this  most  memorable  occasion  gives 
8"5776    for    the    sun's    horizontal    parallax.     The  two  next 


SUPERIOR    PLANETS.  317 

occurrences  of  this  phenomenon  will  happen  on  Dec.  8.  1874, 
and  Dec.  6.  1882.     [See  Note  (F)  §  (357  bo).'] 

(482.)  The  orbit  of  Mercury  is  very  elliptical,  the  ex- 
centricity  being  nearly  one  fourth  of  the  mean  distance. 
This  appears  from  the  inequality  of  the  greatest  elongations 
from  the  sun,  as  observed  at  different  times,  and  which  vary 
between  the  limits  16°  12'  and  28°  48',  and,  from  exact 
measures  of  such  elongations,  it  is  not  difficult  to  show 
that  the  orbit  of  Venus  also  is  slightly  excentric,  and  that 
both  these  planets,  in  fact,  describe  ellipses,  having  the 
sun  in  their  commom  focus. 

(483.)  Transits  of  Mercury  over  the  sun's  disc  occasionally 
occur,  as  in  the  case  of  Venus,  but  more  frequently;  those 
at  the  ascending  node  in  November,  at  the  descending  in 
May.  The  intervals  (considering  each  node  separately)  are 
usually  either  13  or  7  years,  and  in  the  order  13,  13,  13,  7, 
&c. ;  but  owing  to  the  considerable  inclination  of  the  orbit 
of  Mercury  to  the  ecliptic,  this  cannot  be  taken  as  an 
exact  expression  of  the  said  recurrence,  and  it  requires  a 
period  of  at  least  217  years  to  bring  round  the  transits  in 
regular  order.  One  will  occur  in  the  present  year  (1848), 
the  next  in  1861.  They  are  of  much  less  astronomical 
importance  than  that  of  Venus,  on  account  of  the  proximity  of 
Mercury  to  the  sun,  which  affords  a  much  less  favourable 
combination  for  the  determination  of  the  sun's  parallax. 

(484.)  Let  us  now  consider  the  superior  planets,  or  those 
whose  orbits  enclose  on  all  sides  that  of  the  earth.  That 
they  do  so  is  proved  by  several  circumstances  :  —  1st,  They 
arc  not,  like  the  inferior  planets,  confined  to  certain  limits 
of  elongation  from  the  sun,  but  appear  at  all  distances  from 
it,  even  in  the  opposite  quarter  of  the  heavens,  or,  as  it  is 
called,  in  opposition;  which  could  not  happen,  did  not  the 
earth  at  such  times  place  itself  between  them  and  the  sun  : 
2dly,  They  never  appear  horned,  like  Venus  or  Mercury, 
nor  even  semilunar.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  which,  from 
the  minuteness  of  their  parallax,  we  conclude  to  be  the  most 
distant  from  us,  viz.  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune, 
never   appear  otherwise    than  round;   a  sufficient  proof,  of 


33  8  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

itself,  that  we  see  them  always  in  a  direction  not  very 
remote  from  that  in  which  the  sun's  rays  illuminate  them  ; 
and  that,  therefore,  we  occupy  a  station  which  is  never  very 
widely  removed  from  the  centre  of  their  orbits,  or,  in  other 
words,  that  the  earth's  orbit  is  entirely  enclosed  within  theirs, 
and  of  comparatively  small  diameter.  One  only  of  them, 
Mars,  exhibits  any  perceptible  phase,  and  in  its  deficiency 
from  a  circular  outline,  never  surpasses  a  moderately  gibbous 
appearance,  —  the  enlightened  portion  of  the  disc  being 
never  less  than  seven-eighths  of  the  whole.  To  understand 
this,  we  need  only  cast  our  eyes  on  the  annexed  figure,  in 
which  E  is  the  earth,  at  its  apparent  greatest  elongation 
from  the  sun  S,  as  seen  from  Mars,  M.  In  this  position, 
the  angle  S  M  E,  included  between  the  lines 
S  M  and  E  M,  is  at  its  maximum ;  and  there- 
fore, in  this  state  of  things,  a  spectator  on  the  I 
earth  is  enabled  to  see  a  greater  portion  of  \ 
the  dark  hemisphere  of  Mars  than  in  any  other 
situation.  The  extent  of  the  phase,  then,  or 
greatest  observable  degree  of  gibbosity,  affords 
a  measure  —  a  sure,  although  a  coarse  and  rude 
one  —  of  the  angle  S  M  E,  and  therefore  of  the 
proportion  of  the  distance  S  M,  of  Mars,  to 
8  E,  that  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  by  which 
it  appears  that  the  diameter  of  the  orbit  of 
Mars  cannot  be  less  than  1^  times  that  of  the 
earth's.  The  phases  of  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Nep- 
tune, being  impei'ceptible,  it  follows  that  their  orbits  must 
include  not  only  that  of  the  earth,  but  of  Mars  also. 

(485.)  All  the  superior  planets  are  retrograde  in  their 
apparent  motions  when  in  opposition,  and  for  some  time 
before  and  after ;  but  they  differ  greatly  from  each  other. 
both  in  the  extent  of  their  arc  of  retrogradation,  in  the 
duration  of  their  retrograde  movement,  and  in  its  rapidity 
when  swiftest.  It  is  more  extensive  and  rapid  in  the  cam 
of  Mars  than  of  Jupiter,  of  Jupiter  than  of  Saturn,  of  that 
planet  than  of  Uranus,  and  of  Uranus  again  than  Neptune. 
The   angular   velocity    with  which   a   planet   appears  to  rf>- 


*& 


SUPERIOR    PLANETS.  319 

trograde  is  easily  ascertained  by  observing  its  apparent 
place  in  the  heavens  from  day  to  day ;  and  from  such 
observations,  made  about  the  time  of  opposition,  it  is  easy 
to  conclude  the  relative  magnitudes  of  their  orbits,  as 
compared  with  the  earth's,  supposing  their  periodical  times 
known.  For,  from  these,  their  mean  angular  velocities  are 
known  also,  being  inversely  as  the  times.  Suppose,  then, 
E  e  to  be  a  very  small  por- 
tion of  the  earth's  orbit, 
and  M  m  a  corresponding 
portion  of  that  of  a  superior  planet,  described  on  the  day 
of  opposition,  about  the  sun  8,  on  which  day  the  three 
bodies  lie  in  one  straight  line  S  E  M  X.  Then  the  angles 
ESe  and  M  S  m  are  given.  Now,  if  e  m  be  joined  and 
prolonged  to  meet  S  M  continued  in  X,  the  angle  e  X  E, 
which  is  equal  to  the  alternate  angle  X  e  Y,  is  evidently 
the  retrogradation  of  Mars  on  that  day,  and  is,  therefore, 
also  given.  E e,  therefore,  and  the  angle  EXe,  being  given 
in  the  right-angled  triangle  E  e  X,  the  side  K  X  is  easily 
calculated,  and  thus  S  X  becomes  known.  Consequently, 
in  the  triangle  S  m  X,  we  have  given  the  side  S  X  and  the 
two  angles  in  S  X,  and  m  X  S,  whence  the  other  sides,  S  m, 
in  X,  are  easily  determined.  Now,  S  m  is  no  other  than  the 
radius  of  the  orbit  of  the  superior  planet  required,  which  in 
this  calculation  is  supposed  circular,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
earth ;  a  supposition  not  exact,  but  sufficiently  so  to  afford  a 
satisfactory  approximation  to  the  dimensions  of  its  orbit,  and 
which,  if  the  process  be  often  repeated,  in  every  variety  of 
situation  at  which  the  opposition  can  occur,  will  ultimately 
atford  an  average  or  mean  value  of  its  diameter  fully  to  be 
depended  upon. 

(486.)  To  apply  this  principle,  however,  to  practice,  it 
is  necessary  to  know  the  periodic  times  of  the  several  planets. 
These  may  be  obtained  directly,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
by  observing  the  intervals  of  their  passages  through  the 
ecliptic;  but,  owing  to  the  very  small  inclination  of  the 
orbits  of  some  of  them  to  its  plane,  they  cross  it  so  obliquely 
that  the  precise  moment  of  their  arrival  on  it  is  not  asccr- 


320  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY, 

tainable,  unless  by  very  nice  observations.  A  better  method 
consists  in  determining,  from  the  observations  of  several 
successive  days,  the  exact  moments  of  their  arriving  in  oppo- 
sition with  the  sun,  the  criterion  of  which  is  a  difference  of 
longitudes  between  the  sun  and  planet  of  exactly  180°. 
The  interval  between  successive  oppositions  thus  obtained 
is  nearly  one  synodical  period;  and  would  be  exactly  so, 
were  the  planet's  orbit  and  that  of  the  earth  both  circles, 
and  uniformly  described ;  but  as  that  is  found  not  to  be  the 
case  (and  the  criterion  is,  the  inequality  of  successive  syno- 
dical revolutions  so  observed),  the  average  of  a  great 
number,  taken  in  all  varieties  of  situation  in  which  the 
oppositions  occur,  will  be  freed  from  the  elliptic  inequality, 
and  may  be  taken  as  a  mean  synodical  period.  From  this, 
by  the  considerations  and  by  the  process  of  calculation,  in- 
dicated (art.  418.)  the  sidereal  periods  are  readily  obtained. 
The  accuracy  of  this  determination  will,  of  course,  be  greatly 
increased  by  embracing  a  long  interval  between  the  ex- 
treme observations  employed.  In  point  of  fact,  that  interval 
extends  to  nearly  2000  years  in  the  cases  of  the  planets 
known  to  the  ancients,  who  have  recorded  their  observations 
of  them  in  a  manner  sufficiently  careful  to  be  made  use  of. 
Their  periods  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  ascertained 
with  the  utmost  exactness.  Their  numerical  values  will 
be  found  stated,  as  well  as  the  mean  distances,  and  all  the 
other  elements  of  the  planetary  orbits,  in  the  synoptic  table  at 
the  end  of  the  volume,  to  which  (to  avoid  repetition)  the 
reader  is  once  for  all  referred. 

(487.)  In  casting  our  eyes  down  the  list  of  the  planetary 
distances,  and  comparing  them  with  the  periodic  times,  we  can- 
not but  be  struck  with  a  certain  correspondence.  The  greater 
the  distance,  or  the  larger  the  orbit,  evidently  the  longer  the 
period.  The  order  of  the  planets,  beginning  from  the  sun,  is 
the  same,  whether  we  arrange  them  according  to  their  dis- 
tances, or  to  the  time  they  occupy  in  completing  their  revolu- 
tions ;  and  is  as  follows :  —  Mercury,  Venus,  Earth,  Mars, 
the  recently  discovered  family  of  Asteroids,  Jupiter,  Saturn. 


kepler's  third  law.  .321 

JTranus,  and  Neptune.  Nevertheless,  when  we  come  to 
examine  the  numbers  expressing  them,  we  find  that  the  re- 
lation between  the  two  series  is  not  that  of  simple  pro- 
ynrtional  increase.  The  periods  increase  more  than  in  pro- 
portion to  the  distances.  Thus,  the  period  of  Mercury 
is  about  88  days,  and  that  of  the  Earth  365  —  being  in 
I >r< (portion  as  1  to  4*15,  while  their  distances  are  in  the 
less  proportion  of  1  to  2*56 ;  and  a  similar  remark  holds 
good  in  every  instance.  Still,  the  ratio  of  increase  of  the 
times  is  not  so  rapid  as  that  of  the  squares  of  the  distances. 
The  square  of  2*56  is  6*5536,  which  is  considerably  greater 
than  4-15.  An  intermediate  rate  of  increase,  between  the 
simple  proportion  of  the  distances  and  that  of  their  squares 
is  therefore  clearly  pointed  out  by  the  sequence  of  the 
numbers ;  but  it  required  no  ordinary  penetration  in  the 
illustrious  Kepler,  backed  by  uncommon  perseverance  and 
industry,  at  a  period  when  the  data  themselves  were  in- 
volved in  obscurity,  and  when  the  processes  of  trigonometry 
and  of  numerical  calculation  were  encumbered  with  difficulties, 
of  which  the  more  recent  invention  of  logarithmic  tables 
has  happily  left  us  no  conception,  to  perceive  and  demonstrate 
the  real  law  of  their  connection.  This  connection  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  following  proposition :  —  "  The  squares  of 
the  periodic  times  of  any  two  planets  are  to  each  other,  in 
the  same  proportion  as  the  cubes  of  their  mean  distances 
from  the  sun."  Take,  for  example,  the  Earth  and  Mars  *, 
whose  periods  are  in  the  proportion  of  3652564  to  6869796, 
and  whose  distance  from  the  sun  is  that  of  100000  to  152369 ; 
and  it  will  be  found,  by  any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble 
to  go  through  the  calculation,  that  — 

(3652564)1  :  (6869T96)2 ::  (100000 )3  :  (152369)3. 

(488.)  Of  all  the  laws  to  which  induction  from  pure 
observation  has  ever  conducted  man,  this  third  law  (as  it  is 
called)  of  Kepler  may  justly  be  regarded  jis  the  most  remark- 

•  The  expression  of  this  law  of  Kepler  requires  a  slight  modification  when 
we  come  to  the  extreme  nicety  of  numerical  calculation,  for  the  greater  planets, 
iiiv  to  the  influence  of  their  masses.  This  correction  is  imperceptible  for  th» 
Kartli  and  .Mars. 


322  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMT. 

able,  and  the  most  pregnant  with  important  consequences. 
When  we  contemplate  the  constituents  of  the  planetary 
system  from  the  point  of  view  which  this  relation  affords  us, 
it  is  no  longer  mere  analogy  which  strikes  us  —  no  longer 
a  general  resemblance  among  them,  as  individuals  independent 
of  each  other,  and  circulating  about  the  sun,  each  according 
to  its  own  peculiar  nature,  and  connected  with  it  by  its  own 
peculiar  tie.  The  resemblance  is  now  perceived  to  be  a 
true  family  likeness ;  they  are  bound  up  in  one  chain — 
interwoven  in  one  web  of  mutual  relation  and  harmonious 
agreement  —  subjected  to  one  pervading  influence,  which 
extends  from  the  centre  to  the  farthest  limits  of  that  great 
system,  of  which  all  of  them,  the  earth  included,  must  hence- 
forth be  regarded  as  members. 

(489.)  The  laws  of  elliptic  motion  about  the  sun  as  a 
focus,  and  of  the  equable  description  of  areas  by  lines 
joining  the  sun  and  planets,  were  originally  established  by 
Kepler,  from  a  consideration  of  the  observed  motions  of 
Mars;  and  were  by  him  extended,  analogically,  to  all  the 
other  planets.  However  precarious  such  an  extension  might 
then  have  appeared,  modern  astronomy  has  completely  verified 
it  as  a  matter  of  fact,  by  the  general  coincidence  of  its  results 
with  entire  series  of  observations  of  the  apparent  places  of 
the  planets.  These  are  found  to  accord  satisfactorily  with 
the  assumption  of  a  particular  ellipse  for  each  planet,  whose 
magnitude,  degree  of  excentricity,  and  situation  in  space, 
are  numerically  assigned  in  the  synoptic  table  before  referred 
to.  It  is  true,  that  when  observations  are  carried  to  a  high 
degree  of  precision,  and  when  each  planet  is  traced  through 
many  successive  revolutions,  and  its  history  carried  back,  by 
the  aid  of  calculations  founded  on  these  data,  for  many 
centuries,  we  learn  to  regard  the  laws  of  Kepler  as  only 
first  approximations  to  the  much  more  complicated  ones 
which  actually  prevail ;  and  that  to  bring  remote  observations 
into  rigorous  and  mathematical  accordance  with  each  other, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  retain  the  extremely  convenient 
nomenclature  and  relations  of  the  elliptic  system,  it 
becomes  necessary  to  modify,  to  a  certain  extent,  our  verbal 


INTERPRETATION    OF    KEPLER'S    I, AW?.  823 

expression  of  the  laws,  and  to  regard  the  numerical  data  or 
elliptic  elements  of  the  planetary  orbits  as  not  absolutely 
permanent,  but  subject  to  a  series  of  extremely  slow 
and  almost  imperceptible  changes.  These  changes  may  be 
neglected  when  we  consider  only  a  few  revolutions;  but 
going  on  from  century  to  century,  and  continually  accumu- 
lating, they  at  length  produce  material  departures  in  the 
orbits  from  their  original  state.  Their  explanation  will  form 
the  subject  of  a  subsequent  chapter;  but  for  the  present  we 
must  lay  them  out  of  consideration,  as  of  an  order  too 
minute  to  affect  the  general  conclusions  with  which  we  are 
now  concerned.  By  what  means  astronomers  arc  enabled  to 
compare  the  results  of  the  elliptic  theory  with  observation, 
and  thus  satisfy  themselves  of  its  accordance  with  nature, 
will  be  explained  presently. 

(490.)  It  will  first,  however,  be  proper  to  point  out  what 
particular  theoretical  conclusion  is  involved  in  each  of  the 
three  laws  of  Kepler,  considered  as  satisfactorily  established, 
—  what  indication  each  of  them,  separately,  affords  of  the 
mechanical  forces  prevalent  in  our  system,  and  the  mode  in 
which  its  parts  are  connected,  —  and  how,  when  thus  con- 
sidered, they  constitute  the  basis  on  which  the  Newtonian 
explanation  of  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens  is  mainly 
supported.  To  begin  with  the  first  law,  that  of  the  equable 
description  of  areas.  —  Since  the  planets  move  in  curvilinear 
paths,  they  must  (if  they  be  bodies  obeying  the  laws  of 
dynamics)  be  deflected  from  their  otherwise  natural  recti 
linear  progress  by  force.  And  from  tins  law,  taken  as  a 
matter  of  observed  fact,  it  follows,  that  the  direction  of  such 
force,  at  every  point  of  the  orbit  of  each  planet,  always 
passes  through  the  sun.  No  matter  from  what  ultimate  cause 
the  power  which  is  called  gravitation  originates,  —  be  it  a 
virtue  lodged  in  the  sun  as  its  receptacle,  or  be  it  pressure 
from  without,  or  the  resultant  of  many  pressures  or 
solicitations  of  unknown  fluids,  magnetic  or  electric  ethers. 
or  impulses,  —  still,  when  finally  brought  under  our  con- 
templation, and  summed  up  into  a  single  resultant  energy  — 
its  direction   is,  from  every  point   on  all  sides,   n»  ,ir<is   the 

I  i? 


.'524  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

sun's  center.  As  an  abstract  dynamical  proposition,  the 
reader  will  find  it  demonstrated  by  Newton,  in  the  first 
proposition  of  the  Principia,  with  an  elementary  simplicity 
to  which  we  really  could  add  nothing  but  obscurity  by 
amplification,  that  any  body,  urged  towards  a  certain  central 
point  by  a  force  continually  directed  thereto,  and  thereby 
deflected  into  a  curvilinear  path,  will  describe  about  thai 
center  equal  areas  in  equal  times  ;  and  vice  versa,  that  such 
equable  description  of  areas  is  itself  the  essential  criterion  of 
a  continual  direction  of  the  acting  force  towards  the  center 
to  which  this  character  belongs.  The  first  law  of  Kepler, 
then,  gives  us  no  information  as  to  the  nature  or  intensity  of 
the  force  urging  the  planets  to  the  sun  ;  the  only  conclusion 
it  involves  is,  that  it  does  so  urge  them.  It  is  a  property 
of  orbital  rotation  under  the  influence  of  central  forces 
generally,  and,  as  such,  we  daily  see  it  exemplified  in  a 
thousand  familiar  instances.  A  simple  experimental  illus- 
tration of  it  is  to  tie  a  bullet  to  a  thin  string,  and,  having 
whirled  it  round  with  a  moderate  velocity  in  a  vertical  plane, 
to  draw  the  end  of  the  string  through  a  small  ring,  or  allow 
it  to  coil  itself  round  the  finger,  or  round  a  cylindrical  rod 
held  very  firmly  in  a  horizontal  position.  The  bullet  will 
then  approach  the  center  of  motion  in  a  spiral  line  ;  and  the 
increase  of  its  angular  velocity,  and  the  rapid  diminution  of 
its  periodic  time  when  near  the  center,  will  express,  more 
cleai'ly  than  any  words,  the  compensation  by  which  its  uni- 
form description  of  areas  is  maintained  under  a  constantly 
diminishing  distance.  If  the  motion  be  reversed,  and  the 
thread  allowed  to  uncoil,  beginning  with  a  rapid  impulse, 
the  angular  velocity  will  diminish  by  the  same  degrees  as  it 
before  increased.  The  increasing  rapidity  of  a  dancer's 
■pirouette,  as  he  draws  in  his  limbs  and  straightens  his  whole 
person,  so  as  to  bring  every  part  of  his  frame  as  near  as 
possible  to  the  axis  of  his  motion,  is  another  instance  where 
the  connection  of  the  observed  effect  with  the  central  force 
exerted,  though  equally  real,  is  much  less  obvious. 

(491.)  The  second  law  of  Kepler,  or  that  which  asserts 
that  the.planets  describe  ellipses  about  the  tun  as  their  focus, 


INTERPRETATION   OF    KEl'LEll's    LAW?;.  325 

involves,  as  a  consequence,  the  law  of  solar  gravitation  (so  be 
it  allowed  to  call  the  force,  whatever  it  be,  which  urges  them 
towards  the  sun)  as  exerted  on  each  individual  planet,  apart 
from  all  connection  with  the  rest.  A  straight  line,  dynamic- 
ally speaking,  is  the  only  path  which  can  be  pursued  by  a 
body  absolutely  free,  and  under  the  action  of  no  external  force. 
All  deflection  into  a  curve  is  evidence  of  the  exertion  of  a 
force  ;  and  the  greater  the  deflection  in  equal  times,  the 
more  intense  the  force.  Deflection  from  a  straight  line 
is  only  another  word  for  curvature  of  path  ;  and  as  a  circle 
is  characterized  by  the  uniformity  of  its  curvatures  in  all  its 
parts  —  so  is  every  other  curve  (as  an  ellipse)  characterized 
by  the  particular  law  winch  regulates  the  increase  and 
diminution  of  its  curvature  as  we  advance  along  its  circum- 
ference. The  deflecting  force,  then,  which  continually  bends 
a  moving  body  into  a  curve,  may  be  ascertained,  provided 
its  direction,  in  the  first  place,  and,  secondly,  the  law  of  cur- 
vature of  the  curve  itself,  be  known.  Both  these  enter  as 
elements  into  the  expression  of  the  force.  A  body  may 
describe,  for  instance,  an  ellipse,  under  a  great  variety  of 
dispositions  of  the  acting  forces :  it  may  glide  along  it,  for 
example,  as  a  bead  upon  a  polished  wire,  bent  into  an  elliptic 
form ;  in  which  case  the  acting  force  is  always  perpendicular 
to  the  wire,  and  the  velocity  is  uniform.  In  this  case  the 
force  is  directed  to  no  Jixed  center,  and  there  is  no  equable 
description  of  areas  at  all.  Or  it  may  describe  it  as  we 
may  see  done,  if  we  suspend  a  ball  by  a  very  long  string, 
and,  drawing  it  a  little  aside  from  the  perpendicular,  throw 
it  round  with  a  gentle  impulse.  In  this  case  the  acting  force 
is  directed  to  the  center  of  the  ellipse,  about  which  aieas  are 
described  equably,  and  to  which  a  force  proportional  to  the 
distance  (the  decomposed  result  of  terrestrial  gravity)  per- 
petually urges  it.  *  This  is  at  once  a  very  easy  experiment, 
and  a  very  instructive  one,  and  we  shall  again  refer  to  it. 
In  the  case  before  us,  of  an  ellipse  described  by  the  action  of 

•  If  the  suspended  body  be  a  vessel  full  of  fine  sand,  having  a  small  hole  at 
its  bottom,  tlie  elliptic  trace  of  its  orbit  will  be  left  in  a  sand  streak  on  a  lablo 
placed  below  it.  This  neat  illustration  is  due,  to  the  licst  of  my  knowledge, to 
Mr    B.ibbapc. 


3'J()  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

a  force  directed  to  the  focus,  the  steps  of  the  investigation 
of  the  law  of  force  are  these:  1st,  The  law  of  the  areas 
determines  the  actual  velocity  of  the  revolving  body  at  every 
point,  or  the  space  really  run  over  by  it  in  a  given  minute 
portion  of  time ;  2dly,  The  law  of  curvature  of  the  ellipse 
determines  the  linear  amount  of  deflection  from  the  tangent 
in  the  direction  of  the  focus,  wliich  corresponds  to  that  space 
so  run  over ;  3dly,  and  lastly,  The  laws  of  accelerated  motion 
declare  that  the  intensity  of  the  acting  force  causing  such 
deflection  in  its  own  direction,  is  measured  by  or  proportional 
to  the  amount  of  that  deflection,  and  may  therefore  be  cal- 
culated in  any  particular  position,  or  generally  expressed  by 
geometrical  or  algebraic  symbols,  as  a  law  independent  of 
particular  positions,  when  that  deflection  is  so  calculated  or 
expressed.  We  have  here  the  spirit  of  the  process  by  which 
Newton  has  resolved  this  interesting  problem.  For  its 
geometrical  detail,  we  must  refer  to  the  3d  section  of  his 
Principia.  We  know  of  no  artificial  mode  of  imitating  this 
species  of  elliptic  motion ;  though  a  rude  approximation  to  it 
—  enough,  however,  to  give  a  conception  of  the  alternate  ap- 
proach and  recess  of  the  revolving  body  to  and  from  the  focus, 
and  the  variation  of  its  velocity — may  be  had  by  suspending 
a  small  steel  bead  to  a  fine  and  very  long  silk  fibre,  and 
setting  it  to  revolve  in  a  small  orbit  round  the  pole  of  a 
powerful  cylindrical  magnet,  held  upright,  and  vertically 
under  the  point  of  suspension. 

(492.)  The  third  law  of  Kepler,  which  connects  the  dis- 
tances and  periods  of  the  planets  by  a  general  rule,  bears 
with  it,  as  its  theoretical  interpretation,  this  important  con- 
sequence, viz.  that  it  is  one  and  the  same  force,  modified  only 
by  distance  from  the  sun,  which  retains  all  the  planets  in 
their  orbits  about  it.  That  the  attraction  of  the  sun  (if  such 
it  be)  is  exerted  upon  all  the  bodies  of  our  system  indiffer- 
ently, without  regard  to  the  peculiar  materials  of  which 
they  may  consist,  in  the  exact  proportion  of  their  inertias,  or 
(juantltics  of  matter;  that  it  is  not,  therefore,  of  the  nature 
of  the  elective  attractions  of  chemistry  or  of  magnetic  action, 
which  is  nowerless  on  other  substances  than  iron  and  some 


INTERPRETATION    OF    KEFLKli's    LAWS.  327 

one  or  two  more,  but  is  of  a  more  universal  character,  and 
extends  equally  to  all  the  material  constituents  of  our  system, 
and  (as  we  shall  hereafter  see  abundant  reason  to  admit)  to 
those  of  other  systems  than  our  own.  This  law,  important 
and  general  as  it  is,  results,  as  the  simplest  of  corollaries,  from 
the  relations  established  by  Newton  in  the  section  of  the 
J'n'ucipia  referred  to  (Prop,  xv.),  from  which  proposition  it 
results,  that  if  the  earth  were  taken  from  its  actual  orbit,  and 
launched  anew  in  space  at  the  place,  in  the  direction,  and 
with  the  velocity  of  any  of  the  other  planets,  it  would  de- 
scribe the  very  same  orbit,  and  in  the  same  period,  which 
that  planet  actually  does,  a  minute  correction  of  the  period 
only  excepted,  arising  from  the  difference  between  the 
mass  of  the  earth  and  that  of  the  planet.  Small  as  the 
planets  are  compared  to  the  sun,  some  of  them  are  not,  as 
the  earth  is,  mere  atoms  in  the  comparison.  The  strict 
wording  of  Kepler's  law,  as  Newton  has  proved  in  his  fifty- 
ninth  proposition,  is  applicable  only  to  the  case  of  planets 
whose  proportion  to  the  central  body  is  absolutely  inappre- 
tiable.  When  this  is  not  the  case,  the  periodic  time  is 
shortened  in  the  proportion  of  the  square  root  of  the  number 
expressing  the  sun's  mass  or  inertia,  to  that  of  the  sum  of 
the  numbers  expressing  the  masses  of  the  sun  and  planet ; 
and  in  general,  whatever  be  the  masses  of  two  bodies  revolv- 
ing round  each  other  under  the  influence  of  the  Newtonian  law 
of  gravity,  the  square  of  their  periodic  time  will  be  expressed 
by  a  fraction  whose  numerator  is  the  cube  of  their  mean 
distance,  i.  e.  the  greater  semi-axis  of  their  elliptic  orbit, 
and  whose  denominator  is  the  sum  of  their  masses.  When 
one  of  the  masses  is  incomparably  greater  than  the  other, 
this  resolves  into  Kepler's  law;  but  when  this  is  not  the 
case,  the  proposition  thus  generalized  stands  in  lieu  of  that 
law.  In  the  system  of  the  sun  and  planets,  however,  the 
numerical  correction  thus  introduced  into  the  results  of 
Kepler's  law  is  too  small  to  be  of  any  importance,  the  mass 
of  the  largest  of  the  planets  (Jupiter)  being  much  less  than 
a  thousandth  part  of  that  of  the  sun.  We  shall  presently, 
however,  perceive  all  the  importance  of  this  generalization, 
wiien  we  come  to  speak  of  the  satellites. 


328  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

(493.)  It  will  first,  however,  be  proper  to  explain  by  what 
process  of  calculation  the  expression  of  a  planet's  elliptic 
orbit  by  its  elements  can  be  compared  with  observation,  and 
how  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  that  the  numerical  data  con- 
tained in  a  table  of  such  elements  for  the  whole  system  does 
really  exhibit  a  true  picture  of  it,  and  afford  the  means  of 
determining  its  state  at  every  instant  of  time,  by  the  mere 
application  of  Kepler's  laws.  Now,  for  each  planet,  it  is 
necessary  for  this  purpose  to  know,  1st,  the  magnitude  and 
form  of  its  ellipse ;  2dly,  the  situation  of  this  ellipse  in  space, 
with  respect  to  the  ecliptic,  and  to  a  fixed  line  drawn  therein  ; 
3dly,  the  local  situation  of  the  planet  in  its  ellipse  at  some 
known  epoch,  and  its  periodic  time  or  mean  angular  velocity, 
or,  as  it  is  called,  its  mean  motion. 

,  (494.)  The  magnitude  and  form  of  an  ellipse  are  deter- 
mined by  its  greatest  length  and  least  breadth,  or  its  two 
principal  axes ;  but  for  astronomical  uses  it  is  preferable  to 
use  the  semi-axis  major  (or  half  the  greatest  length),  and 
the  excentricity  or  distance  of  the  focus  from  the  center, 
which  last  is  usually  estimated  in  parts  of  the  former.  Thus, 
an  ellipse,  whose  length  is  10  and  breadth  8  parts  of  any  scale, 
has  for  its  major  semi-axis  5,  and  for  its  excentricity  3  such 
parts;  but  when  estimated  in  parts  of  the  semi-axis,  regarded 
as  a  unit,  the  excentricity  is  expressed  by  the  fraction  J-. 

(495.)  The  ecliptic  is  the  plane  to  which  an  inhabitant  of 
the  earth  most  naturally  refers  the  rest  of  the  solar  system, 
as  a  sort  of  ground-plane ;  and  the  axis  of  its  orbit  might  be 
taken  for  a  line  of  departure  in  that  plane  or  origin  of  angular 
reckoning.  Were  the  axis  fixed,  this  would  be  the  best 
possible  origin  of  longitudes  ;  but  as  it  has  a  motion  (though 
an  excessively  slow  one),  there  is,  in  fact,  no  advantage  in 
reckoning  from  the  axis  more  than  from  the  line  of  the 
equinoxes,  and  astronomers  therefore  prefer  the  latter,  taking 
account  of  its  variation  by  the  effect  of  precession,  and  re- 
storing it,  by  calculation  at  every  instant,  to  a  fixed  position. 
Now,  to  determine  the  situation  of  the  ellipse  described  by 
a  planet  with  respect  to  this  plane,  three  elements  require  to 
be  known;  —  1st,  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  planet's 
orbit  to  the  olane  of  the  ecliptic;  2dly,  the  line  in  which 


Till.    PLANK    OF    THE    OKHIT.  329 

these  two  planes  intersect  each  other,  which  of  necessity 
passes  through  the  sun,  and  whose  position  with  respect  to 
the  line  of  the  equinoxes  is  therefore  given  by  stating  its 
longitude.  This  line  is  called  the  line  of  the  nodes.  When 
the  planet  is  in  this  line,  in  the  act  of  passing  from  the  south 
to  the  north  side  of  the  ecliptic,  it  is  in  its  ascending  node, 
and  its  longitude  at  that  moment  is  the  element  called  the 
longitude  of  the  node.  These  two  data  determine  the  situation 
of  the  plane  of  the  orbit ;  and  there  only  remains  for  the 
complete  determination  of  the  situation  of  the  planet's  ellipse, 
to  know  how  it  is  placed  in  that  plane,  which  (since  its  focus  is 
necessarily  in  the  sun)  is  ascertained  by  stating  the  longitude  oj 
its  perihelion,  or  the  place  which  the  extremity  of  the  axis 
nearest  the  sun  Occupies,  when  orthographically  projected  on 
the  ecliptic* 

(496.)  The  dimensions  and  situation  of  the  planet's  orbit 
thus  determined,  it  only  remains,  for  a  complete  acquaintance 
with  its  history,  to  determine  the  circumstances  of  its  motion 
in  the  orbit  so  precisely  fixed.  Now,  for  this  purpose,  all 
that  is  needed  is  to  know  the  moment  of  time  when  it  is  either 
at  the  perihelion,  or  at  any  other  precisely  determined  point 
of  its  orbit,  and  its  whole  period ;  for  these  being  known,  the 
law  of  the  areas  determines  the  place  at  every  other  instant. 
This  moment  is  called  (when  the  perihelion  is  the  point  chosen) 
the  perihelion  passage,  or,  when  some  point  of  the  orbit  is  fixed 
upon,  without  special  reference  to  the  perihelion,  the  epoch. 

(497.)  Thus,  then,  we  have  seven  particulars  or  elements, 
which  must  be  numerically  stated,  before  we  can  reduce  to 
calculation  the  state  of  the  system  at  any  given  moment. 
But,  these  known,  it  is  easy  to  ascertain  the  apparent  posi- 
tions of  each  planet,  as  it  would  be  seen  from  the  sun,  or  is 
eeen  from  the  earth  at  any  time.  The  former  is  called  the 
heliocentric  ;  the  latter  the  geocentric,  place  of  the  planet 

(498.)  To  commence  with  the  heliocentric  places.  Let  S 
represent  the  sun ;  P  A  N  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  being  an 
ellipse,  having  the  S  in  its  focus,  and  A  for  its  perihelion  ; 

*  What  is  most  improperly  called  in  some  books  the  "  longitude  of  the  peri- 
helion on  the  orbit  "  is  a  broken  arc  or  an  angle  made  up  of  two  in  different 
plains,  viz.  from  the  equinox  to  the  node  on  the  ecliptic  and  thence  to  the  peri- 
helion on  the  orbit. 


330 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


and  let  p  a  N  T  represent  the  projection  of  the  orbit  on  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic,  intersecting  the 
line  of  equinoxes  ST  ir.  T ,  which, 
therefore,  is  the  origin  of  lonjritudes. 
Then  will  S  N  be  the  line  of  nodes ; 
and  if  we  suppose  B  to  lie  on  the 
south,  and  A  on  the  north  side  of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  di- 
rection of  the  planet's  motion  to  be  from  B  to  A,  N  will  be 
the  ascending  node,  and  the  angle  T  S  N  the  longitude  of 
the  node.  In  like  manner,  if  P  be  the  place  of  the  planet  at 
any  time,  and  if  it  and  the  perihelion  A  be  projected  on  the 
ecliptic,  upon  the  points  p,  a,  the  angles  *f  S  p,  T  S  a,  will 
be  the  respective  heliocentric  longitudes  of  the  planet  and  of 
the  perihelion,  the  former  of  which  is  to  be*  determined,  and 
the  latter  is  one  of  the  given  elements.  Lastly,  the  angle 
p  S  P  is  the  heliocentric  latitude  of  the  planet,  which  is  also 
required  to  be  known. 

(499.)  Now,  the  time  being  given,  and  also  the  moment  of 
the  planet's  passing  the  perihelion,  the  interval,  or  the  time 
of  describing  the  portion  A  P  of  the  orbit,  is  given,  and  the 
periodical  time,  and  the  whole  area  of  the  ellipse  being 
known,  the  law  of  proportionality  of  areas  to  the  times  of 
their  description  gives  the  magnitude  of  the  area  ASP. 
From  this  it  is  a  problem  of  pure  geometry  to  determine  the 
corresponding  angle  A  S  P,  which  is  called  the  planet's  true 
anomaly.  This  problem  is  of  the  kind  called  transcendental, 
and  has  been  resolved  by  a  great  variety  of  processes,  some 
more,  some  less  intricate.  It  offers,  however,  no  peculiar 
difficulty,  and  is  practically  resolved  with  great  facility  by 
the  help  of  tables  constructed  for  the  purpose,  adapted  to 
the  case  of  each  particular  planet.  * 

(500.)  The  true  anomaly  thus  obtained,  the  planet's 
angular  distance  from  the  node,  or  the  angle  N  S  P,  is  to  be 

*  It  will  readily  be  understood,  that,  except  in  the  case  of  uniform  circular 
motion,  an  equable  description  of  areas  about  any  center  is  incompatible  with 
an  equable  description  of  angles.  The  object  of  the  problem  in  the  text  is  to 
pass  from  the  area,  supposed  known,  to  the  angle,  supposed  unknown  :  in  other 
words,  to  derive  the  true  amount  of  angular  motion  from  the  perihelion,  or  the 
true  anomaly  from  what  is  technically  called  the  mean  anomaly,  that  is,  the  mean 
■ntrutar  motion  which  would  have  been  performed  had  the  motion  in  angle,  been 
uniform  instead  ot  the  motion  in  urea.     It  happens  fortunately,  that  this  is  the 


GEOCENTRIC  PLACE  OF  A  PLANET.        331 

found.  Now,  the  longitudes  of  the  perihelion  and  node  being 
respectively  T  a  and  T  N,  which  are  given,  their  difference 
a  X  is  also  given,  and  the  angle  N  of  the  spherical  right- 
angled  triangle  A  N  a,  being  the  inclination  of  the  plane 
of  the  orbit  to  the  ecliptic,  is  known.  Hence  we  calculate 
the  arc  N  A,  or  the  angle  N  S  A,  which,  added  to  A  S  P, 
gives  the  angle  N  S  P  required.  And  from  this,  regarded 
as  the  measure  of  the  arc  N  P,  forming  the  hypothenuse 
of  the  right  angled  spherical  triangle  P  N  p,  whose  angle  N, 
as  before,  is  known,  it  is  easy  to  obtain  the  other  two  sides, 
N  p  and  P  p.  The  latter,  being  the  measure  of  the  angle 
p  S  P,  expresses  the  planet's  heliocentric  latitude ;  the  former 
measures  the  angle  N  S  p,  or  the  planet's  distance  in  lon- 
gitude from  its  node,  which,  added  to  the  known  angle 
T  S  N,  the  longitude  of  the  node,  gives  the  heliocentric  lon- 
gitude. This  process,  however  circuitous  it  may  appear, 
when  once  well  understood  may  be  gone  through  numerically 
by  the  aid  of  the  usual  logarithmic  and  trigonometrical 
tables,  in  little  more  time  than  it  will  have  taken  the  reader 
to  peruse  its  description. 

(501.)  The  geocentric  differs  from  the  heliocentric  place 
of  a  planet  by  reason  of  that  parallactic  change  of  apparent 
situation  which  arises  from  the  earth's  motion  in  its  orbit. 
Were  the  planets'  distances  as  vast  as  those  of  the  stars,  the 
earth's  orbital  motion  would  be  insensible  when  viewed 
from  them,  and  they  would  always  appear  to  us  to  hold  the 
same  relative  situations  among  the  fixed  stars  as  if  viewed 
from  the  sun,  i.  e.  they  would  then  be  seen  in  their  heliocentric 
places.  The  difference,  then,  between  the  heliocentric  and 
geocentric  places  of  a  planet  is,  in  fact,  the  same  thing  with 
its  parallax,  arising  from  the  earth's  removal  from  the  centre 
of  the  system  and  its  annual  motion.  It  follows  from  this, 
that  the  first  step  towards  a  knowledge  of  its  amount,  and 
the  consequent  determination  of  the  apparent  place  of  each 

simplest  of  all  problems  of  the  transcendental  kind,  and  can  he  resolved,  in  the 
most  difficult  case,  by  the  rule  of  "  false  position,"  or  trial  and  error,  in  a  very 
few  minutes.  Nay,  it  may  even  be  resolved  approximately  on  inspection  by  a 
Minple  and  easily  constructed  piece  of  mechanism,  of  which  the  reatler  mav  see  a 
deaertptUm  in  the  Cambridge  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  iv.  p.  425..  by 
tbe  ..iiihor  of  tins  work. 


332  OUTLINES   OF    48TRONOMY 

planet,  as  referred  from  the  earth  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixer! 
ptars,  must  be  to  ascertain  the  proportion  of  its  linear  dis- 
tances from  the  earth  and  from  the  sun,  as  compared  with 
the  earth's  distance  from  the  sun,  and  the  angular  positions 
of  all  three  with  respect  to  each  other. 

(502.)  Suppose,  therefore,  S  to  represent  the  sun,  E  the 
earth,  and  P  the  planet ;  S  T  the  line  of  equinoxes,  T  E 
the  earth's  orbit,  and  V  p  a  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the 
planet  on  the  ecliptic.  Then  will  the  angle  S  P  E  (according 
to  the  general  notion  of  parallax  conveyed  in  art.  69)  re- 
p  present  the  parallax  of  the  planet 
arising  from  the  change  of  station 
from  S  to  E  ;  E  P  will  be  the  appa- 
rent direction  of  the  planet  seen  from 
"r       «^*^  E ;  and  if  S  Q  be  drawn  parallel  to 

E  p,  the  angle  T  SQ  will  be  the  geocentric  longitude  of  the 
planet,  while  T  S  E  represents  the  heliocentric  longitude  of 
the  earth,  T  S^  that  of  the  planet.  The  former  of  these, 
T  S  E,  is  given  by  the  solar  tables ;  the  latter,  T  S  p,  is 
found  by  the  process  above  described  (art.  500).  Moreover. 
S  P  is  the  radius  vector  of  the  planet's  orbit,  and  S  E  that 
of  the  earth's,  both  of  which  are  determined  from  the  known 
dimensions  of  their  respective  ellipses,  and  the  places  of  the 
bodies  in  them  at  the  assigned  time.  Lastly,  the  angle 
P  S  p  is  the  planet's  heliocentric  latitude. 

(503.)  Our  object,  then,  is,  from  all  these  data,  to  de- 
termine the  angle  T  S  Q,  and  P  E  p,  which  is  the  geocentric 
latitude.  The  process,  then,  will  stand  as  follows:  —  1st, 
In  the  triangle  S  P  p,  right-angled  at  p,  given  S  P,  and  the 
angle  P  S  p  (the  planet's  radius  vector  and  heliocentric 
latitude),  find  S  p  and  P  p;  2dly,  In  the  triangle  SE^, 
given  S  p  (just  found),  S  E  (the  earth's  radius  vector),  and 
the  angle  E  S  p  (the  difference  of  heliocentric  longitudes  of 
the  earth  and  planet),  find  the  angle  S  p  E,  and  the  side 
E  p.  The  former  being  equal  to  the  alternate  angle  p  S  Q, 
is  the  parallactic  removal  of  the  planet  in  longitude,  which, 
added  to  T  S  p,  gives  its  geocentric  longitude.  The  latter, 
E  p  (which  is  called  the  curtate  distance  of  the  planet  from 
the  earth),  gives  at  once  the  geocentric  latitude,  by  means  of 


ORDBB   <>F    DISCOVERY   OP    THK    PLANETS.  333 

the  right- angled  triangle  P  E  p,  of  which  E  p  and  P  p  are 
known  sides,  and  the  angle  P  E  p  is  the  geocentric  latitude 
Bought. 

(504.)  The  calculations  required  for  these  purposes  are 
nothing  but  the  most  ordinary  processes  of  plane  trigo- 
nometry ;  and,  though  somewhat  tedious,  are  neither  intricate 
nor  difficult.  When  executed,  however,  they  afford  us  the 
means  of  comparing  the  places  of  the  planets  actually 
observed  with  the  elliptic  theory,  with  the  utmost  exactness, 
and  thus  putting  it  to  the  severest  trial ;  and  it  is  upon  the 
testimony  of  such  computations,  so  brought  into  comparison 
with  observed  facts,  that  we  declare  that  theory  to  be  a  true 
representation  of  nature. 

(505.)  The  planets  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and 
Saturn,  have  been  known  from  the  earliest  ages  in  which 
astronomy  has  been  cultivated.  Uranus  was  discovered  by 
Sir  W.  Herschel  in  1781,  March  13th,  in  the  course  of  a 
review  of  the  heavens,  in  which  every  star  visible  in  a 
telescope  of  a  certain  power  was  brought  under  close  ex- 
amination, when  the  new  planet  was  immediately  detected 
by  its  disc,  under  a  high  magnifying  power.  It  has  since 
been  ascertained  to  have  been  observed  on  many  previous 
occasions,  with  telescopes  of  insufficient  power  to  show  its 
disc,  and  even  entered  in  catalogues  as  a  star ;  and  some  ol 
the  observations  which  have  been  so  recorded  have  beep 
used  to  improve  and  extend  our  knowledge  of  its  orbit. 
The  discovery  of  the  asteroids  dates  from  the  first  day  of 
1801,  when  Ceres  was  discovered  by  Piazzi,  at  Palermo, 
a  discovery  speedily  followed  by  those  of  Juno  by  pro- 
fessor Harding,  of  Gottingen,  in  1804;  and  of  Pallas  and 
Vesta,  by  Dr.  Olbers,  of  Bremen,  in  1802  and  1807  re- 
spectively. It  is  extremely  remarkable  that  this  important 
addition  to  our  system  had  been  in  some  sort  surmised  as  a 
thing  not  unlikely,  on  the  ground  that  the  intervals  between 
the  orbit  of  Mercury  and  the  other  planetary  orbits,  go  on 
doubling  as  we  recede  from  the  sun,  or  nearly  so.  Thus, 
the  interval  betwesn  the  orbits  of  the  Earth  and  Mercury  is 
nearly  twice  that  between  those  of  Venus  and  Mercury; 
that  between  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  Mercury  nearly  twice 


334  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

that  between  the  Earth  and  Mercury ;  and  so  on.  The 
interval  between  the  orbits  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  how- 
ever, is  much  too  great,  and  would  form  an  exception  to  this 
law,  which  is,  however,  again  resumed  in  the  case  of 
the  three  planets  next  in  order  of  remoteness,  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  and  Uranus.  It  was  therefore  thrown  out,  by  the 
late  Professor  Bode,  of  Berlin,*  as  a  possible  surmise,  that 
a  planet  not  then  yet  discovered  might  exist  between  Mars 
and  Jupiter;  and  it  may  easily  be  imagined  what  was  the 
astonishment  of  astronomers  on  finding  not  one  only,  but 
four  planets,  differing  greatly  in  all  the  other  elements  of  their 
orbits,  but  agreeing  very  nearly,  both  inter  se,  and  with  the 
above  stated  empirical  law,  in  respect  of  their  mean  distances 
from  the  sun.  No  account,  a  priori  or  from  theory,  was  to 
be  given  of  this  singular  progression,  which  is  not,  like 
Kepler's  laws,  strictly  exact  in  numerical  verification:  but 
the  circumstances  we  have  just  mentioned  tended  to  create 
a  strong  belief  that  it  was  something  beyond  a  mere  ac- 
cidental coincidence,  and  bore  reference  to  the  essential 
structure  of  the  planetary  system.  It  was  even  conjectured 
that  the  asteroids  are  fragments  of  some  greater  planet  which 
formerly  circulated  in  that  interval,  but  which  has  been  blown 
to  atoms  by  an  explosion ;  an  idea  countenanced  by  the  ex- 
ceeding minuteness  of  these  bodies  which  present  discs  ;  and 
it  was  argued  that  in  that  case  innumerable  more  such  frag- 
ments must  exist  and  might  come  to  be  hereafter  discovered. 
Whatever  may  be  thought  of  such  a  speculation  as  a  physical 
hypothesis,  this  conclusion  has  been  verified  to  a  considerable 

*  The  progression  is  (rather  rudely)  that  of  the  numbers  4,  4  +  3,  4  +  6, 
4  +  12,  &c.  The  empirical  law  itself,  as  we  have  above  stated  it,  is  ascribed  by 
Voiron,  not  to  Bode  (who  would  appear,  however,  at  all  events,  to  have  first 
drawn  attention  to  this  interpretation  of  its  interruption,)  but  to  Professor  Titius 
of  Wittemberg.     (Voiron,  Supplement  to  Blilly. ) 

Another  law  has  been  proposed  (in  a  letter  to  the  writer,  dated  March  1, 
IS*)*)),  by  Mr.  J.  Jones,  of  Brynhyfryd,  Wrexham.  If  the  planets'  mean 
distances  'rom  the  sun  be  arranged  in  the  following  orders, —  Mercury,  Venus, 
Jupiter.  Saturn; — the  Earth,  Mars,  Uranus,  Neptune ;— the  product  of  the 
means     in    each    group    is    nearly    equal    to    the    product    of    the    extremes. 

Venus   x  Jupiter       Earth  x  Neptune       ,       T  .   .     c  e    .   .,      ,.    .   ,. 

! = J =  1.      In   point  ot  fact  the   first  traction 

Mercury  x  Saturn         Mars  x   Uranus 

=  1*02;  and  the  last  ■  ,  so   that  the  approach  to  verification  of  the  law  i» 

103  FP 

really  very  near. 


DISCOVERY    OF    TITE    NEW    PLANK  TS.  335 

extent  as  a  matter  of  fact  by  subsequent  discovery,  the  result 
of  a  careful  and  minute  examination  and  mapping  down  of 
the  smaller  stars  in  and  near  the  zodiac,  undertaken  with  that 
express  object.  Zodiacal  charts  of  this  kind,  the  product  of 
the  zeal  and  industry  of  many  astronomers,  have  been  con- 
structed, in  which  every  star  down  to  the  ninth,  tenth,  or 
even  lower  magnitudes,  is  inserted,  and  these  stars  being 
compared  with  the  actual  stars  of  the  heavens,  the  intrusion 
of  any  stranger  within  their  limits  cannot  fail  to  be  noticed 
when  the  comparison  is  systematically  conducted.  The  dis- 
covery of  Astraea  and  Hebe  by  Professor  Hencke  in  1845  and 
1847  revived  the  flagging  spirit  of  enquiry  in  this  direction  ; 
with  what  success,  the  list  in  the  Appendix  to  this  volume 
will  best  show.  The  labours  of  our  indefatigable  countryman, 
Mr.  Hind,  have  been  rewarded  by  the  discovery  of  no  less 
than  eight  of  them. 

(506.)  The  discovery  of  Neptune  marks  in  a  signal  manner 
the  maturity  of  Astronomical  science.  The  proof,  or  at  least 
the  urgent  presumption  of  the  existence  of  such  a  planet,  as 
a  means  of  accounting  (by  its  attraction)  for  certain  small 
irregularities  observed  in  the  motions  of  Uranus,  was  afforded 
almost  simultaneously  by  the  independent  researches  of  two 
geometers,  Messrs.  Adams  of  Cambridge  and  Leverrier  of 
Paris,  who  were  enabled,  from  theory  alone,  to  calculate 
whereabouts  it  ought  to  appear  in  the  heavens,  if  visible, 
the  places  thus  independently  calculated  agreeing  surpris- 
ingly. Within  a  sinyle  degree  of  the  place  assigned  by 
M.  Leverrier's  calculations,  and  by  him  communicated  to 
Dr.  Galle  of  the  Royal  Observatory  at  Berlin,  and  within 
two  and  a  half  from  that  indicated  by  Mr.  Adams,  it  was 
actually  found  by  Dr.  Galle  on  the  very  first  night  (Sept.  23. 
1846)  after  the  receipt  of  M.  Leverrier's  communication,  on 
turning  a  telescope  on  the  spot,  and  comparing  the  stars  in 
its  immediate  neighbourhood  with  those  previously  laid  down 
in  one  of  the  zodiacal  charts  already  alluded  to.* 

*   Constructed  by  Dr.   Bremiker,  of  Berlin.      On  reading  the  history  of  tl- is 
noble  discovery,  we  are  ready  to  exclaim  with  Schiller — 

"  Mit  dem  Genius  stcht  die  Natur  in  ewigem  Bundc, 
Was  <ler  Eine  verspricht  leittet  die  Andre  gewiss.'' 

Professor  (liallis,  of  the  Cambridge  Obavrvatory,  directing  the  Northtim- 


336  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

(507.)  The  mean  distance  of  Neptune  from  the  sun,  how- 
ever, so  far  from  falling  in  with  the  supposed  law  of  planetary 
distances  above  mentioned,  offers  a  decided  case  of  discord- 
ance. The  interval  between  its  orbit  and  that  of  Mercury, 
instead  of  being  nearly  double  the  interval  between  those  of 
Uranus  and  Mercury,  does  not,  in  fact,  exceed  the  latter 
interval  by  much  more  than  half  its  amount.  This  remark- 
able exception  may  serve  to  make  us  cautious  in  the  too 
ready  admission  of  empirical  laws  of  this  nature  to  the  rank 
of  fundamental  truths,  though,  as  in  the  present  instance, 
they  may  prove  useful  auxiliaries,  and  serve  as  stepping 
stones,  affording  a  temporary  footing  in  the  path  to  great 
discoveries.  The  force  of  this  remark  will  be  more  apparent 
when  we  come  to  explain  more  particularly  the  nature  of 
the  theoretical  views  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  Neptune 
itself. 

(508.)  We  shall  devote  the  rest  of  this  chapter  to  an 
account  of  the  physical  peculiarities  and  probable  condition  of 
the  several  planets,  so  far  as  the  former  are  known  by  ob 
servation,  or  the  latter  rest  on  probable  grounds  of  conjecture. 
In  this,  three  features  principally  strike  us  as  necessarily 
productive  of  extraordinary  diversity  in  the  provis'ons  by 
which,  if  they  be,  like  our  earth,  inhabited,  animal  life  must 
be  supported.  These  are,  first,  the  difference  in  their  re- 
spective supplies  of  light  and  heat  from  the  sun;  secondly, 
the  difference  in  the  intensities  of  the  gravitating  forces  which 
must  subsist  at  their  surfaces,  or  the  different  ratios  which, 
on  their  several  globes,  the  inertia  of  bodies  must  bear  to 
their  weights;  and,  thirdly,  the  difference  in  the  nature  of 
the  materials  of  which,  from  what  we  know  of  their  mean 
density,  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  they  consist.  Tlic 
intensity  of  solar  radiation  is  nearly  seven  times  greater  on 
Mercury  than  on  the  Earth,  and  on  Neptune  900  times  less ; 

berland  telescope  of  that  Institution  to  the  place  assigned  by  Mr.  Adams's 
calculations  and  its  vicinity,  on  the  4th  and  12th  of  August  1846,  saw  the 
I  lanet  on  both  those  dajs,  and  noted  its  place  (among  those  of  other  stars)  for 
re-ol>servation.  He,  however,  postponed  the  comparison  of  the  places  observed, 
and,  not  possessing  Dr.  Bremiker's  chart  (which  would  have  at  once  indicated 
the  presence  of  an  unmapped  star),  remained  in  ignorance  of  the  planets 
existence  as  a  visible  object  till  its  announcement  as  such  by  Dr.  Galle. 


PHYSICAL    DESCRIPTION    OF    THE    PLANETS.  337 

the  proportion  between  the  two  extremes  being  that  of  up- 
wards of  5600  to  1.      Let  any  one  figure  to  himself  the 
condition  of  our  globe,  were  the  sun  to  be  septupled,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  greater  ratio  !   or  were  it  diminished  to  a 
seventh,  or  to  a  900th  of  its  actual  power!     It  is  true  that 
owing  to  the  remarkable  difference  between  the  properties 
of  radiant  heat  as  emitted  from  bodies  of  very  exalted  tem- 
perature, as  the  sun,  nnd  as  from  such  as  we  commonly  term 
warm,  it  is  very  possible  that  a  dense  atmosphere  surrounding 
a  planet,  while  allowing  the  access  of  solar  heat  to  its  surface, 
may  oppose  a  powerful  obstacle  to  its  escape,  and  that  thus 
the  feeble  sunshine  on  a  remote  planet  may  be  retained  and 
accumulated  on  its  surface  in  the  same  way  (and  for  the  same 
reason)  that  a  very  slight  amount  of  sunshine,  or  even  the 
dispersed  heat  of  a  bright  though  clouded  day,  suffices  to 
maintain  the  interior  of  a  closed  greenhouse  at  a  high  tem- 
perature.    We  cannot  then  absolutely  conclude  the  preva- 
lence of  that  excessive  cold  on  the  surface  of  a  distant  planet 
which  its  mere  remoteness  from  the  sun  might  lead  us,  primd 
facie,  to  expect. 

(508.  b.)  Again,  the  intensity  of  gravity,  or  its  efficacy 
in  counteracting  muscular  power  and  repressing  animal 
activity,  on  Jupiter,  is  nearly  two  and  a  half  times  that  on 
the  Earth,  on  Mars  not  more  than  one-half,  on  the  Moon 
one-sixth,  and  on  the  smaller  planets  probably  not  more  than 
one-twentieth ;  giving  a  scale  of  which  the  extremes  are  in 
the  proportion  of  sixty  to  one.  Lastly,  the  density  of  Saturn 
hardly  exceeds  one-eighth  of  the  Earth's,  so  that  it  must  con- 
sist of  materials  not  heavier  on  the  average  than  dry  fir  wood. 
Now,  under  the  various  combinations  of  elements  so  impor- 
tant to  life  as  these,  what  immense  diversity  must  we  not 
admit  in  the  conditions  of  that  great  problem,  the  mainten- 
ance of  animal  and  intellectual  existence  and  happiness,  which 
seems,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  by  what  we  see  around  us  in 
our  own  planet,  and  by  the  way  in  which  every  corner  of  it 
is  crowded  with  living  beings,  to  form  an  unceasing  and 
worthy  object  for  the  exercise  of  the  Benevolence  and  Wis- 
dom which  preside  over  all ! 

L 


338  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(509.)  Quitting,  however,  the  region  of  mere  speculation, 
we  will  now  show  what  information  the  telescope  affords  ua 
of  the  actual  condition  of  the  several  planets  within  its  reach. 
Of  Mercury  we  can  see  little  more  than  that  it  is  round,  and 
exhibits  phases.  It  is  too  small,  and  too  much  lost  in  the 
constant  neighbourhood  of  the  Sun,  to  allow  us  to  make 
out  more  of  its  nature.  The  real  diameter  of  Mercury  is 
about  3200  miles:  its  apparent  diameter  varies  from  5"  to 
12".  Nor  does  Venus  offer  any  remarkable  peculiarities: 
although  its  real  diameter  is  7800  miles,  and  although  it  oc- 
ca^ionally  attains  the  considerable  apparent  diameter  of  61", 
which  is  larger  than  that  of  any  other  planet,  it  is  yet  the 
most  difficult  of  them  all  to  define  with  telescopes.  The 
intense  lustre  of  its  illuminated  part  dazzles  the  sight,  and 
exaggerates  every  imperfection  of  the  telescope ;  yet  we  see 
clearly  that  its  surface  is  not  mottled  over  with  permanent 
spots  like  the  Moon  ;  we  notice  in  it  neither  mountains  nor 
shadows,  but  a  uniform  brightness,  in  which  sometimes  we 
may  indeed  fancy,  or  perhaps  more  than  fancy,  brighter  or 
obscurer  portions,  but  can  seldom  or  never  rest  fully  satisfied 
of  the  fact.  It  is  from  some  observations  of  this  kind  that  both 
Venus  and  Mercury  have  been  concluded  to  revolve  on  their 
axes  in  about  the  same  time  as  the  Earth,  though  in  the 
case  of  Venus,  Bianchini  and  other  more  recent  observers 
have  contended  for  a  period  of  twenty-four  times  that  length. 
The  most  natural  conclusion,  from  the  very  rare  appearance 
and  want  of  permanence  in  the  spots,  is,  that  we  do  not  see, 
as  in  the  Moon,  the  real  surface  of  these  planets,  but  only 
their  atmospheres,  much  loaded  with  clouds,  and  which  may 
serve  to  mitigate  the  otherwise  intense  glare  of  their  sun- 
shine. 

(510.)  The  case  is  very  different  with  Mars.  In  this 
planet  we  frequently  discern,  with  perfect  distinctness,  the 
outlines  of  what  may  be  continents  and  seas.  (See  Plate  III. 
fig.  1.,  which  represents  Mars  in  its  gibbous  state,  as  seen 
on  the  16th  of  August,  1830,  in  the  20-feet  reflector  at 
Slough.)  Of  these,  the  former  are  distinguished  by  that 
ruddy  colour  which  characterizes  the  light,   of   this  planet 


JUPITER.  389 

(which  always  appears  red  and  fiery),  and  indicates,  no 
doubt,  an  ochrey  tinge  in  the  general  soil,  like  what  the  red 
sandstone  districts  on  the  Earth  may  possibly  offer  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Mars,  only  more  decided.  Contrasted  with 
this  (by  a  general  law  in  optics),  the  seas,  as  we  may  call 
them,  appear  greenish.*  These  spots,  however,  are  not 
always  to  be  seen  equally  distinct,  but,  when  seen,  they  offer 
the  appearance  of  forms  considerably  definite  and  highly 
characteristic!,  brought  successively  into  view  by  the  rotation 
of  the  planet,  from  the  assiduous  observation  of  which  it  has 
even  been  found  practicable  to  construct  a  rude  chart  of  the 
surface  of  the  planet.  The  variety  in  the  spots  may  arise 
from  the  planet  not  being  destitute  of  atmosphere  and  clouds ; 
and  what  adds  greatly  to  the  probability  of  this  is  the  ap- 
pearance of  brilliant  white  spots  at  its  poles, — one  of  which 
appears  in  our  figure,  — which  have  been  conjectured,  with 
some  probability,  to  be  snow  ;  as  they  disappear  when  they 
have  been  long  exposed  to  the  sun,  and  are  greatest  when 
just  emerging  from  the  long  night  of  their  polar  winter,  the 
snow  line  then  extending  to  about  six  degrees  (reckoned  on 
a  meridian  of  the  planet)  from  the  pole.  By  watching  the 
spots  during  a  whole  night,  and  on  successive  nights,  it  is 
found  that  Mars  has  a  rotation  on  an  axis  inclined  about 
30°  18'  td  the  ecliptic,  and  in  a  period  of  24h  37m  23SJ  in  the 
same  direction  as  the  Earth's,  or  from  west  to  east.  The 
greatest  and  least  apparent  diameters  of  Mars  are  4"  and 
18",  and  its  real  diameter  about  4100  miles. 

(511.)  We  now  come  to  a  much  more  magnificent  planet, 
Jupiter,  the  largest  of  them  all,  being  in  diameter  no  less 
than  87,000  miles,  and  in  bulk  exceeding  that  of  the  Earth 
nearly  1300  times.  It  is,  moreover,  dignified  by  the  atten- 
dance of  four  moons,  satellites,  or  secondary  planets,  as  they  are 


*  I  have  noticed  the  phaenomena  described  in  the  text  on  many  occasions,  but 
never  more  distinct  than  on  the  occasion  when  the  drawing  was  made  from 
which  the  figure  in  Plate  I.  is  engraved.  —  Author. 

t  The  teader  will  find  many  of  those  forms  represented  in  Schumacher's 
Astronomisclie  Nachrichten,  No.  191,  434,  and  in  the  chart  in  No.  349,  by 
Messrs.  Beer  and  Madler. 

X  Bier  and  Madler,  Astr.  Xachr.  S49.    22*-736,  Proctor,  A.  S.  Aor.  xxix.  2SS. 


340  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

called,  which  constantly  aecompany  and  revolve  about  it,  as 
the  Moon  does  round  the  Earth,  and  in  the  same  direction, 
forming  with  their  principal,  or  primary,  a  beautiful  miniature 
system,  entirely  analogous  to  that  greater  one  of  which  their 
central  body  is  itself  a  member,  obeying  the  same  laws,  and 
exemplifying,  in  the  most  striking  and  instructive  manner, 
the  prevalence  of  the  gravitating  power  as  the  ruling  prin- 
ciple of  their  motions  :  of  these,  however,  we  shall  speak  more 
at  large  in  the  next  chapter. 

(512.)    The   disc   of  Jupiter   is    always   observed   to  be 
crossed  in  one  certain  direction  by  dark   bends  or  belts  pre- 
senting the  appearance,  in  Plate  III.  fig.  2.,  which  represents 
this  planet  as  seen  on  the  23rd  of  September,  1832,  in  the 
20-feet  reflector  at  Slough.     These  belts  are,  however,  by  no 
means  alike  at  all  times ;  they  vary  in  breadth  and  in  situa- 
tion on  the  disc  (though   never  in  their  general   direction). 
They  have  even  been  seen  broken  up  and  distributed  over 
the  whole  face  of  the  planet;  but  this  phenomenon  is  ex- 
tremely rare.     Branches  running  out  from  them,  and  subdi- 
visions, as  represented  in  the  figure,  as  well  as  evident  darker 
spots,  are  by  no  means  uncommon.     But  the  most  singular 
phenomenon  presented  by  the  belts  of  Jupiter  is  the  occasional 
appearance  upon  them  of  perfectly  round,  well  defined,  bright 
spots  (not  unlike  the  discs  of  the  satellites  (see  art.  540.),  as 
they  are  occasionally  seen  projected  on    the    planet  when 
passing  between  it  and  the  Earth,  only  smaller.     They  vary 
in  situation  and  number,  as  many  as  ten  having,  on  one  oc- 
casion (Oct.  28,  1857),  been  seen   at  once,  but,  so  far  as 
hitherto  observed,  only  on  the  southern  hemisphere  of  Jupiter. 
They  were  first  noticed  by  Mr.  Dawes  in  the  spring  of  1849, 
but  first  described  and  figured  by  Mr.  Lassell,  March  27, 1850. 
They  have  been  more  recently  again  and  more  distinctly  and 
consecutively  observed  by  the  former  of  these  observers,  who 
has  given  figures  of  them  in  Ast.  Soc.  Not.  xviii.  pp.  8.  40. 
(512.  a.)  From  the  appearances  and  configurations  of  the 
belts,  attentively  watched,   it  is  concluded  that  this  planet, 
revolves  in  the  surprisingly  short  period  of  9h  55m  21**3 


SATURN.  341 

(Airy),  on  an  axis  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  belts. 
.Now,  it  is  very  remarkable,  and  forms  a  most  satisfactory 
comment  on  the  reasoning  by  which  the  spheroidal  figure  of 
the  Earth  has  been  deduced  from  its  diurnal  rotation,  that  the 
outline  of  Jupiter's  disc  is  evidently  not  circular,  but  elliptic, 
being  considerably  flattened  in  the  direction  of  its  axis  of  ro- 
tation. This  appearance  is  no  optical  illusion,  but  is  authen- 
ticated by  micrometrical  measures,  which  assign  106  to  100 
for  the  proportion  of  the  equatorial  and  polar  diameters. 
And  to  confirm,  in  the  strongest  manner,  the  truth  of  those 
principles  on  which  our  former  conclusions  have  been  founded, 
and  fully  to  authorize  their  extension  to  this  remote  system, 
it  appears,  on  calculation,  that  this  is  really  the  degree  of 
ol)lateness  which  corresponds,  on  those  principles,  to  the 
dimensions  of  Jupiter,  and  to  the  time  of  his  rotation. 

(513.)  The  parallelism  of  the  belts  to  the  equator  of  Jupiter, 
their  occasional  variations,  and  these  appearances  of  spots  seen 
upon  them,  render  it  extremely  probable  that  they  subsist 
in  the  atmosphere  of  the  planet,  forming  tracts  of  compa- 
ratively clear  sky,  determined  by  currents  analogous  to  our 
trade-winds,  but  of  a  much  more  steady  and  decided  charac- 
ter, as  might  indeed  be  expected  from  the  immense  velocity 
of  its  rotation.  That  it  is  the  comparatively  darker  body  of 
the  planet  which  appears  in  the  belts  is  evident  from  this,  — 
that  they  do  not  come  up  in  all  their  strength  to  the  edge  of 
the  disc,  but  fade  away  gradually  before  they  reach  it  The 
round  bright  spots  described  above  may  therefore  not  impos- 
sibly be  insulated  masses  of  cloud,  of  local  origin,  analogous 
to  the  cumuli  which  sometimes  cap  ascending  columns  of 
vapour  in  our  atmosphere.  The  apparent  diameter  of  Jupiter 
varies  from  30"  to  46".* 

(514.)  A  still  more  wonderful,  and,  as  it  may  be  termed, 
elaborately  artificial  mechanism,  u  displayed  in  Saturn,  the 
next  in  order  of  remoteness  to  Jupiter,  to  which  it  is  not 
much  inferior  in  magnitude,  being  about  79,000  miles  in  dia- 

*  Prof.  P.  Smyth  and  Mr.  Delaltuehave  published  fine  representations  of 
Jupiter,  the  former  as  seen  from  the  Peak  of  TeneriflFe  (alt  10,700  ft),  rh« 
latter  in  his  observatory  at  Cranford. 


342  OUTLINES   OF  ASTliONOMY. 

meter,  nearly  1000  times  exceeding  the  earth  in  bulk,  and 
subtending  an  apparent  angular  diameter  at  the  earth,  of 
about  18"  at  its  mean  distance.  This  stupendous  globe, 
besides  being  attended  by  no  le.-s  than  eight  satellites,  or 
moons,  is  surrounded  with  three  broad,  flat,  and  extremely 
thin  rings,  concentric  with  the  planet  and  with  each  other,  the 
inner  being  very  faint  and  semi-transparent ;  all  lying  in  one 
plane,  and  separated  by  a  very  narrow  interval  from  each 
other  throughout  their  whole  circumference,  as  they  are  from 
the  planet  by  a  much  wider.  The  dimensions  of  this  extra- 
ordinary appendage  are  as  follows  *  :  — 

"  Miles. 

Exterior  diameter  of  exterior  bright  ring     ...  40*095  =  176,418 

Interior  ditto    ....          ....  35*289  =  155.272 

Exterior  diameter  of  interior  bright  ring     ...  34*475  =  151,690 

Interior  ditto      -                                        ....  26-668=117,339 

Equatorial  diameter  of  the  body          ....  17*991=   79,160 

Interval  between  the  planet  and  interior  bright  ring      -  4*339=    19,090 

Interval  of  the  rings 0*408=      1,791 

Thickness  of  the  ring  not  exceeding    -----=         250 

The  figure  (PI.  III.  fig.  3.)  represents  Saturn  surrounded 
by  its  rings,  and  having  its  body  striped  with  dark  belts, 
somewhat  similar,  but  broader  and  less  strongly  marked  than 
those  of  Jupiter,  and  owing,  doubtless,  to  a  similar  cause. f 
Whatever  be  the  materials  of  which  the  ring  consists  (and 
there  are  strong  reasons,  Art.  522.,  for  believing  it  not  to 
consist  of  solid  matter)  it  is  at  least  substantial  enough  to 
cast  a  shadow,  which,  when  the  Earth  is  properly  situated, 
may  be  seen  on  the  body  of  the  planet  on  the  side  next  the 
Sun ;  as  also  to  receive  one  when  thrown  on  it  by  the  body 
on  the  opposite  side.  The  form  of  this  latter  shadow,  minutely 
scrutinized  with  powerful  telescopes,  has  led  some  observers 
to  conclude  that  the  edge  of  the  outer  ring  is  in  some  degree 
rounded,  and  that  the  two  rings  do  not  lie  precisely  in  one 

*  These  dimensions  are  calculated  from  Prof.  Struve's  micrometric  measures 
Mem.  Ast  Soc.  iii.  301.,  with  the  exception  of  the  thickness  of  the  ring,  which 
is  concluded  from  its  total  disappearance  in  1833,  in  a  telescope  which  would 
certainly  have  shown,  as  a  visible  object,  a  line  of  light  one-twentieth  of  a 
second  in  breadth.  The  interval  of  the  rings  here  stated  is  possibly  somewhat 
too  small. 

t  The  equatorial  bright  belt  is  generally  well  seen.  The  subdivision  of  the 
dark  one  by  two  narrow  bright  bands  is  seldom  so  distinct  as  represented  in  tha 
plate. 


SAT  U  UN.  343 

plane.*  From  the  parallelism  of  the  belts  with  the  plane  of 
the  ring,  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  axis  of  rotation  of  the 
planet  is  perpendicular  to  that  plane ;  and  this  conjecture  is 
confirmed  by  the  occasional  appearance  of  extensive  dusky 
spots  on  its  surface,  which,  when  watched,  like  the  spots  on 
Mars  or  Jupiter,  indicate  a  rotation  in  10h  16m  0S,44  (accord- 
ing to  the  observations  of  Sir  Wm,  Herschel)  about  an  axis 
bo  situated. 

(515.)  The  axis  of  rotation,  like  that  of  the  earth,  preserves 
its  parallelism  to  itself  during  the  motion  of  the  planet  in  its 
orbit ;  and  the  same  is  also  the  case  with  the  ring,  whose 
plane  is  constantly  inclined  at  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the 
same,  angle  to  that  of  the  orbit,  and,  therefore,  to  the 
ecliptic,  viz.  28°  11';  and  intersects  the  latter  plane  in  a 
line,  which  makes  at  present  |  an  angle  with  the  line  of 
equinoxes  of  167°  31'.  So  that  the  nodes  of  the  ring  lie  in 
167°  31'  and  347°  31'  of  longitude.  Whenever,  then,  the 
planet  happens  to  be  situated  in  one  or  other  of  these  longi- 
tudes, as  at  C,  the  plane  of  the  ring  passes  through  the  sun, 
which  then  illuminates  only  the  edge  of  it.  And  if  the 
earth  at  that  moment  be  in  F,  it  will  see  the  ring  edgeways, 
the  planet  being  in  opposition,  and  therefore  most  favour- 
ably situated  (cateris  paribus)  for  observation.  Under  these 
circumstances  the  ring,  if  seen  at  all,  can  only  appear  as  a 
very  narrow  straight  line  of  light  projecting  on  either  side 
of  the  body  as  a  prolongation  of  its  diameter.  In  fact,  it  is 
quite  invisible  in  any  but  telescopes  of  extraordinary  power.J 
This  remarkable  phenomenon  takes  place  at  intervals  of  fif- 
teen years  nearly  (being  a  semi-period  of  Saturn  in  its  orbit). 
One  disappearance  at  least  must  take  place  whenever  Saturn 
passes  either  node  of  its  orbit;  but  three  must  frequently 
happen,  and  two  are  possible.  To  show  this,  suppose  S  to 
be  the  sun,  A  B  C  D  part  of  Saturn's  orbit  situated  so  as  to 

*  The  excessive  thinness  of  the  rings  leads  us  to  demur  to  the  former  of  thes« 
conclusions  as  a  result  of  observation,  though  fully  admitting  it  as  theoretically 
probable. 

t  According  to  Bessel,  the  longitude  of  the  node  of  the  ring  increases  by 
46"-462  per  annum.     In  1800  it  was  166°  53'  8''"9. 

X  Its  disappearance  was  complete  when  ohserred  with  a  refleitor  eighteen 
inches  in  aperture  and  twentv  fert  in  focal  lenuth  on  the  29th  of  April,  I8SS 
bv  the  author. 


344 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


include  the  node  of  the  ring  (at  C);  EFGH  the  Earth's 
orbit ;  S  C  the  line  of  the  node ;  E  B,  G  D  parallel  to  S  C 
touching  the  earth's  orbit  in  EG;  and  let  the  direction  of 
motion  of  both  bodies  be  that  indicated  by  the  arrow.  Then 
since  the  ring  preserves  its  parallelism,  its  plane  can  nowhere 
intersect  the  earth's  orbit,  and  therefore  no  disappearance 
can  take  place,  unless  the  planet  be  between  B  and  D :  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  a  disappearance  is  possible  (if  the  earth 
be  rightly  situated)  during  the  whole  time  of  the  description 


of  the  arc  B  D.  Now,  since  S  B  or  SD,  the  distance  of 
Saturn  from  the  Sun,  is  to  S  E  or  S  G,  that  of  the  Earth,  as 
9-54  to  1,  the  angle  C  SD  or  C  SB  =  6°  1',  and  the  whole 
angle  B  S  D=rl2°  2',  which  is  described  by  Saturn  (on  an 
average)  in  359'46  days,  wanting  only  5*8  days  of  a  complete 
year.  The  Earth  then  describes  very  nearly  an  entire  revo- 
lution within  the  limits  of  time  when  a  disappearance  is  pos- 
sible ;  and  since,  in  either  half  of  its  orbit  E  F  G  or  G  H  E, 
it  may  equally  encounter  the  plane  of  the  ring,  one  such 
encounter  at  least  is  unavoidable  within  the  time  specified. 

(516.)  Let  G  a  be  the  arc  of  the  Earth's  orbit  described 
from  G  in  5*8  days.  Then  if,  at  the  moment  of  Saturn's 
arrival  at  B,  the  Earth  be  at  «,  it  will  encounter  the  plane 
of  the  ring  advancing  parallel  to  itself  and  to  B  E  to  mec  t 
it,  somewhere  in  the  quadrant  H  E,  as  at  M,  after  which 
it  will  be  behind  that  plane  (with  reference  to  the  direction 


DISAPPEARANCE    OF    SATURN'S    RING.  345 

of  Saturn's  motion)  through  all  the  arc  M  E  F  G  up  to  G, 
where  it  will  again  overtake  it  at  the  very  moment  of  the 
planet  quitting  the  arc  B  D.  In  this  state  of  things  there 
will  be  two  disappearances.  If,  when  Saturn  is  at  B,  the 
Earth  be  anywhere  in  the  arc  a  H  E,  it  is  equally  evident 
that  it  will  meet  and  pass  through  the  advancing  plane  of  the 
ring  somewhere  in  the  quadrant  H  E,  that  it  will  again 
overtake  and  pass  through  itsomewhere  in  the  semicircle  E  F  G, 
and  again  meet  it  in  some  point  of  the  quadrant  G  H,  so  that 
three  disappearances  will  take  place.  So,  also,  if  the  Earth 
be  at  E  when  Saturn  is  at  B,  the  motion  of  the  Earth  being  at 
that  instant  directly  towards  B,  the  plane  of  the  ring  will 
for  a  short  time  leave  it  behind ;  but  the  ground  so  lost  being 
rapidly  regained,  as  the  earth's  motion  becomes  oblique  to 
the  line  of  junction,  it  will  soon  overtake  and  pass  through 
the  plane  in  the  early  part  of  the  quadrant  E  F,  and  passing 
on  through  G  before  Saturn  arrives  at  D,  will  meet  the  plane 
again  in  the  quadrant  G  H.  The  same  will  continue  up  to 
a  certain  point  b,  at  which,  if  the  earth  be  initially  situated, 
there  will  be  but  two  disappearances  —  the  plane  of  the  ring 
there  overtaking  the  earth  for  an  instant,  and  being  imme- 
diately again  left  behind  by  it,  to  be  again  encountered  by 
it  in  G  H.  Finally,  if  the  initial  place  of  the  earth  (when 
Saturn  is  at  B)  be  in  the  arc  b  F  a,  there  will  be  but  one 
passage  through  the  plane  of  the  ring,  viz.,  in  the  semicircle 
G  H  E,  the  earth  being  in  advance  of  that  plane  throughout 
the  whole  of  b  G. 

(517.)  The  appearances  will  moreover  be  varied  according 
as  the  earth  passes  from  the  enlightened  to  the  unenlight- 
ened side  of  the  ring,  or  vice  versa.  If  C  be  the  ascending 
node  of  the  ring,  and  if  the  under  side  of  the  paper  be  sup- 
posed south  and  the  upper  north  of  the  ecliptic,  then,  when 
the  Earth  meets  the  plane  of  the  ring  in  the  quadrant  H  E, 
it  passes  from  the  bright  to  the  dark  side.:  where  it  overtakes 
it  in  the  quadrant  E  F,  the  contrary.  Vice  versa,  when  it 
overtakes  it  in  F  G,  the  transition  is  from  the  bright  to  the 
dark  side,  and  the  contrary  where  it  meets  it  in  G  H.  On 
the  other  hand  when  the  earth  is  overtaken  by  the  ring-plane 


.346  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

in  the  interval  E  b,  the  change  is  from  the  bright  to  the  dark 
side.  When  the  dark  side  is  exposed  to  sight,  the  aspect  of 
the  planet  is  very  singular.  It  appears  as  a  bright  round 
disc,  with  its  belts,  &c,  but  crossed  equatorially  by  a  narrow 
and  perfectly  black  line.  This  can  never  of  course  happen 
when  the  planet  is  more  than  6°  1'  from  the  node  of  the  ring. 
Generally,  the  northern  side  is  enlightened  and  visible  when 
the  heliocentric  longitude  of  Saturn  is  between  173°  32'  and 
341°  30',  and  the  southern  when  between  353°  32'  and  161° 
30'.  The  greatest  opening  of  the  ring  occurs  when  the 
planet  is  situated  at  90°  distance  from  the  node  of  the  ring, 
or  in  longitudes  77°  31'  and  257°  31',  and  at  these  points 
the  longer  diameter  of  its  apparent  ellipse  is  almost  exactly 
double  the  shorter. 

(518.)  It  will  naturally  be  asked  how  so  stupendous  an 
arch,  if  composed  of  solid  and  ponderous  materials,  can  be 
sustained  without  collapsing  and  falling  in  upon  the  planet? 
The  answer  to  this  is  to  be  found  in  a  swift  rotation  of  the 
ring  in  its  own  plane,  which  observation  has  detected,  owing  to 
some  portion  of  the  ring  being  a  little  less  bright  than  others, 
and  assigned  its  period  at  10h  32™  15%  which,  from  what  we 
know  of  its  dimensions,  and  of  the  force  of  gravity  in  the 
Saturnian  system,  is  very  nearly  the  periodic  time  of  a  satel- 
lite revolving  at  the  same  distance  as  the  middle  of  its 
breadth.  It  is  the  centrifugal  force,  then,  arising  from  this 
rotation,  which  sustains  it ;  and  although  no  observation  nice 
enough  to  exhibit  adifference  of  periods  between  the  outer  and 
inner  rings  have  hitherto  been  made,  it  is  more  than  probable 
that  such  a  difference  does  subsist  as  to  place  each  independ- 
ently of  the  other  in  a  similar  state  of  equilibrium.  Still,  it 
might  be  urged,  such  is  the  thinness  of  the  rings  that  it  may 
very  well  be  doubted,  whether  the  strain  brought  upon  either 
of  them  by  the  difference  of  its  interior  and  exterior  centri- 
fugal forces,  if  solid,  would  not  suffice  to  tear  it  in  pieces. 
A  fluid  constitution  would  obviate  this  difficulty  ;  and  indeed 
it  is  very  possible  that  the  rings  may  be  gaseous,  or  rather 
such  a  mixture  of  gas  and  vapour  as  consists  with  our  idea 
of  a  cloud. 


EQUILIBRIUM    OF    SATURN'S    RINGS.  347 

(519.)  Although  the  rings  are,  as  we  have  said,  very 
nearly  concentric  with  the  body  of  Saturn,  yet  micrometri- 
cal  measurements  of  extreme  delicacy*  have  demonstrated 
that  the  coincidence  is  not  mathematically  exact,  but  that 
the  center  of  gravity  of  the  rings  oscillates  round  that  of  the 
body,  describing  a  very  minute  orbit,  probably  under  laws 
of  much  complexity.  Trifling  as  this  remark  may  appear, 
it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  stability  of  the  system 
of  the  rings,  if  solid  and  coherent.  Supposing  them  mathe- 
matically perfect  in  their  circular  form,  and  exactly  concen- 
tric with  the  planet,  it  is  demonstrable  that  they  would  form 
a  system  in  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium,  which  the  slightest 
external  power  would  subvert — not  by  causing  a  rupture  in 
the  substance  of  the  rings — but  by  precipitating  them  un- 
broken on  the  surface  of  the  planet.  For  the  attraction  of 
such  a  ring  or  rings  on  a  point  or  sphere  excentrically  within 
them,  is  not  the  same  in  all  directions,  but  tends  to  draw  the 
point  or  sphere  towards  the  nearest  part  of  the  ring,  or  away 
from  the  center.  Hence,  supposing  the  body  to  become,  from 
any  cause,  ever  so  little  excentric  to  the  ring,  the  tendency 
of  their  mutual  gravity  is  not  to  correct  but  to  increase  this 
excentricity,  and  to  bring  the  nearest  parts  of  them  together. 
Now,  external  powers,  capable  of  producing  such  excentricity, 
exist  in  the  attractions  of  the  satellites,  as  will  be  shown  in 
Chap.  XI T. ;  and  in  order  that  the  system  may  he  stable, 
and  possess  within  itself  a  power  of  resisting  the  first  inroads 
of  such  a  tendency,  while  yet  nascent  and  feeble,  and  oppos- 
ing them  by  an  opposite  or  maintaining  power,  it  has  been 
shown  that  it  is  sufficient  to  a  Imit  the  rings,  if  solid,  to  be 
loaded  in  some  part  of  their  circumference,  either  by  some 
minute  inequality  of  thickness,  or  by  some  portions  being 
denser  than  others.  Such  a  load  would  give  to  the  whole 
ring  to  which  it  was  attached  somewhat  of  the  character  of 
a  heavy  and  sluggish  satellite  maintaining  itself  in  an  orbit 
with  a  certain  energy  sufficient  to  overcome  minute  causes 
of  disturbance,  and  establish  an  average  bearing  on  its  center. 

*  By  Struve,   confirming  a  suspicion  suggested  by   the  eye-observations  of 

M.  Scfiwi.be. 


348  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

But  even  without  supposing  the  existence  of  any  such  load, 
—  of  which,  after  all,  we  have  no  proof,  —  and  granting,  in 
its  full  extent,  the  general  instability  of  the  equilibrium,  we 
think  we  perceive,  in  the  rapid  periodicity  of  all  the  causes 
of  disturbance,  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  its  preservation. 
However  homely  be  the  illustration,  we  can  conceive  nothing 
more  apt,  in  every  way,  to  give  a  general  conception  of  this 
maintenance  of  equilibrium  under  a  constant  tendency  to 
subversion,  than  the  mode  in  which  a  practised  hand  will 
sustain  a  long  pole  in  a  perpendicular  position  resting  on  the 
finger,  by  a  continual  and  almost  imperceptible  variation  of 
the  point  of  support.  Be  that,  however,  as  it  may,  the  ob- 
served oscillation  of  the  centers  of  the  rings  about  that  of 
the  planet  is  in  itself  the  evidence  of  a  perpetual  contest 
between  conservative  and  destructive  powers  —  both  ex- 
tremely feeble,  but  so  antagonizing  one  another  as  to  prevent 
the  latter  from  ever  acquiring  an  uncontrollable  ascendancy, 
and  rushing  to  a  catastrophe. 

(520.)  This  is  also  the  place  to  observe,  that  as  the  smallest 
difference  of  velocity  between  the  body  and  the  rings  must 
infallibly  precipitate  the  latter  on  the  former,  never  more  to 
separate  (for  they  would,  once  in  contact,  have  attained  a 
position  of  stable  equilibrium,  and  be  held  together  ever  after 
by  an  immense  force) ;  it  follows,  either  that  their  motions 
in  their  common  orbit  round  the  sun  must  have  been  adjusted 
to  each  other  by  an  external  power,  with  the  minutest  pre- 
cision, or  that  the  rings  must  have  been  formed  about  the 
planet  while  subject  to  their  common  orbital  motion,  and 
under  the  full  and  free  influence  of  all  the  acting  forces. 

(521.)  [The  exterior  ring  of  Saturn  is  described  by  many 
observers  as  rather  less  luminous  than  the  interior,  and  the 
inner  portion  of  this  latter  than  its  outer.  On  the  night  of 
Nov.  11,  1850,  however,  Mr.  G.  B.  Bond,  of  the  Harvard 
Observatory  (Cambridge,  U.  S.),  using  the  great  Fraunhofer 
equatorial  of  that  institution,  became  aware  of  a  line  of  de- 
marcation between  these  two  portions  so  definite,  and  an 
extension  inwards  of  the  dusky  border  to  such  an  extent 
(one  fifth,  by  measurement,  of  the  joint  breadth  of  the  two  old 


CONSTITUTION    OF    SATURN'S   KINGS.  349 

rings),  as  to  justify  him  in  considering  it  as  a  newly-discovered 
ring.  On  the  nights  of  the  25th  and  29th  of  tlie  same 
month,  and  without  knowledge  of  Mr.  Bond's  observations, 
Mr.  Dawes,  at  his  observatory  at  Wateringbury,  by  the  aid 
of  an  exquisite  achromatic  by  Merz,  of  6^  inches  aperture, 
observed  the  very  same  fact,  and  even  more  distinctly,  so  as 
to  be  sure  of  a  decidedly  darker  interval  between  the  old  and 
new  rings,  and  even  to  subdivide  the  latter  into  two  of  une- 
qual degrees  of  obscurity,  separated  by  a  line  more  obscure 
than  either. 

(522. "i  Dr.  Galle  of  Berlin,  however,  would  appear  to 
have  been  the  first  to  notice  (June  10.  1838)  a  faint  ex- 
tension of  the  inner  ring  towards  the  body  of  the  planet,  to 
about  half  the  interval  between  the  then  recognized  inner  ring 
and  the  body,  as  sliown  by  micrometrical  measures.  But  this 
result  remained  unpublished  (or  at  least  not  generally 
known)  until  after  the  observations  of  Messrs.  Bond  and 
Dawes.  The  most  remarkable  feature  of  this  singular  dis- 
covery is,  that  subsequent  observations,  from  many  quarter.-, 
have  concurred  in  showing  the  new  ring  to  consist  of  semi- 
transparent  materials  through  which  the  limb  of  the  planet  may 
be  seen  up  to  the  edge  of  the  interior  bright  ring.  Dark  lines 
(apparently  of  a  transitory  nature)  have  been  observed  on  the 
bright  rings  parallel  to  the  permanent  dark  interval  dividing 
them.  All  these  indications  taken  in  conjunction  with  whsit 
is  said  in  art.  518.  decidedly  point  to  a  vaporous  constitu- 
tion of  these  wonderful  appendages.*] 

(522  a.)  Still  it  has  been  thought  remarkable  that  this  new 
ring,  or  appendage  to  the  rings,  should  not  have  been  dis- 
covered earlier ;  and  it  has  even  been  conjectured  that  the 
breadth  of  the  ring  has  been  graduallv  increasing  inwards 
since  the  time  of  Iluyghens,  its  first  discoverer :  and  this 
conjecture  for  a  while  appeared  to  be  supported  by  micro- 
metrical  measures  obtained  by  M.  Otto  Struve  (with  whom 
the   conjecture   originated),    which  seemed   to    show  a  still 

*   The  passage  of  Saturn  across  any  eonsiderable  star  would  afford  a»  admir- 
able opportunity  of  testing  the  existence  of  fissures  in  the  rings,  as  it  would  flash  in 
ession  through  them.      The  opportunity  of  watching  for  such  occultatioi.s  -- 
when  Sdtuin  traverses  the  Milky-Way,  for  instance — should  not  be  neglested. 


350  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY  . 

further  diminution  of  the  interval  between  the  rings  and  tne 
ball.  The  question,  however,  appears  to  be  definitively  settled 
in  the  negative  by  the  elaborate  micrometrical  measures  of 
Mr.  Main,  at  the  Royal  Observatory  at  Greenwich,  and  by 
the  discussions  entered  into  by  M.  Kaiser. 

(522  b.)  The  rings  of  Saturn  must  present  a  magnificent 
spectacle  from  those  regions  of  the  planet  which  lie  above 
their  enlightened  sides,  being  seen  as  vast  luminous  arches, 
spanning  the  sky  from  horizon  to  horizon,  and  holding  an 
almost  invariable  situation  among  the  stars.  To  a  spectator 
situated  any  where  in  the  axis  of  the  planet,  it  is  evident 
that  their  interior  and  exterior  outlines  must  both  appear  as 
circles  corresponding  to  parallels  of  declination,  and  must 
occasion  a  permanent  eclipse  of  every  heavenly  body  lying 
between  these  parallels.  It  is  otherwise  to  a  spectator  situ- 
ated on  the  planet's  surface.  To  such  a  one  the  interior  and 
exterior  outline  of  each  ring  would,  by  the  effect  of  per- 
spective, be  thrown  into  nonconcentric  ellipses,  so  that  (sup- 
posing he  could  see  through  the  whole  planet  and  obtain  a 
view  of  the  whole  ring)  it  would  appear  broader  on  the  side 
nearest  to  him  than  on  that  most  remote.  These  ellipses, 
moreover,  when  traced  along  the  heavens,  would  not  coincide 
with  parallels  of  declination  J  ;  but  would  deviate  from  such 
parallels  towards  the  elevated  pole,  as  is  evident,  if  we  con- 
sider that  a  perpendicular  ST  from  any  point  S  on  the  planet's 
surface  to  the  plane  of  the  ring  AB  is  parallel  to  the  axis  of 


rotation  ;  so  that  the  right  cone  ASD,  generated  by  the  revo- 
lution of  AS  round  ST,  traces  on  the  heavens  a  circle  of  decli- 

*  Mem.  Ast.  Soc.  xxv. 

t   Ast.  Soc.  Notice,  xvi.  66. 

y  The  circumstances  have  been  traced  in  minute  detail  by  Dr.  Lardner,  who 
first,  I  believe,  drew  attention  to  the  effect  of  situation  on  the  suituce  of  the 
planet  in  modifying  the  phenomena  presented  by  the  rings. 


URANUS. — NEPTUNE.  35 1 

nation,  having  the  edge  A  of  the  ring  for  its  upper  culminating 
point:  whereas  the  oblique  cone  A  SB,  tracing  the  visible 
course  of  the  ring  in  the  heavens,  though  coincident  with  the 
former  at  its  upper  culmination  A,  lies  elsewhere  wholly 
exterior  to  it,  and  has  its  inferior  culmination  B  nearer  to  the 
elevated  pole  by  the  angle  BSD,  the  difference  of  the  angles 
of  the  two  cones.  The  apparent  course  of  either  edge  of  the 
ring,  then,  is  a  curve  touching  the  circle  of  declination  at 
which  that  edge  culminates,  but  receding  from  it  towards  the 
elevated  pole,  so  as  to  allow  stars  or  the  Sun  to  be  visible  at 
certain  seasons  under  the  ring  at  their  rising —  to  be  eclipsed 
wholly  or  partially  by  it  at  its  under  edge,  and  again  to 
emerge  before  setting.  This  will  not  prevent,  however, 
some  considerable  regions  of  Saturn  from  suffering  very  long 
total  interception  of  the  Solar  beams,  affording,  to  our  ideas, 
but  an  inhospitable  asylum  to  animated  beings,  ill  compen- 
sated by  the  feeble  light  of  the  satellites.  But  we  shall  do 
wrong  to  judge  of  the  fitness  or  unfitness  of  their  condition 
from  what  we  see  around  us,  when  perhaps  the  very  combi- 
nations which  convey  to  our  minds  only  images  of  horror, 
may  be,  in  reality,  theatres  of  the  most  striking  and  glorious 
displays  of  beneficent  contrivance. 

(523.)  Of  Uranus  we  see  nothing  but  a  small  round 
uniformly  illuminated  disc,  without  rings,  belts,  or  discernible 
spots.  Its  apparent  diameter  is  about  4",  from  which  it 
never  varies  much,  owing  to  the  smallness  of  our  orbit  in  com- 
parison of  its  own.  Its  real  diameter  is  about  35,000  miles, 
and  its  bulk  82  times  that  of  the  earth.  It  is  attended  by 
four  satellites,  whose  existence  may  be  considered  as  con- 
clusively established  (and  more  have  been  suspected). 

(524.)  The  discovery  of  Neptune  is  so  recent,  and  its 
situation  in  the  ecliptic  at  present  so  little  favourable  for 
seeing  it  with  perfect  distinctness,  that  nothing  very  positive 
can  be  stated  as  to  its  physical  appearance.  It  was  at  first  sus- 
pected to  have  a  ring,  but  the  suspicion  has  not  been  verified. 
It  is  attended  by  at  least  one  satellite,  the  existence  of  which 
has  been  demoustrated  by  the  observations  of  Mr.  Lassell, 
M.  Otto  Struve,  and  Mr.  Bond. 


352  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

(525.)  If  the  immense  distance  of  Neptune  precludes  all 
hope  of  coming  at  much  knowledge  of  its  physical  state,  the 
minuteness  of  the  Asteroids  is  no  less  a  bar  to  any  enquiry 
into  theirs.  One  of  them,  Pallas,  has  been  said  to  have 
somewhat  of  a  nebulous  or  hazy  appearance,  indicative  of  an 
extensive  and  vaporous  atmosphere,  little  repressed  and  con- 
densed by  the  inadequate  gravity  of  so  small  a  mass.  It  is 
probable,  however,  that  the  appearance  in  question  has  origi- 
nated in  some  imperfection  in  the  telescope  employed,  or 
other  temporary  causes  of  illusion.  In  Vesta  and  Pallas 
only  have  sensible  discs  been  hitherto  observed,  and  those 
only  with  very  high  magnifying  powers.  Vesta  was  once 
seen  by  Schrceter  with  the  naked  eye.  No  doubt,  the  most 
remarkable  of  their  peculiarities  must  lie  in  this  condition 
of  their  state.  A  man  placed  on  one  of  them  would  spring 
with  ease  60  feet  high,  and  sustain  no  greater  shock  in  his 
descent  than  he  does  on  the  earth  from  leaping  a  yard.  On 
such  planets  giants  might  exist;  and  those  enormous  animals, 
which  on  earth  require  the  buoyant  power  of  water  to 
counteract  their  weight,  might  there  be  denizens  of  the  land. 
From  some  recent  researches  of  M.  Leverrier,  it  appears  that 
we  shall  be  warranted  in  attributing  to  the  totality  of  the 
Asteroids  a  quantity  of  matter  quite  insignificant. 

(525  a.)  There  is  a  remarkable  division  of  the  planetary 
system  into  two  families  or  classes  of  planets,  the  large,  ami 
the  small.  To  the  latter  family  belong  those  interior  to  the 
orbits  of  Jupiter,  viz.,  Mercury,  Venus,  the  Earth,  and  Mars, 
with  the  Asteroids.  To  the  former,  all  exterior  to  the  orbits 
of  the  first  class  —  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune. 
The  Asteroids  themselves,  however,  may  be  considered  as 
forming  a  family  apart,  their  magnitudes  being  as  much 
inferior  to  those  of  the  interior  planets  as  these  are  to  the 
exterior,  or  in  a  still  lower  ratio.  Not  less  remarkable  is  the 
circumstance  that  while  all  the  interior  planets  revolve  on 
their  axes  (so  far  as  is  known)  in  about  the  same  time  (24h\ 
the  exterior  (as  is  certain  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn 
at  least)  have  periods  of  rotation  less  than  half  that  leng+h. 
In   point   of  density,  too,   as  we    shall    see  further  on,    an 


GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SOLAR    SYSTEM.  353 

equally  marked  distinction  of  specific  character  is  preserved, 
all  the  interior  ones  having  about  the  same  density  as  the 
Eartl ,  while  that  of  all  the  exterior  is  very  much  less, 
not  exceeding  a  quarter  of  the  Earth's,  and  agreeing  (in  the 
cases  of  Jupiter  and  Uranus)  very  closely  with  that  of  the 
Sun. 

(526.)  We  shall  close  this  chapter  with  an  illustration  cal- 
culated to  convey  to  the  minds  of  our  readers  a  general  impres- 
sion of  the  relative  magnitudes  and  distances  of  the  parts  of 
our  system.  Choose  any  well  levelled  field  or  bowling-green. 
On  it  place  a  globe,  two  feet  in  diameter ;  this  will  represent 
the  Sun ;  Mercury  will  be  represented  by  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle  164  feet  in  diameter 
for  its  orbit ;  Venus  a  pea,  on  a  circle  of  284  feet  in  diameter ; 
the  Earth  also  a  pea,  on  a  circle  of  430  feet ;  Mars  a  rather 
large  pin's  head,  on  a  circle  of  654  feet ;  the  Asteroids,  grains 
of  sand,  in  orbits  of  from  1000  to  1 200  feet ;  Jupiter  a 
moderate-sized  orange,  in  a  circle  nearly  half  a  mile  across ; 
Saturn  a  small  orange,  on  a  circle  of  four-fifths  of  a  mile ; 
Uranus  a  full-sized  cherry,  or  small  plum,  upon  the  circum- 
ference of  a  circle  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half;  and  Neptune 
a  good-sized  plum,  on  a  circle  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in 
diameter.  As  to  getting  correct  notions  on  this  subject  by 
drawing  circles  on  paper,  or,  still  worse,  from  those  very 
childish  toys  called  orreries,  it  is  out  of  the  question.  To 
imitate  the  motions  of  the  planets,  in  the  above-mentioned 
orbits,  Mercury  must  describe  its  own  diameter  in  41  seconds; 
Venus  in  4m  14s ;  the  Earth,  in  7  minutes  ;  Mars,  in  4m  48* ; 
Jupiter,  2h  56m;  Saturn,  in  3h  13m;  Uranus,  in  2h  16m; 
and  Neptune,  in  3h  30m.* 

*  In  the  "  Penny  Encyclopaedia,"  vol.  22.  p.  197,  the  diameters  of  the  orbits  of 
the  planets  here  set  down,  are  quoted  as  their  distances  from  the  center,  and  the 
site  of  the  sun  is  enlarged  to  four  feet,  while  the  sizes  of  the  planets  are  unaltered. 


A  A 


354  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


CHAPTER  X. 

OP    THE    SATELLITES. 

OF  THE  MOON,  AS  A  SATELLITE  OF  THE  EARTH.  —  GENERAL  PROX- 
IMITY OF  SATELLITES  TO  THEIR  PRIMARIES,  AND  CONSEQUENT 
SUBORDINATION  OF  THEIR  MOTIONS.  —  MASSES  OF  THE  PRIMARIES 
CONCLUDED  FROM  THE  PERIODS  OF  THEIR  SATELLITES. MAIN- 
TENANCE of  kepler's  laws  in  the  secondary  systems. — of 
jupiter's  satellites.  —  their  eclipses,  etc. — velocity  of 

light  discovered  by  their  means. satellites  of  saturn 

of  uranus  —  of  neptune. 

(527.)  In  the  annual  circuit  of  the  earth  about  the  sun,  it  is 
constantly  attended  by  its  satellite,  the  moon,  which  revolves 
round  it,  or  rather  both  round  their  common  center  of 
gravity ;  while  this  center,  strictly  speaking,  and  not  either  of 
the  two  bodies  thus  connected,  moves  in  an  elliptic  orbit,  un 
disturbed  by  their  mutual  action,  just  as  the  center  of  gravity 
of  a  large  and  small  stone  tied  together  and  flung  into  the  air 
describes  a  parabola  as  if  it  were  a  real  material  substance 
under  the  earth's  attraction,  while  the  stones  circulate  round 
it  or  round  each  other,  as  we  choose  to  conceive  the  matter. 

(528.)  If  we  trace,  therefore,  the  real  curve  actually  de- 
scribed by  either  the  moon's  or  the  earth's  centers,  in  virtue 
of  this  compound  motion,  it  will  appear  to  be,  not  an  exact 
ellipse,  but  an  undulated  curve,  like  that  represented  in  the 
figure  to  article  324.,  only  that  the  number  of  undulations  in 
a  whole  revolution  is  but  13,  and  their  actual  deviation  from 
the  general  ellipse,  which  serves  them  as  a  central  line,  is 
comparatively  very  much  smaller — so  much  so,  indeed,  that 
every  part  of  the  curve  described  by  either  the  earth  or  moon 
is  concave  towards  the  sun.  The  excursions  of  the  earth  on 
either  side  the  ellipse,  indeed,  are  so  very  small  as  to  be 
hardly  appretiable.  In  fact,  the  center  of  gravity  of  the 
earth  and  moon  lies  alwavs  within  the  surface  of  the  earth,  so 


OF    THE    MOON    AS   A    SATELLITE.  355 

that  the  monthly  orbit  described  by  the  earth's  center  about 
the  common  center  of  gravity  is  comprehended  within  a  space 
less  than  the  size  of  the  earth  itself.  The  effect  is,  never- 
theless, sensible,  in  producing  an  apparent  monthly  displace- 
ment of  the  sun  in  longitude,  of  a  parallactic  kind,  which  ia 
called  the  menstrual  equation;  whose  greatest  amount  is,  how- 
ever, less  than  the  sun's  horizontal  parallax,  or  than  8 -6". 

(529.)  The  moon,  as  we  have  seen,  is  about  60  radii  of  the 
earth  distant  from  the  center  of  the  latter.  Its  proximity, 
therefore,  to  its  center  of  attraction,  thus  estimated,  is  much 
greater  than  that  of  the  planets  to  the  sun  ;  of  which  Mercury, 
the  nearest,  is  84,  and  Uranus  2026  solar  radii  from  its 
center.  It  is  owing  to  this  proximity  that  the  moon  remains 
attached  to  the  earth  as  a  satellite.  Were  it  much  farther, 
the  feebleness  of  its  gravity  towards  the  earth  would  be  in- 
adequate to  produce  that  alternate  acceleration  and  re- 
tardation in  its  motion  about  the  sun,  which  divests  it  of  the 
character  of  an  independent  planet,  and  keeps  its  movements 
subordinate  to  those  of  the  earth.  The  one  would  outrun, 
or  be  left  behind  the  other,  in  their  revolutions  round  the 
sun  (by  reason  of  Kepler's  third  law),  according  to  the  re- 
lative dimensions  of  their  heliocentric  orbits,  after  which  the 
whole  influence  of  the  earth  would  be  confined  to  producing 
some  considerable  periodical  disturbance  in  the  moon's  motion, 
as  it  passed  or  was  passed  by  it  in  each  synodical  revolution. 

(530.)  At  the  distance  at  which  the  moon  really  is  from  us, 
its  gravity  towards  the  earth  is  actually  less  than  towards  the 
sun.  That  this  is  the  case  appears  sufficiently  from  what 
we  have  already  stated,  that  the  moon's  real  path,  even  when 
between  the  earth  and  sun,  is  concave  towards  the  latter. 
But  it  will  appear  still  more  clearly  if,  from  the  known 
periodic  times*  in  which  the  earth  completes  its  annual  and 

*  R  and  r  radii  of  two  orbits  (supposed  circular),  P  ana  p  the  periodic 
times  ;  then  the  arcs  in  question  (A  and  a)  are  to  each  other  as  '  to  -;  and 
since  the  verted  sines  are  as  the  squares  of  the  arcs  directly  and  the  radii  in- 
versely, these  are  to  each  other  as  p;to  -~t;  and  in  this  ratio  are  the  forces  acting 
on  the  revolving  bodies  in  either  case. 

A  A  2 


356  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  moon  its  monthly  orbit,  and  from  the  dimensions  of  those 
orbits,  we  calculate  the  amount  of  deflection  in  either,  from 
their  tangents,  in  equal  very  minute  portions  of  time,  as  one 
second.  These  are  the  versed  sines  of  the  arcs  described  in  that 
time  in  the  two  orbits,  and  these  are  the  measures  of  the  acting 
forces  which  produce  those  deflections.  If  we  execute  the 
numerical  calculation  in  the  case  before  us,  we  shall  find  2-233 : 
1  for  the  proportion  in  which  the  intensity  of  the  force  which 
retains  the  earth  in  its  orbit  round  the  sun  actually  exceeds  that 
by  which  the  moon  is  retained  in  its  orbit  about  the  earth. 

(531.)  Now  the  sun  is  about  400  times  more  remote  from 
the  earth  than  the  moon  is.  And,  as  gravity  increases  as  the 
squares  of  the  distances  decrease,  it  must  follow  that  at  equal 
distances,  the  intensity  of  solar  would  exceed  that  of  terres- 
trial  gravity  in  the  above  proportion,  augmented  in  the  further 
ratio  of  the  square  of  400  to  1 ;  that  is,  iu  the  proportion  of 
355,000  to  1 ;  and  therefore,  if  we  grant  that  the  intensity  or 
the  gravitating  energy  is  commensurate  with  the  mass  or  in- 
ertia of  the  attracting  body,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  the  mass 
of  the  earth  to  be  no  more  than  ■3^/0-5  ff  of  that  of  the  sun.* 

(532.)  The  argument  is,  in  fact,  nothing  more  than  a  re- 
capitulation of  what  has  been  adduced  in  Chap.  VIII.  (art. 
448.)  But  it  is  here  re-introduced,  in  order  to  show  how 
the  mass  of  a  planet  which  is  attended  by  one  or  more  satel- 
lites can  be  as  it  were  weighed  against  the  sun,  provided  we 
have  learned,  from  observation,  the  dimensions  of  the  orbits 
described  by  the  planet  about  the  sun,  and  by  the  satellites 
about  the  planet,  and  also  the  periods  in  which  these  orbits 
ure  respectively  described.  It  is  by  this  method  that  the 
masses  of  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune  have  been 
ascertained,  and  from  which  their  densities  are  concluded. 
See  art.  (561.). 

(533.)  Jupiter,  as  already  stated,  is  attended  by  four 
satellites ;    Saturn  by  eight ;    Uranus  certainly  by  four ;  and 

*  In  the  synoptic  table  at  the  end  of  this  volume,  the  mass  of  the  sun  is  taken 
somewhat  higher,  according  to  the  most  recent  determination.  It  has  not  been 
thought  worth  while  to  alter  all  the  figures  of  the  text  in  conformity  wild  that 
estimate. 


SATELLITES   OF   JUPITER.  357 

Neptune  by  one,  or  possibly  more.  These,  with  their  re- 
spective primaries  (as  the  central  planets  are  called)  form  in 
each  case  miniature  systems  entirely  analogous,  in  the 
general  laws  by  which  their  motions  are  governed,  to  the 
great  system  in  which  the  sun  acts  the  part  of  the  primary, 
and  the  planets  of  its  satellites.  In  each  of  these  systems 
the  laws  of  Kepler  are  obeyed,  in  the  sense,  that  is  to  say,  in 
which  they  are  obeyed  in  the  planetary  system  —  approxim- 
ately, and  without  prejudice  to  the  effects  of  mutual  pertur- 
bation, of  extraneous  interference,  if  any,  and  of  that  small 
but  not  imperceptible  correction  which  arises  from  the  elliptic 
form  of  the  central  body.  Their  orbits  are  circles  or  ellipses 
of  very  moderate  excentricity,  the  primary  occupying  one 
focus.  About  this  they  describe  areas  very  nearly  propor- 
tional to  the  times ;  and  the  squares  of  the  periodical  times 
of  all  the  satellites  belonging  to  each  planet  are  in  proportion 
to  each  other  as  the  cubes  of  their  distances.  The  tables  at 
the  end  of  the  volume  exhibit  a  synoptic  view  of  the  distances 
and  periods  in  these  several  systems,  so  far  as  they  are  at 
present  known;  and  to  all  of  them  it  will  be  observed  that 
the  same  remark  respecting  their  proximity  to  their  primaries 
holds  good,  as  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  with  a  similar  reason 
for  such  close  connection. 

(534.)  Of  these  systems,  however,  the  only  one  which  has 
been  studied  with  attention  to  all  its  details,  is  that  of  Jupiter; 
partly  on  account  of  the  conspicuous  brilliancy  of  its  four 
attendants,  which  are  large  enough  to  offer  visible  and 
measurable  discs  in  telescopes  of  great  power ;  but  more  for 
the  sake  of  their  eclipses,  which,  as  they  happen  very  fre- 
quently, and  are  easily  observed,  afford  signals  of  considerable 
use  for  the  determination  of  terrestrial  longitudes  (art.  286.). 
This  method,  indeed,  until  thrown  into  the  background  by 
the  greater  facility  and  exactness  now  attainable  by  lunar 
observations  (art  287.),  was  the  best,  or  rather  the  only 
one  which  could  be  relied  on  for  great  distances  and  lonjr 
intervals. 

(535.)  The  satellites  of  Jupiter  revolve  from  west  to  east 
(following  the  analogy  of  the  planets  and  moon),  in  plane* 


3.58  OUTLINES   OF    ASTUONOMT. 

very  nearly,  although  not  exactly,  coincident  with  that  of 
the  equator  of  the  planet,  or  parallel  to  its  belts.  This  latter 
plane  is  inclined  3°  5'  30"  to  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  and  is 
therefore  but  little  different  from  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 
Accordingly,  we  see  their  orbits  projected  very  nearly  into 
straight  lines,  in  which  they  appear  to  oscillate  to  and  fro, 
sometimes  passing  before  Jupiter,  and  casting  shadows  on 
his  disc  (which  are  very  visible  in  good  telescopes,  like  small 
round  ink  spots,  the  circular  form  of  which  is  very  evident), 
and  sometimes  disappearing  behind  the  body,  or  being 
eclipsed  in  its  shadow  at  a  distance  from  it.  It  is  by  these 
eclipses  that  we  are  furnished  with  accurate  data  for  the 
construction  of  tables  of  the  satellites'  motions,  as  well  as 
with  signals  for  determining  differences  of  longitude. 

(536.)  The  eclipses  of  the  satellites,  in  their  general  con- 
ception, are  perfectly  analogous  to  those  of  the  moon,  but  in 
their  detail  they  differ  in  several  particulars.  Owing  to  the 
much  greater  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun,  and  its 
greater  magnitude,  the  cone  of  its  shadow  or  umbra  (art.  420." 
is  greatly  more  elongated,  and  of  far  greater  dimension,  than 
that  of  the  earth.  The  satellites  are,  moreover,  much  less  in 
proportion  to  their  primary,  their  orbits  less  inclined  to  to 
ecliptic,  and  (comparatively  to  the  diameter  of  the  planet)  of 
smaller  dimensions,  than  is  the  case  with  the  moon.  Owing 
to  these  causes,  the  three  interior  satellites  of  Jupiter  pass 
through  the  shadow,  and  are  totally  eclipsed,  every  revolution ; 
and  the  fourth,  though,  from  the  greater  inclination  of  its 
orbit,  it  sometimes  escapes  eclipse,  and  may  occasionally  graze 
as  it  were  the  border  of  the  shadow,  and  suffer  partial  eclipse, 
yet  does  so  comparatively  seldom,  and,  ordinarily  speaking, 
its  eclipses  happen,  like  those  of  the  rest,  each  revolution. 

(537.)  These  eclipses,  moreover,  are  not  seen,  as  is  the 
case  with  those  of  the  moon,  from  the  center  of  their  motion, 
but  from  a  remote  station,  and  one  whose  situation  with 
respect  to  the  line  of  shadow  is  variable.  This,  of  course, 
makes  no  difference  in  the  times  of  the  eclipses,  but  a  very 
great  one  in  their  visibility,  and  in  their  apparent  situations 


ECLIPSES   OF   JUPITER'S    SATELLITES.  359 

with  respect  to  the  planet  at  the  moments  of  their  entering 
and  quitting  the  shadow. 

(538.)  Suppose  S  to  be  the  sun,  E  the  earth  in  its  orbit 
EFGK,  J  Jupiter,  and  a  b  the  orbit  of  one  of  its  satellites. 
The  cone  of  the  shadow,  then,  will  have  its  vertex  at  X,  a 
point  far  beyond  the  orbits  of  all  the   satellites ;  and   the 


penumbra,  owing  to  the  great  distance  of  the  sun,  and  the 
consequent  smallness  of  the  angle  (about  6'  only)  its  disc 
subtends  at  Jupiter,  will  hardly  extend,  within  the  limits  of 
the  satellites'  orbits,  to  any  perceptible  distance  beyond  the 
shadow,  —  for  which  reason  it  is  not  represented  in  the  figure. 
A  satellite  revolving  from  west  to  east  (in  the  direction  of 
the  arrows)  will  be  eclipsed  when  it  enters  the  shadow  at  a, 
but  not  suddenly,  because,  like  the  moon,  it  has  a  considerable 
diameter  seen  from  the  planet ;  so  that  the  time  elapsing 
from  the  first  perceptible  loss  of  light  to  its  total  extinction 
will  be  that  which  it  occupies  in  describing  about  Jupiter 
an  angle  equal  to  its  apparent  diameter  as  seen  from  the 
center  of  the  planet,  or  rather  somewhat  more,  by  reason  of 
the  penumbra ;  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  its  emergence 
at  b.  Now,  owing  to  the  difference  of  telescopes  and  of  eyes, 
it  is  not  possible  to  assign  the  precise  moment  of  incipient 
obscuration,  or  of  total  extinction  at  a,  nor  that  of  the  first 
glimpse  of  light  falling  on  the  satellite  at  b,  or  the  complete 
recovery  of  its  light.  The  observation  of  an  eclipse,  then, 
in  which  only  the  immersion,  or  only  the  emersion,  is  seen, 
is  incomplete,  and  inadequate  to  afford  any  precise  informa- 
tion, theoretical  or  practical.  But,  if  both  the  immersion 
and  emersion  can  be  observed  with  the  same  telescope  and  by 
the  same  person,  the  interval  of  the  times  will  give  the  duration, 


360  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

and  their  mean  the  exact  middle  of  the  eclipse,  when  the 
satellite  is  in  the  line  S  J  X,  i.  e.  the  true  moment  of  its 
opposition  to  the  sun.  Such  observations,  and  such  only,  are 
of  use  for  determining  the  periods  and  other  particulars  of 
the  motions  of  the  satellites,  and  for  affording  data  of  any 
material  use  for  the  calculation  of  terrestial  longitudes. 
The  intervals  of  the  eclipses,  it  will  be  observed,  give  the 
synodic  periods  of  the  satellites'  revolutions ;  from  which  their 
sidereal  periods  must  be  concluded  by  the  method  in  art.  418. 

(539.)  It  is  evident,  from  a  mere  inspection  of  our  figure, 
that  the  eclipses  take  place  to  the  west  of  the  planet,  when 
the  earth  is  situated  to  the  west  of  the  line  S  J,  i.  e.  before 
the  opposition  of  Jupiter  ;  and  to  the  east,  when  in  the  other 
half  of  its  orbit,  or  after  the  opposition.  When  the  earth 
approaches  the  opposition,  the  visual  line  becomes  more  and 
more  nearly  coincident  with  the  direction  of  the  shadow,  and 
the  apparent  place  where  the  eclipses  happen  will  be  con- 
tinually nearer  and  nearer  to  the  body  of  the  planet  When 
the  earth  comes  to  F,  a  point  determined  by  drawing  b  F  to 
touch  the  body  of  the  planet,  the  emersions  will  cease  to  be 
visible,  and  will  thenceforth,  up  to  the  time  of  the  opposition, 
happen  behind  the  disc  of  the  planet.  Similarly,  from  the 
opposition  till  the  time  when  the  earth  arrives  at  I,  a  point 
determined  by  drawing  a  I  tangent  to  the  eastern  limb 
of  Jupiter,  the  immersions  will  be  concealed  from  our  view. 
When  the  earth  arrives  at  G  (or  H)  the  immersion  (or  emer- 
sion) will  happen  at  the  very  edge  of  the  visible  disc,  and 
when  between  G  and  H  (a  very  small  space),  the  satellites 
will  pass  uneclipsed  behind  the  limb  of  the  planet. 

(540.)  Both  the  satellites  and  their  shadows  are  frequently 
observed  to  transit  or  pass  across  the  disc  of  the  planet. 
When  a  satellite  comes  to  m,  its  shadow  will  be  thrown  on 
Jupiter,  and  will  appear  to  move  across  it  as  a  black  spot  till 
the  satellite  comes  to  n.  But  the  satellite  itself  will  not 
appear  to  enter  on  the  disc  till  it  comes  up  to  the  line  drawn 
from  E  to  the  eastern  edge  of  the  disc,  and  will  not  leave  it 
till  it  attains  a  similar  line  drawn  to  the  western  edge.  It 
appears  then  that  the  shadow  will  precede  the  satellite  in  itd 


eclipses  of  jupiter's  satellites. 


361 


progress  over  the  disc  before  the  opposition  of  Jupiter,  and 
vice  versa.  In  these  transits  of  the  satellites,  which,  with 
very  powerful  telescopes,  may  be  observed  with  great 
precision,  it  frequently  happens  that  the  satellite  itself  is 
discernible  on  the  disc  as  a  bright  spot  if  projected  on  a  dark 
belt ;  but  occasionally  also  as  a  dark  spot  of  smaller  dimensions 
than  the  shadow.  This  curious  fact  (observed  by  Schroeter 
and  Harding)  has  led  to  a  conclusion  that  certain  of  the 
satellites  have  occasionally  on  their  oion  bodies,  or  in  their 
atmospheres,  obscure  spots  of  great  extent.  We  say  of  great 
extent ;  for  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  small  as  they  appear  to 
us,  are  really  bodies  of  considerable  size,  as  the  following 
comparative  table  will  show :  *  — 


Mean  apparent 
diameter  as  seen 

Mean  apparent 
diameter  as  seen  Irom 

Diameter  in 
miles. 

Mass.t 

from  the  earth. 

Jupiter's  center. 

Jupiter 

39"  91 

91128 

1-0000000 

1st  satellite 

1-105 

33'      1 1" 

2508 

00000173 

2d    

0911 

17      35 

2068 

0-0000232 

3d   

1-488 

18        0 

3377 

0-0000885 

4th 

1  -273 

8      46 

2890 

0-0000427 

From  which  it  follows,  that  the  first  satellite  appears,  when 
on  Jupiter's  horizon,  as  large  as  our  moon  to  us ;  the  second 
and  third  nearly  equal  to  each  other,  and  of  somewhat  more 
than  half  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  first,  and  the  fourth 
about  one  quarter  of  that  diameter.  So  seen,  they  will 
frequently,  of  course,  eclipse  one  another,  and  cause  eclipses 
of  the  sun  (the  latter  visible,  however,  only  over  a  very  small 
portion  of  the  planet),  and  their  motions  and  aspects  with 
respect  to  each  other  must  offer  a  perpetual  variety  and 
singular  and  pleasing  interest  to  the  inhabitants  of  their 
primary. 

(541.)  Besides  the  eclipses  and  the  transits  of  the  satellites 
across  the  disc,  they  may  also  disappear  to  us  when  not 
eclipsed,  by  passing  behind  the  body  of  the  planet.  Thus, 
when  the  earth  is  at  E,  the  immersion  of  the  satellite  will  be 
seen  at  a,  and  its  emersion  at  b,  both  to  the  west  of  the 

*  Struvc,  Mem.  Art.  Soc.  iii.  301.      Main.  Do.  xxv.  p.  51. 

•\   Laplace,  Alec.  Ccl.  liv.  viii.  §  27. 


362  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

planet,  after  which  the  satellite,  still  continuing  its  course  in 
the  direction  b,  will  pass  behind  the  body,  and  again  emerge 
an  the  opposite  side,  after  an  interval  of  occultation  greater 
or  less  according  to  the  distance  of  the  satellite.  This  interval 
(on  account  of  the  great  distance  of  the  earth  compared  with 
the  radii  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites)  varies  but  little  in 
the  case  of  each  satellite,  being  nearly  equal  to  the  time 
which  the  satellite  requires  to  describe  an  arc  of  its  orbit, 
equal  to  the  angular  diameter  of  Jupiter  as  seen  from  its 
center,  which  time,  for  the  several  satellites,  is  as  follows : 
viz.,  for  the  first,  2h  20m;  for  the  second,  2h  56m ;  for  the 
third,  3h  43m ;  and  for  the  fourth,  4h  56m ;  the  corresponding 
diameters  of  the  planet  as  seen  from  these  respective  satellites 
being,  19°  49' ;  12°  25' ;  7°  47' ;  and  4°  25'.*  Before  the  op- 
position of  Jupiter,  these  occultations  of  the  satellites  happen 
after  the  eclipses  :  after  the  opposition  (when,  for  instance, 
the  earth  is  in  the  situation  K),  the  occultations  take  place 
before  the  eclipses.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that,  owing  to  the 
proximity  of  the  orbits  of  the  first  and  second  satellites  to 
the  planet,  both  the  immersion  and  emersion  of  either  of 
them  can  never  be  observed  in  any  single  eclipse,  the  im- 
mersion being  concealed  by  the  body,  if  the  planet  be  past  its 
opposition,  the  emersion  if  not  yet  arrived  at  it.  So  also  of 
the  occultation.  The  commencement  of  the  occultation,  or 
the  passage  of  the  satellite  behind  the  disc,  takes  place  while 
obscured  by  the  shadow,  before  opposition,  and  its  re-emer- 
gence after.  All  these  particulars  will  be  easily  apparent  on 
mere  inspection  of  the  figure  (art.  536.).  It  is  only  during 
the  short  time  that  the  earth  is  in  the  arc  G  H,  i.e.  between 
the  sun  and  Jupiter,  that  the  cone  of  the  shadow  converging 
(while  that  of  the  visual  rays  diverges)  behind  the  planet, 
permits  their  occultations  to  be  completely  observed  both 
at  ingress  and  egress,  unobscured,  the  eclipses  being  then 
invisible. 

(542.)  An  extremely  singular  relation  subsists  between  the 
mean  angular  velocities  or  mean  motions  (as  they  are  termed) 

*  These  data  arc   taken   approximately  from  Mr.  Woolliouse's  paper  in  the 
■applement  to  the  Nautical  Almanack  for  183J. 


B4  I.ITSES    OF    JUl'lTElt's    SATELLITES.  303 

of  the  three  first  satellites  of  Jupiter.  If  the  mean  angular 
velocity  of  the  first  satellite  be  added  to  twice  that  of  the 
third,  the  sum  will  equal  three  times  that  of  the  second. 
From  this  relation  it  follows,  that  if  from  the  mean  longitude 
of  the  first,  added  to  twice  that  of  the  third,  be  subducted 
three  times  that  of  the  second,  the  remainder  will  always  be 
the  same,  or  constant,  and  observation  informs  us  that  this 
constant  is  180°,  or  two  right  angles;  so  that  the  situations 
of  any  two  of  them  being  given,  that  of  the  third  may  be 
found.  It  has  been  attempted  to  account  for  this  remarkable 
fact,  on  the  theory  of  gravity  by  their  mutual  action ;  and 
Laplace  has  demonstrated,  that  if  this  relation  were  at  any 
one  epoch  approximately  true,  the  mutual  attractions  of  the 
satellites  would,  in  process  of  time,  render  it  exactly  so. 
One  curious  consequence  is,  that  these  three  satellites  cannot 
be  all  eclipsed  at  once ;  for,  in  consequence  of  the  last-men- 
tioned relation,  when  the  second  and  third  lie  in  the  same 
direction  from  the  center,  the  first  must  lie  on  the  opposite  ; 
and  therefore,  when  at  such  a  conjuncture  the  first  is  eclipsed, 
the  other  two  must  lie  between  the  sun  and  planet,  throwing 
their  shadows  on  the  disc,  and  vice  versa. 

(543.)  Although,  however,  for  the  above  mentioned  reason, 
the  satellites  cannot  be  all  eclipsed  at  once,  yet  it  may  happen, 
and  occasionally  does  so,  that  all  are  either  eclipsed,  occulted, 
or  projected  on  the  body,  in  which  case  they  are,  generally 
speaking,  equally  invisible,  since  it  requires  an  excellent  tele- 
scope to  discern  a  satellite  on  the  body,  except  in  peculiar 
circumstances.  Instances  of  the  actual  observation  of  Jupiter 
thus  denuded  of  its  usual  attendance  and  offering  the  appear- 
ance of  a  solitary  disc,  though  rare,  have  been  more  than 
once  recorded.  The  first  occasion  in  which  this  was  noticed 
was  by  Molyneux,  on  November  2d  (old  style),  1681.*  A 
similar  observation  is  recorded  by  Sir  W.  Herschel  as  made 
by  him  on  May  23d,  1802.  The  phamomenon  has  also  been 
observed  by  Mr.  Wallis,  on  April  lath,  1826  (in  which  case 
the  deprivation  continued  two  whole  hours) ;  and  lastly  by 
Mr.  II.  Gricsbach,  on  September  27th,  1843. 

•  IMpMMXj  Optics.,  p.  271. 


364  OUTLINES    OF    ASTIiONOMY. 

(544.)  The  discovery  of  Jupiter's  satellites,  one  of  the 
first  fruits  of  the  invention  of  the  telescope,  and  of  Galileo's 
early  and  happy  idea  of  directing  its  new-found  powers  to 
the  examination  of  the  heavens,  forms  one  of  the  most 
memorable  epochs  in  the  history  of  astronomy.  The  first 
astronomical  solution  of  the  great  problem  of  "  the  longitude" 
— practically  the  most  important  for  the  interests  of  mankind 
which  has  ever  been  brought  under  the  dominion  of  strict 
scientific  principles,  dates  immediately  from  their  discovery. 
The  final  and  conclusive  establishment  of  the  Copernican 
system  of  astronomy  may  also  be  considered  as  referable  to 
the  discovery  and  study  of  this  exquisite  miniature  system, 
in  which  the  laws  of  the  planetary  motions,  as  ascertained  by 
Kepler,  and  especially  that  which  connects  their  periods  and 
distances,  were  speedily  traced,  and  found  to  be  satisfactorily 
maintained.  And  (as  if  to  accumulate  historical  interest  on 
this  point)  it  is  to  the  observation  of  their  eclipses  that  we 
owe  the  grand  discovery  of  the  successive  propagation  of 
light,  and  the  determination  of  the  enormous  velocity  of  that 
wonderful  element.     This  we  must  explain  now  at  large. 

(545.)  The  earth's  orbit  being  concentric  with  that  of 
Jupiter  and  interior  to  it  (see  Jig.  art.  536.),  their  mutual 
distance  is  continually  varying,  the  variation  extending  from 
the  sum  to  the  difference  of  the  radii  of  the  two  orbits ;  and 
the  difference  of  the  greater  and  least  distances  being  equal 
to  a  diameter  of  the  earth's  orbit.  Now,  it  was  observed  by 
Koemer  (a  Danish  astronomer,  in  1675),  on  comparing  to- 
gether observations  of  eclipses  of  the  satellites  during 
many  successive  years,  that  the  eclipses  at  and  about  the 
opposition  of  Jupiter  (or  its  nearest  point  to  the  earth)  took 
place  too  soon — sooner,  that  is,  than,  by  calculation  from  an 
average,  he  expected  them ;  whereas  those  which  happened 
when  the  earth  was  in  the  part  of  its  orbit  most  remote  from 
Jupiter  were  always  too  late.  Connecting  the  observed  error 
in  their  computed  times  with  the  variation  of  distance,  he 
concluded,  that,  to  make  the  calculation  on  an  average  period 
correspond  with  fact,  an  allowance  in  respect  of  time  behoved 
to  be  made  proportional  to  the  excess  or  defect  of  Jupiter's 


SATELLITES   OF    SATURN.  365 

distance  from  the  earth  above  or  below  its  average  amount, 
and  such  that  a  difference  of  distance  of  one  diameter  of  the 
earth's  orbit  should  correspond  to  16m268,6  of  time  allowed. 
Speculating  on  the  probable  physical  cause,  he  was  naturally 
led  to  think  of  a  gradual  instead  of  an  instantaneous  pro- 
pagation of  light.  This  explained  every  particular  of  the 
observed  phenomenon,  but  the  velocity  required  (192,000 
miles  per  second)  was  so  great  as  to  startle  many,  and,  at  all 
events,  to  require  confirmation.  This  has  been  afforded  since, 
and  of  the  most  unequivocal  kind,  by  Bradley's  discovery  of 
the  aberration  of  light  (art.  329.).  The  velocity  of  light 
deduced  from  this  last  phenomenon  differs  by  less  than  one 
eightieth  of  its  amount  from  that  calculated  from  the  eclipses, 
and  even  this  difference  will  no  doubt  be  destroyed  by  nicer 
and  more  rigorously  reduced  observations.  The  velocity  has 
also  been  determined  by  M.  Fizeau  (by  direct  experiments 
with  a  reflecting  apparatus  on  a  most  ingenious  principle, 
suggested  by  Mr.  Wheatstone  for  measuring  the  velocity 
of  the  electric  current)  at  70,000  geographical  leagues,  26 
to  the  degree  =  194,600  statute  miles  per  second. 

(546.)  The  orbits  of  Jupiter's  satellites  are  but  little  ex- 
centric,  those  of  the  two  interior,  indeed,  have  no  perceptible 
excentricity.  Their  mutual  action  produces  in  them  per- 
turbations analogous  to  those  of  the  planets  about  the  sun, 
and  which  have  been  diligently  investigated  by  Laplace  and 
others.  By  assiduous  observation  it  has  been  ascertained 
that  they  are  subject  to  marked  fluctuations  in  respect  of 
brightness,  and  that  these  fluctuations  happen  periodically, 
according  to  their  position  with  respect  to  the  sun.  From 
this  it  has  been  concluded,  apparently  with  reason,  that  they 
turn  on  their  axes,  like  our  moon,  in  periods  equal  to  their 
respective  sidereal  revolutions  about  their  primary. 

(547.)  The  satellites  of  Saturn  have  been  much  less 
studied  than  those  of  Jupiter,  being  far  more  difficult  to  ob- 
serve. The  most  distant  has  its  orbit  materially  inclined 
(no  less  than  12°  14')*  to  the  plane  of  the  ring,  with  which 
the  orbits  of  all  the  rest  nearly  coincide.  Nor  is  this  the  only 
•  Latitude,  Astron.,  Art.  9075 


3f>6  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

circumstance  which  separates  it  by  a  marked  difference  of 
character  from  the  system  of  the  seven  inferior  ones,  and 
renders  it  in  some  sort  an  anomalous  member  of  the  Saturnian 
system.  Its  distance  from  the  planet's  center  is  no  less  than 
64  times  the  radius  of  the  globe  of  Saturn,  a  distance  from 
the  primary  to  which  our  own  moon  (at  60  radii)  offers  the 
only  parallel.  Its  variation  of  light  also  in  different  parts  of 
its  orbit  is  very  much  greater  than  in  the  case  of  any  other 
secondary  planet.  Dominic  Cassini  indeed  (its  first  dis- 
coverer, a.  d.  1671)  found  it  to  disappear  for  nearly  half  its 
revolution  when  to  the  east  of  Saturn,  and  though  the  more 
powerful  telescopes  now  in  use  enable  us  to  follow  it  round 
the  whole  of  its  circuit,  its  diminution  of  light  is  so  great  in 
the  eastern  half  of  its  orbit  as  to  render  it  somewhat  difficult 
to  perceive.  From  this  circumstance  (viz.  from  the  defalca- 
tion of  light  occurring  constantly  on  the  same  side  of  Saturn 
as  seen  from  the  earth,  the  visual  ray  from  which  is  never 
very  oblique  to  the  direction  in  which  the  sun's  light  falls  on 
it)  it  is  presumed,  with  much  certainty,  that  this  satellite 
revolves  on  its  axis  in  the  exact  time  of  rotation  about  the 
primary  ;  as  we  know  to  be  the  case  with  the  moon,  and  as 
there  is  considerable  ground  for  believing  to  be  so  with  all 
secondaries. 

(548.)  The  next  satellite  in  order,  proceeding  inwards,  (as 
it  used  to  be  considered  until  the  recent  discovery  of  an  in- 
termediate one,)  was  the  first  to  be  detected.*  It  is  by  far 
the  largest  and  most  conspicuous  of  all,  and  is  probably  not 
much  inferior  to  Mercury  in  size.  It  is  the  only  one  of 
the  number  whose  theory  and  perturbations  have  been  at  all 
enquired  intof  further  than  to  verify  Kepler's  law  of  the 
periodic  times,  which  holds  good,  mutatis  mutandis,  and  under 
the  requisite  reservations,  in  this,  as  in  the  system  of  Jupiter. 
The  three  next  satellites,  still  proceeding  inwards  J,  are  very 
minute,  and  require  pretty  powerful  telescopes  to  see  them ; 
while  the  two  interior  satellites,  which  just  skirt  the  edge  of 

*   By  Huyghens,  March  25,  1655. 

f   By  Bessel,  Astr.  Nachr.  Nos.  193.  214. 

t    Discovered  by  Dominic  Cassini  in  1672  and  1684. 


SATELLITES   OF    URANUS.  307 

the  ring*,  can  only  be  seen  with  telescopes  of  extraordinary 
power  and  perfection,  and  under  the  most  favourable  atmo 
spheric  circumstances.  At  the  epoch  of  their  discovery  they 
were  seen  to  thread,  like  beads,  the  almost  infinitely  thin 
fibre  of  light  to  which  the  ring,  then  seen  edgeways,  was 
reduced,  and  for  a  short  time  to  advance  off  it  at  either  end, 
speedily  to  return,  and  hastening  to  their  habitual  conceal 
ment  behind  or  on  the  body.  An  eighth  very  faint  satellite 
has  been  recently  detected  (between  the  two  outermost  of 
the  old  satellites)  simultaneously  (within  the  same  hour)  by 
Mr.  Dawes,  Mr.  Lassell,  and  Professor  Bond  f,  the  two 
former  observing  together  in  Mr.  Lassell's  observatory  at 
Starfield,  the  latter  in  that  of  Cambridge,  U.  S. 

(5-49.)  Owing  to  the  obliquity  of  the  ring  and  of  the  orbits 
of  the  satellite  s  to  Saturn's  ecliptic,  there  are  no  eclipses,  oc- 
cupations, or  transits  of  these  bodies  or  their  shadows  across 
the  disc  of  their  primary  (the  interior  ones  excepted),  until 
near  the  time  when  the  ring  is  seen  edgewise,  and  when  they 
do  take  place  their  observation  is  attended  with  too  much 
difficulty  to  be  of  any  practical  use,  like  the  eclipses  of 
Jupiter's  satellites  for  the  determination  of  longitudes,  for 

*  Discovered  by  Sir  William  Herscliel  in  17S9. 

f  On  the  night  of  the  19th  of  Sept.  1848.  Considerable  confusion  used 
already  to  prevail,  before  the  discovery  of  this  satellite,  in  the  nomenclature  of 
the  Saturnian  system,  owing  to  the  order  of  discovery  not  coinciding  with  that 
of  distances.  Astronomers  were  not  agreed  whether  to  call  the  two  interior 
satellites  the  6th  and  7th  (reckoning  inward)  and  the  older  ones  the  1st,  2d,  3d, 
4th,  and  5th,  reckoning  outward  ;  or  to  commence  with  the  innermost  and  reckon 
outwards,  from  1  to  7.  This  confusion,  which  the  introduction  of  an  eighth 
would  have  rendered  intolerable,  has  been  obviated  by  a  mythological  nomen- 
clature, suggested  in  a  former  edition  of  this  work,  and  which  has  been  generally 
accepted,  in  consonance  with  that  at  length  completely  established  for  the  primary 
planets  Taking  the  names  of  the  Titanian  divinities,  the  following  \erses  (par- 
doning false  quantities)  afford  an  easy  artificial  memory. 

Iapetus  cunctos  supra  rotat,  huncco  sequuntur 

Hyperion,  Titan,  Rhea,  DiontS,  Te'thys, 
Enceladus,  Mimas — 

It  is  worth  remarking  that  Simon  Marius,  who  disputed  the  priority  of  the 
discovery  of  Jupiter's  satellites  with  Galileo,  proposed  for  them  mythological 
names,  viz:  — Io,  Europa,  Ganymede, and  Callisto.  The  revival  of  these  names 
would  savour  of  a  preference  of  Marius's  claim,  which,  even  if  an  absolute 
priority  were  conceded  (which  it  is  not),  would  still  leave  Galileo's  general 
claim  to  the  use  of  the  telescope  as  a  means  of  astronomical  discovery  intact. 
Hut  in  the  case  of  Jupiter's  satellite*  there  exists  no  confusion  to  rectify.  They 
are  constantly  referred  to  by  their  numerical  designaticis  in  every  ilm..nack. 


368  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

which  reason  they  have  been  hitherto  little  attended  to  bj 
astronomers. 

(550.)  A  remarkable  relation  subsists  between  the  periodic 
times  of  the  two  interior  satellites  of  Saturn  and  those  of  the 
two  next  in  order  of  distance  ;  viz.  that  the  period  of  the 
third  (Tethys)  is  double  that  of  the  first  (Mimas),  and  that 
of  the  fourth  (Dione)  double  that  of  the  second  (Enceladus). 
The  coincidence  is  exact  in  either  case  to  about  one  800th 
part  of  the  larger  period. 

(551.)  The  satellites  of  Uranus  require  very  powerful  and 
perfect  telescopes  for  their  observation.  Four  are  certainly 
known  to  exist,  to  which  (proceeding  from  without,  inwards 
in  succession)  the  names  Oberon,  Titania,  Umbriel,  and 
Ariel,  of  the  fairies,  sylphs,  and  gnomes  of  Shakspere  and 
Pope,  have  been  assigned  respectively.  Of  these  Oberon 
and  Titania  are  tolerably  conspicuous  in  a  reflecting  telescope 
of  18  or  20  inches  in  aperture.  They  were  discovered  by 
Sir  W.  Herschel  in  1787,  and  have  since  been  reobserved 
by  the  author  of  this  work,  and  subsequently  by  Messrs.  Las- 
sell,  Otto  Struve,  and  Lamont.  Umbriel  (a  much  fainter 
object)  was  also  very  probably  seen  by  Sir  W.  Herschel, 
and  described  by  him  as  "  an  interior  satellite,''  but  his  ob- 
servations of  it  were  not  sufficiently  numerous  and  precise  to 
place  its  existence,  at  that  time,  beyond  question.  It  was 
rediscovered,  however,  by  M.  Otto  Struve*,  and  observed 
subsequently,  on  numerous  occasions,  by  Mr.  Lassell,  to  whom 
we  also  owe  the  first  discovery  of  Ariel t,  as  well  as  a  fine 
series  of  observations  and  micrometrical  measures  of  all  four, 
obtained  at  his  observatory  at  Liverpool  and  during  his  re- 
sidence in  Malta  in  1852-3,  which  forms  a  remarkable  epoch 
in  the  history  of  astronomical  observation.  Three  other 
satellites,  one  intermediate  between  Oberon  and  Titania,  the 
others  exterior  to  both,  were  suspected  by  Sir  W.  Herschel, 
but  their  existence  has  not  been  confirmed.  The  periods 
and  distances  of  the  four  known  satellites  will  be  found  in 
the  synoptic  table  at  the  end  of  the  volume. 

*  October  8.  1847.  f  September  14.  1847. 


SATELLITES  OF  NEPTUNE.  3HH 

(652.)  The  orbits  of  these  satellites  offer  remarkable,  and, 
indeed,  quite  unexpected  and  unexampled  peculiarities.  Con- 
trary to  the  unbroken  analogy  of  the  whole  planetary  system 
—  whether  of  primaries  or  secondaries — the  planes  of  their 
orbits  are  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic,  being  inclined 
no  less  than  78°  58'  to  that  plane,  and  in  these  orbits  their 
motions  are  retrograde;  that  is  to  say,  their  positions,  when 
projected  on  the  ecliptic,  instead  of  advancing  from  west  to 
east  round  the  centre  of  their  primary,  as  is  the  case  with 
every  other  planet  and  satellite,  move  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion. Their  orbits  are  nearly  or  quite  circular,  and  they 
do  not  appear  to  have  any  sensible,  or,  at  least,  any  rapid 
motion  of  nodes,  or  to  have  undergone  any  material  change  of 
inclination,  in  the  course,  at  least,  of  half  a  revolution  of 
their  primary  round  the  sun.  When  the  earth  is  in  the 
plane  of  their  orbits,  or  nearly  so,  their  apparent  paths  are 
straight  lines  or  very  elongated  ellipses,  in  which  case  they 
become  invisible,  their  feeble  light  being  effaced  by  the 
superior  light  of  the  planet,  long  before  they  come  up  to  its 
disc,  so  that  the  observations  of  any  eclipses  or  occultations 
they  may  undergo  is  quite  out  of  the  question  with  our 
present  telescopes. 

(553.)  If  the  observation  of  the  satellites  of  Uranus  be 
difficult,  those  of  Neptune,  owing  to  the  immense  distance  of 
that  planet,  may  be  readily  imagined  to  offer  still  greater 
difficulties.  Of  the  existence  of  two,  discovered  by  Mr.  Las- 
sell  *,  there  can  remain  no  doubt,  having  also  been  observed 
by  other  astronomers,  both  in  Europe  and  America.  Accord- 
ing to  M.  Otto  Struve  f  the  orbit  of  the  first  is  inclined  to  the 
ecliptic  at  the  considerable  angle  of  35° ;  but  whether,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  satellites  of  Uranus,  the  direction  of  its 
motion  be  retrograde  it  is  not  possible  to  say  until  it  shall 
have  been  longer  observed. 

*  On  July  7th,  1847  (suspected  in  1846),  and  August  14th,  1850. 
f  A stron.   Niu-hr.  No.  629.  from  hit  own  observation,  September  I  1th  te 
December  20th,  1847. 


B   B 


370  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 


/ 


CHAPTER  XI. 

OF   COMETS. 

GREAT  NUMBER    OP    RECORDED    COMETS. — THE    NUMBER    OF  THOSB 

UNRECORDED    PROBABLY  MUCH    GREATER GENERAL    DESCRH3- 

TION    OP    A    COMET.  —  COMETS    WITHOUT   TAILS,   OR   WITH  MORE 

THAN     ONE.  THEIB    EXTREME    TENUITY.  THEIR     PROBABLE 

STRUCTURE. — MOTIONS  CONFORMABLE  TO  THE  LAW  OP  GRAVITY. 
—  ACTUAL  DIMENSIONS  OF  COMETS.  —  PERIODICAL  RETURN  OF 
SEVERAL. — HALLEY'S  COMET. — OTHER  ANCIENT  COMETS  PROBABLY 

PERIODIC. ENCKE'S  COMET. BIELA's. FA YE's. — LEXELL's. DE 

VICO's. —  BRORSEN'S.  —  PETERS'S.— GREAT  COMET  OF  1843.  — ITS 

PROBABLE    IDENTITY    WITH    SEVERAL    OLDER    COMETS. GREAT 

INTEREST    AT    PRESENT   ATTACHED    TO    COMETARY    ASTRONOMY, 

AND  ITS  REASONS. REMARKS  ON  COMETARY  ORBITS  IN  GENERAL. 

— GREAT   COMETS,    OF    1858,  1861    AND    1862. 

(554.)  The  extraordinary  aspect  of  comets,  their  rapid  and 
seemingly  irregular  motions,  the  unexpected  manner  in  which 
they  often  burst  upon  us,  and  the  imposing  magnitudes  which 
they  occasionally  assume,  have  in  all  ages  rendered  them 
objects  of  astonishment,  not  unmixed  with  superstitious  dread 
to  the  uninstructed,  and  an  enigma  to  those  most  conversant 
with  the  wonders  of  creation  and  the  operations  of  natural 
causes.  Even  now,  that  we  have  ceased  to  regard  their 
movements  as  irregular,  or  as  governed  by  other  laws  than 
those  which  retain  the  planets  in  their  orbits,  their  intimate 
nature,  and  the  offices  they  perform  in  the  economy  of  our 
system,  are  as  much  unknown  as  ever.  No  distinct  and 
satisfactory  account  has  yet  been  rendered  of  those  immensely 
voluminous  appendages  which  they  bear  about  with  them,  and 
which  are  known  by  the  name  of  their  tails,  (though  impro- 
perly, since  they  often  precede  them  in  their  motions,)  any 
more  than  of  several  other  singularities  which  they  present. 

(555.)  The    number   of  comets  which  have  been  astro- 
nomically observed,  or  of  which  notices  have  been  recorded 


OF    COMETS.  371 

in  lustory,  is  very  great,  amounting  to  several  hundreds  * , 
and  when  we  consider  that  in  the  earlier  ages  of  astronomy, 
and  indeed  in  more  recent  times,  before  the  invention  of  the 
telescope,  only  large  and  conspicuous  ones  were  noticed ;  and 
that,  since  due  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  subject, 
scarcely  a  year  has  passed  without  the  observation  of  one  or 
two  of  these  bodies,  and  that  sometimes  two  and  even  three 
have  appeared  at  once  ;  it  will  be  easily  supposed  that  their 
actual  number  must  be  at  least  many  thousands.  Multitudes, 
indeed,  must  escape  all  observation,  by  reason  of  their  paths 
traversing  only  that  part  of  the  heavens  which  is  above  the 
horizon  in  the  daytime.  Comets  so  circumstanced  can  only 
become  visible  by  the  rare  coincidence  of  a  total  eclipse  of  the 
sun,  —  a  coincidence  which  happened,  as  related  by  Seneca, 
sixty-two  years  before  Christ,  when  a  large  comet  was  ac- 
tually observed  very  near  the  sun.  Several,  however,  stana 
on  record  as  having  been  bright  enough  to  be  seen  with  the 
naked  eye  in  the  daytime,  even  at  noon  and  in  bright  sun- 
shine. Such  were  the  comets  of  1402,  1532,  and  1843,  and 
that  of  43  b.  c.  which  appeared  during  the  games  celebrated 
by  Augustus  in  honour  of  Venus  shortly  after  the  death  of 
Caesar,  and  which  the  flattery  of  poets  declared  to  be  the 
soul  of  that  hero  taking  its  place  among  the  divinities. 

(556.)  That  feelings  of  awe  and  astonishment  should  be 
excited  by  the  sudden  and  unexpected  appearance  of  a  great 
somet,  is  no  way  surprising ;  being,  in  fact,  according  to  the 
accounts  we  have  of  such  events,  one  of  the  most  imposing 
of  all  natural  phamomena.  Comets  consist  for  the  most  part 
of  a  large  and  more  or  less  splendid,  but  ill  defined  nebulous 
mass  of  light,  called  the  head,  which  is  usually  much  brighter 
towards  its  center,  and  offers  the  appearance  of  a  vivid  nucletts, 

*  See  catalogues  in  the  Almagest  of  Riccioli ;  Pingre's  Cometographie  j 
Delambre's  Astron.  vol.  Hi.  ;  Astronomische  Abhandlungen,  No.  1.  (which 
contains  the  elements  of  all  the  orbits  of  comets  which  have  been  computed  to 
the  time  of  its  publication,  1823);  also  a  catalogue,  by  the  Rev.  T.  J.  Hussey. 
Lond.  &  Ed.  Phil.  Mag.  vol.  ii.  No.  9.  etseq.  In  a  list  cited  by  Lalande  from 
the  1st  vol.  of  the  Tables  de  Berlin,  700  comets  are  enumerated.  See  also 
notices  of  the  Astronomical  Society  and  Astron.  Nachr.  passim.  A  great  many 
<>{'  the  more  ancient  comets  are  recorded  in  the  Chinese  Annals,  and  in  some 
cases  with  sufficient  precision  to  allow  of  the  calculation  of  rudely  appro.\inv.ts 
orhits  from  their  motions  so  described. 

b  ■  i 


372  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

like  a  star  or  planet.  From  the  head,  and  in  a  direction 
opposite  to  that  in  which  the  sun  is  situated  from  the  comet 
appear  to  diverge  two  streams  of  light,  which  grow  broader 
and  more  diffused  at  a  distance  from  the  head,  and  which 
most  commonly  close  in  and  unite  at  a  little  distance  be- 
hind it,  but  sometimes  continue  distinct  for  a  great  part  of 
their  course  ;  producing  an  effect  like  that  of  the  trains  left 
by  some  bright  meteors,  or  like  the  diverging  fire  of  a  sky- 
rocket (only  without  sparks  or  perceptible  motion).  This  is 
the  tail.  This  magnificent  appendage  attains  occasionally 
an  immense  apparent  length.  Aristotle  relates  of  the  tail 
of  the  comet  of  371  b.  c,  that  it  occupied  a  third  of  the 
hemisphere,  or  60°  ;  that  of  a.  d.  1618  is  stated  to  have  been 
attended  by  a  train  no  less  than  104°  in  length.  The 
comet  of  1680,  the  most  celebrated  of  modern  times,  and 
on  many  accounts  the  most  remarkable  of  all,  with  a 
head  not  exceeding  in  brightness  a  star  of  the  second  mag- 
nitude, covered  with  its  tail  an  extent  of  more  than  70°  of 
the  heavens,  or,  as  some  accounts  state,  90° ;  that  of  the 
comet  of  1769  extended  97°,  and  that  of  the  last  great  comet 
(1843)  was  estimated  at  about  65°  when  longest.  The 
figure  {fig.  2.,  Plate  II.)  is  a  representation  of  the  comet  of 
1819  —  by  no  means  one  of  the  most  considerable,  but  winch 
was,  however,  very  conspicuous  to  the  naked  eye. 

(557.)  The  tail  is,  however,  by  no  means  an  invariable 
appendage  of  comets.  Many  of  the  brightest  have  been 
observed  to  have  short  and  feeble  tails,  and  a  few  great 
comets  have  been  entirely  without  them.  Those  of  1585 
and  1763  offered  no  vestige  of  a  tail;  and  Cassini  describes 
the  comets  of  1665  and  1682  as  being  as  round*  and  as  well 
defined  as  Jupiter.  On  the  other  hand,  instances  are  not 
wanting  of  comets  furnished  with  many  tails  or  streams  of 
diverging  light.  That  of  1744  had  no  less  than  six,  spread 
out  like  an  immense  fan,  extending  to  a  distance  of  nearly 

*  This  description,  however,  applies  to  the  "  disc  "  of  the  head  of  these  comets 
«»«>  seen  in  a  telescope.  Cassini's  expressions  are,  "aussi  rond,  aussi  net,  et  aussi 
clair  que  Jupiter,"  (where  it  is  to  he  ohserved  that  the  latter  epithet  must  hy 
no  means  he  translated  bright).  To  understand  this  passage  fully,  the  reader 
must  refer  to  the  description  given  further  on,  of  the  "disc"  of  H  alley 'a  comet, 
after  its  perihelion  passage  in  1835-6- 


EXTREME   TENUITY    OF   COMETS.  373 

3u°  in  length.  The  small  comet  of  1823  had  two,  making 
an  angle  of  about  160°,  the  brighter  turned  as  usual  from 
the  sun,  the  fainter  towards  it,  or  nearly  so.  The  tails  of 
comets,  too,  are  often  somewhat  curved,  bending,  in  general, 
towards  the  region  which  the  comet  has  left,  as  if  moving 
6omewhat  more  slowly,  or  as  if  resisted  in  the!r  course. 

(558.)  The  smaller  comets,  such  as  are  risible  only  in 
telescopes,  or  with  difficulty  by  the  naked  eye,  and  which 
are  by  far  the  most  numerous,  offer  very  frequently  no 
appearance  of  a  tail,  and  appear  only  as  round  or  somewhat 
oval  vaporous  masses,  more  dense  towards  the  center, 
where,  however,  they  appear  to  have  no  distinct  nucleus,  or 
anything  which  seems  entitled  to  be  considered  as  a  solid 
body.  This  was  shown  in  a  very  remarkable  manner  in  the 
case  of  the  comet  discovered  by  Miss  Mitchell  in  1847,  which 
on  the  5th  of  October  in  that  year  passed  centrally  over  a  star 
of  the  fifth  magnitude :  so  centrally  that  with  a  magnifying 
power  of  100  it  was  impossible  to  determine  in  which  direc- 
tion the  extent  of  the  nebulosity  was  greatest.  The  star's 
light  seemed  in  no  degree  enfeebled  ;  yet  such  a  star  would 
be  completely  obliterated  by  a  moderate  fog,  extending  only 
a  few  yards  from  the  surface  of  the  earth.  And  since  it  ia 
an  observed  fact,  that  even  those  larger  comets  which  have 
presented  the  appearance  of  a  nucleus  have  yet  exhibited 
no  phases,  though  we  cannot  doubt  that  they  shine  by  the 
reflected  solar  light,  it  follows  that  even  these  can  only  be 
regarded  as  great  masses  of  thin  vapour,  susceptible  of  being 
penetrated  through  their  whole  substance  by  the  sunbeams, 
and  reflecting  them  alike  from  their  interior  parts  and  from 
their  surfaces.  Nor  will  any  one  regard  this  explanation  as 
forced,  or  feel  disposed  to  resort  to  a  phosphorescent  quality 
in  the  comet  itself,  to  account  for  the  phaenomena  in  question, 
when  we  consider  (what  will  be  hereafter  shown)  the  enor- 
mous magnitude  of  the  space  thus  illuminated,  and  the  ex- 
tremely small  mass  which  there  is  ground  to  attribute  to 
these  bodies.  It  will  then  be  evident  that  the  most  un- 
substantial clouds  which  float  in  the  highest  regions  of  our 
atmosphere,  and  seem  at  sunset  to  be  drenched  in  light,  and 


374  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY". 

to  glow  throughout  their  whole  depth  as  if  in  actual  ignition, 
without  any  shadow  or  dark  side,  must  be  looked  upon  as 
dense  and  massive  bodies  compared  with  the  filmy  and  all 
but  spiritual  texture  of  a  comet.  Accordingly,  whenever 
powerful  telescopes  have  been  turned  on  these  bodies,  they 
have  not  failed  to  dispel  the  illusion  which  attributes  solidity 
to  that  more  condensed  part  of  the  head,  which  appears  to  the 
naked  eye  as  a  nucleus ;  though  it  is  true  that  in  some,  a  very 
minute  stellar  point  has  been  seen,  indicating  the  existence 
of  something  more  substantial. 

(559.)  It  is  in  all  probability  to  the  feeble  coercion  of  the 
elastic  power  of  their  gaseous  parts,  by  the  gravitation  of  so 
small  a  central  mass,  that  we  must  attribute  this  extra- 
ordinary developement  of  the  atmospheres  of  comets.  If  the 
earth,  retaining  its  present  size,  were  reduced,  by  any 
internal  change  (as  by  hollowing  out  its  central  parts)  to  one 
thousandth  part  of  its  actual  mass,  its  coercive  power  over 
the  atmosphere  would  be  diminished  in  the  same  proportion, 
and  in  consequence  the  latter  would  expand  to  a  thousand 
times  its  actual  bulk  ;  and  indeed  much  more,  owing  to  the 
still  farther  diminution  of  gravity,  by  the  recess  of  the  upper 
parts  from  the  center.*  An  atmosphere,  however,  free  to 
expand  equally  in  all  directions,  would  envelope  the  nucleus 
spherically,  so  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  admit  the  action 
of  other  causes  to  account  for  its  enormous  extension  in  the 
direction  of  the  tail,  — a  subject  to  which  we  shall  presently 
take  occasion  to  recur. 

(560.)  That  the  luminous  part  of  a  comet  is  something  in 
the  nature  of  a  smoke,  fog,  or  cloud,  suspended  in  a  trans- 
parent atmosphere,  is  evident  from  a  fact  which  has  been 
often  noticed,  viz.  —  that  the  portion  of  the  tail  where  it 
comes  closest  to,  and  surrounds  the  head,  is  yet  separated 
from  it  by  an  interval  less  luminous,  as  if  sustained  and  kept 
off  from  contact  by  a  transparent  stratum,  as  we  often  see  one 
layer  of  clouds  over  another  with  a  considerable  clear  space 

*  Newton  has  calculated  (Princ.  III.  p.  512.)  that  a  globe  of  air  of  ordi- 
nary density  at  the  earth's  surfocc,  of  one  inch  in  diameter,  if  reduced  to  the 
density  clue  to  the  altitude  above  the  surface  of  one  radius  of  the  earth,  would 
occupy  a  sphere  exceeding  in  radius  the  orbit  of  Saturn.  The  tail  of  a  great 
comet  then,  for  aught  we  can  tell,  may  consist  of  only  a  very  few  pounds  or  even 
ounces  of  matter. 


MOTIONS   OF    COMETS.  375 

between.  These,  and  most  of  the  other  facts  observed  in 
the  history  of  comets,  appear  to  indicate  that  the  structure 
of  a  comet,  as  seen  in  section  in  the  direction  of  its  length, 
must  be  that  of  a  hollow  envelope,  of  a  parabolic  form, 
enclosing  near  its  vertex  the  nucleus  and  head,  something  as 
represented  in  the  annexed  figure.  This  would  account  for 
the  apparent  division  of  the  tail  into  two  principal  lateral 


branches,  the  envelope  being  oblique  to  the  line  of  sight  at 
its  borders,  and  therefore  a  greater  depth  of  illuminated 
matter  being  there  exposed  to  the  eye.  In  all  probability, 
however,  they  admit  great  varieties  of  structure,  and  among 
them  may  very  possibly  be  bodies  of  widely  different  physical 
constitution,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  one  and  the  same 
comet  at  different  epochs  undergoes  great  changes,  both  in 
the  disposition  of  its  materials  and  in  their  physical  state. 

(561.)  We  come  now  to  speak  of  the  motions  of  comets. 
These  are  apparently  most  irregular  and  capricious.  Some- 
times they  remain  in  sight  only  for  a  few  days,  at  others  for 
many  months ;  some  move  with  extreme  slowness,  others 
with  extraordinary  velocity;  while  not  unfrequently,  the 
two  extremes  of  apparent  speed  are  exhibited  by  the  same 
comet  in  different  parts  of  its  course.  The  comet  of  1472 
described  an  arc  of  the  heavens  of  40°  of  a  great  circle  *  in 
a  single  day.  Some  pursue  a  direct,  some  a  retrograde,  and 
others  a  tortuous  and  very  irregular  course;  nor  do  they 
confine  themselves,  like  the  planets,  within  any  certain  region 
of  the  heavens,  but  traverse  indifferently  every  part.  Their 
variations  in  apparent  size,  during  the  time  they  continue 
visible,  are  no  less  remarkable  than  those  of  their  velocity ; 
sometimes  they  make  their  first  appearance  as  faint  and  slow 
moving  objects,  with  little  or  no  tail ;    but  by  degrees  ac- 

•   1 20°  in  extent  in  the  former  editions.      Bnt  this  was  the  arc  described  iw 
longitude,  and  the  comet  at  the  time  referred  to  had  great  north  latitude. 


376  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

cclerate,  enlarge,  and  throw  out  from  them  this  appendage, 
which  increases  in  length  and  brightness  till  (as  always 
happens  in  such  cases)  they  approach  the  sun,  and  are  lost 
in  his  beams.  After  a  time  they  again  emerge,  on  the 
other  side,  receding  from  the  sun  with  a  velocity  at  first 
rapid,  but  gradually  decaying.  It  is  for  the  most  part  after 
thus  passing  the  sun,  that  they  shine  forth  in  all  their 
splendour,  and  that  their  tails  acquire  their  greatest  length 
and  developement ;  thus  indicating  plainly  the  action  of  the 
sun's  rays  as  the  exciting  cause  of  that  extraordinary  emana- 
tion. As  they  continue  to  recede  from  the  sun,  their  motion 
diminishes  and  the  tail  dies  away,  or  is  absorbed  into  the 
head,  which  itself  grows  continually  feebler,  and  is  at  length 
altogether  lost  sight  of,  in  by  far  the  greater  number  of  cases 
never  to  be  seen  more. 

(562.)  Without  the  clue  furnished  by  the  theory  of  gravi- 
tation, the  enigma  of  these  seemingly  irregular  and  capricious 
movements  might  have  remained  for  ever  unresolved.  But 
Newton,  having  demonstrated  the  possibility  of  any  conic 
section  whatever  being  described  about  the  sun,  by  a  body 
revolving  under  the  dominion  of  that  law,  immediately  per- 
ceived the  applicability  of  the  general  proposition  to  the  case 
of  cometaiy  orbits;  and  the  great  comet  of  1680,  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  on  record,  both  for  the  immense  length  of 
its  tail  and  for  the  excessive  closeness  of  its  approach  to  the 
sun  (within  one  sixth  of  the  diameter  of  that  luminary), 
afforded  him  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  trial  of  his 
theory.  The  success  of  the  attempt  was  complete.  He 
ascertained  that  this  comets  described  about  the  sun  as  its 
fucus  an  elliptic  orbit  of  so  great  an  excentricity  as  to  be 
undistinguishable  from  a  parabola,  (which  is  the  extreme,  or 
limiting  form  of  the  ellipse  when  the  axis  becomes  infinite,) 
and  that  in  this  orbit  the  areas  described  about  the  sun  were, 
as  in  the  planetary  ellipses,  proportional  to  the  times.  The 
representation  of  the  apparent  motions  of  this  comet  by  such 
an  orbit,  throughout  its  whole  observed  course,  was  found 
to  be  as  satisfactory  as  those  of  the  motions  of  the  planets 
in  their  nearly  circular  paths.  From  that  time  it  became 
a  received  truth,  that  the  motions  of  comets  are  regulated 


MOTIONS   OF    COMETS.  37  7 

"by  the  aamc  general  laws  as  those  of  the  planets — the 
difference  of  the  cases  consisting  only  in  the  extravagant 
elongation  of  their  ellipses,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  limit 
to  the  inclinations  of  their  planes  to  that  of  the  ecliptic,  or  of 
any  general  coincidence  in  the  direction  of  their  motions 
from  west  to  east,  rather  than  from  east  to  west,  like  what  is 
observed  among  the  planets. 

(563.)  It  is  a  problem  of  pure  geometry,  from  the  general 
laws  of  elliptic  or  parabolic  motion,  to  find  the  situation  and 
dimensions  of  the  ellipse  or  parabola  which  shall  represent 
the  motion  of  any  given  comet.  In  general,  three  complete 
observations  of  its  right  ascension  and  declination,  with  the 
times  at  which  they  were  made,  suffice  for  the  solution  of 
this  problem,  (which  is,  however,  by  no  means  an  easy  one,) 
and  for  the  determination  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit. 
These  consist,  mutatis  mutandis,  of  the  same  data  as  are  re- 
quired for  the  computation  of  the  motion  of  a  planet ;  (that 
is  to  say,  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion,  that  of  the  ascend- 
ing node,  the  inclination  to  the  ecliptic,  the  semiaxis,  excen- 
tricity,  and  time  of  perihelion  passage,  as  also  whether  the 
motion  is  direct  or  retrograde ;)  and,  once  determined,  it 
becomes  very  easy  to  compare  them  with  the  whole  observed 
course  of  the  comet,  by  a  process  exactly  similar  to  that  of 
art.  502.,  and  thus  at  once  to  ascertain  their  correctness, 
and  to  put  to  the  severest  trial  the  truth  of  those  general 
laws  on  which  all  such  calculations  are  founded. 

(564.)  For  the  most  part,  it  is  found  that  the  motions  of 
comets  may  be  sufficiently  well  represented  by  parabolic 
orbits, — that  is  to  say,  ellipses  whose  axes  are  of  infinite 
length,  or,  at  least,  so  very  long  that  no  appretiable  error 
in  the  calculation  of  their  motions,  during  all  the  time  they 
continue  visible,  would  be  incurred  by  supposing  them  actually 
infinite.  The  parabola  is  that  conic  section  which  is  the 
limit  between  the  ellipse  on  the  one  hand,  which  returns 
into  itself,  and  the  hyperbola  on  the  other,  which  runs  out 
to  infinity.  A  comet,  therefore,  which  should  describe  an 
elliptic  path,  however  long  its  axis,  must  have  visited  the 
sun  before,  and  must  again  return  (unless  disturbed)  iu  some 


378  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

determinate  period, — but  should  its  orbit  be  of  the  hyperbolic 
character,  when  once  it  had  passed  its  perihelion,  it  could 
never  more  return  within  the  sphere  of  our  observation,  but 
must  run  off  to  visit  other  systems,  or  be  lost  in  the  immensity 
of  space.  There  is  no  instance  of  a  comet  whose  orbit  has 
been  very  carefully  calculated  by  more  than  one  computist 
being  proved  to  have  described  a  hyperbola,  though  several 
have  been  suspected  of  doing  so.*  Many  have  been  well 
ascertained  to  move  in  ellipses.  These  latter,  in  so  far  as 
their  orbits  can  remain  unaltered  by  the  attractions  of  the 
planets,  must  be  regarded  as  permanent  members  of  our 
system. 

(565.)  We  must  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  actual  di- 
mensions of  comets.  The  calculation  of  the  diameters  of 
their  heads,  and  the  lengths  and  breadths  of  their  tails,  offers 
not  the  slightest  difficulty  when  once  the  elements  of  their 
orbits  are  known,  for  by  these  we  know  their  real  distances 
from  the  earth  at  any  time,  and  the  true  direction  of  the  tail, 
which  we  see  only  foreshortened.  Now  calculations  instituted 
on  these  principles  lead  to  the  surprising  fact,  that  the  comets 
are  by  far  the  most  voluminous  bodies  in  our  system.  The 
following  are  the  dimensions  of  some  of  those  which  have 
been  made  the  subjects  of  such  enquiry. 

(566.)  The  tail  of  the  great  comet  of  1680,  immediately 
after  its  perihelion  passage,  was  found  by  Newton  to  have 
been  no  less  than  20000000  of  leagues  in  length,  and  to  have 
occupied  only  two  days  m  its  emission  from  the  comet's  body  ! 
a  decisive  proof  this  of  its  being  darted  forth  by  some  active 
force,  the  origin  of  which,  to  judge  from  the  direction  of  the 
tail,  must  be  sought  in  the  sun  itself.  Its  greatest  length 
amounted  to  41000000  leagues,  a  length  much  exceeding  the 
whole  interval  between  the  sun  and  earth.  The  tail  of  the 
comet  of  1769  extended  16000000  leagues,  and  that  of  the 
great  comet  of  18 1 1,  36000000.  The  portion  of  the  head  of 
this  last,  comprised  within  the  transparent  atmospheric  en- 
velope which  separated  it  from  the  tail,  was  180000  leagues 

*  For  example,  that  of 172S,  calculated  by  Burckhardt ;  that  of  1771,  by  both 
Burckhardt  and  Enckc ;  and  the  second  comet  of  1818,  by  Rosenberg  and 
Bebwabe. 


halley's  comet.  379 

in  diameter.  It  is  hardly  conceivable,  that  matter  once  pro- 
jected to  such  enormous  distances  should  ever  be  collected 
again  by  the  feeble  attraction  of  such  a  body  as  a  comet  —  a 
consideration  which  accounts  for  the  surmised  progressive 
diminution  of  the  tails  of  such  as  have  been  frequently 
observed. 

(567.)  The  most  remarkable  of  those  comets  which  have 
been  ascertained  to  move  in  elliptic  orbits  is  that  of  Halley, 
so  called  from  the  celebrated  Edmund  Halley,  who,  on  cal- 
culating its  elements  from  its  perihelion  passage  in  1682, 
when  it  appeared  in  great  splendour,  with  a  tail  30°  in 
length,  was  led  to  conclude  its  identity  with  the  great 
comets  of  1531  and  1607,  whose  elements  he  had  also 
ascertained.  The  intervals  of  these  successive  apparitions 
being  75  and  76  years,  Halley  was  encouraged  to  predict 
its  reappearance  about  the  year  1759.  So  remarkable  a 
prediction  could  not  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  all  as- 
tronomers, and,  as  the  time  approached,  it  became  extremely 
interesting  to  know  whether  the  attractions  of  the  larger  pla- 
nets might  not  materially  interfere  with  its  orbitual  motion. 
The  computation  of  their  influence  from  the  Newtonian  law 
of  gravity,  a  most  difficult  and  intricate  piece  of  calculation, 
was  undertaken  and  accomplished  by  Clairaut,  who  found 
that  the  action  of  Saturn  would  retard  its  return  by  100 
days,  and  that  of  Jupiter  by  no  less  than  518,  making  in  all 
618  days,  by  which  the  expected  return  would  happen  later 
than  on  the  supposition  of  its  retaining  an  unaltered  period,  — 
and  that,  in  short,  the  time  of  the  expected  perihelion  passage 
would  take  place  within  a  month,  one  way  or  other,  of  the 
middle  of  April,  1759. — It  actually  happened  on  the  12th 
of  March  in  that  year.  Its  next  return  was  calculated  by 
several  eminent  geometers*,  and  fixed  successively  for  the 
4th,  the  7th,  the  11th,  and  the  26th  of  November,  1835; 
the  two  latter  determinations  appearing  entitled  to  the 
higher  degree  of  confidence,  owing  partly  to  the  more  com- 
plete discussion  bestowed  on  the  observations  of  1682  and 

*  Damoiseau,  Pontecoulant,  Rosenbcrger,  aiul  Luhmann. 


380  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

1759,  and  partly  to  the  continually  improving  state  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  methods  of  estimating  the  disturbing  effect 
of  the  several  planets.  The  last  of  these  predictions,  that  of 
M.  Lehmann,  was  published  on  the  25th  of  July.  On  the 
5th  of  August  the  comet  first  became  visible  in  the  clear 
atmosphere  of  Rome  as  an  exceedingly  faint  telescopic 
nebula,  within  a  degree  of  its  place  as  predicted  by  M. 
Rosenberger  for  that  day.  On  or  about  the  20th  of  Au- 
gust it  became  generally  visible,  and,  pursuing  very  nearly 
its  calculated  path  among  the  stars,  passed  its  perihelion  on 
the  16th  of  November;  after  which,  its  course  carrying 
it  south,  it  ceased  to  be  visible  in  Europe,  though  it  continued 
to  be  conspicuously  so  in  the  southern  hemisphere  throughout 
February,  March,  and  April,  1836,  disappearing  finally  on 
the  5th  of  May. 

(568.)  Although  the  appearance  of  this  celebrated  comet 
at  its  last  apparition  was  not  such  as  might  be  reasonably 
considered  likely  to  excite  lively  sensations  of  terror,  even  in 
superstitious  ages,  yet,  having  been  an  object  of  the  most 
diligent  attention  in  all  parts  of  the  world  to  astronomers, 
furnished  with  telescopes  very  far  surpassing  in  power  those 
which  had  been  applied  to  it  at  its  former  appearance  in  1759, 
and  indeed  to  any  of  the  greater  comets  on  record,  the 
opportunity  thus  afforded  of  studying  its  physical  structure, 
and  the  extraordinary  phenomena  which  it  presented  when 
so  examined  have  rendered  this  a  memorable  epoch  in  cometic 
history.  Its  first  appearance,  while  yet  very  remote  from  the 
sun,  was  that  of  a  small  round  or  somewhat  oval  nebida, 
quite  destitute  of  tail,  and  having  a  minute  point  of  more 
concentrated  light  excentrically  situated  within  it.  It 
was  not  before  the  2d  of  October  that  the  tail  began  to  be 
developed,  and  thenceforward  increased  pretty  rapidly,  being 
already  4°  or  5°  long  on  the  5th.  It  attained  its  greatest 
apparent  length  (about  20°)  on  the  15th  of  October.  From 
that  time,  though  not  yet  arrived  at  its  perihelion,  it  decreased 
with  such  rapidity,  that  already  on  the  29th  it  was  only  3°, 
and  on   November  the  5th  2g°  in  length.     There  is  every 


HALLEYS  COMET  381 

reason  to  believe  that  before  the  perihelion,  the  tail  had 
altogether  disappeared,  as,  though  it  continued  to  be  observed 
at  Pulkowa  up  to  the  very  day  of  its  perihelion  passage,  no 
mention  whatever  is  made  of  any  tail  being  then  seen. 

(569.)  By  far  the  most  striking  phenomena,  however,  ob- 
served in  this  part  of  its  career,  were  those  which,  commencing 
simultaneously  with  the  growth  of  the  tail,  connected  them- 
selves evidently  with  the  production  of  that  appendage  and 
its  projection  from  the  head.  On  the  2d  of  October  (the 
very  day  of  the  first  observed  commencement  of  the  tail) 
the  nucleus,  which  had  been  faint  and  small,  was  observed 
suddenly  to  have  become  much  brighter,  and  to  be  in  the  act 
of  throwing  out  a  jet  or  stream  of  light  from  its  anterior  part, 
or  that  turned  towards  the  sum  This  ejection  after  ceasing 
awhile  was  resumed,  and  with  much  greater  apparent  violence, 
on  the  8  th,  and  continued,  with  occasional  intermittences,  so 
long  as  the  tail  itself  continued  visible.  Both  the  form  of 
this  luminous  ejection,  and  the  direction  in  which  it  issued 
from  the  nucleus,  meanwhile  underwent  singular  and  capri- 
cious alterations,  the  different  phases  succeeding  each  other 
with  such  rapidity  that  on  no  two  successive  nights  were  the 
appearances  alike.  At  one  time  the  emitted  jet  was  single, 
and  confined  within  narrow  limits  of  divergence  from  the 
nucleus.  At  others  it  presented  a  fan-shaped  or  swallow- 
tailed  form,  analogous  to  that  of  a  gas-flame  issuing  from  a 
flattened  orifice :  while  at  others  again  two,  three,  or  even 
more  jets  were  darted  forth  in  different  directions.*  (See 
figures  a,  b,  c,  d,  plate  I.  fig  4.,  which  represent,  highly  mag- 
nified, the  appearances  of  the  nucleus  with  its  jets  of  light, 
on  the  8th,  9th,  10th,  and  12th  of  October,  and  in  which  the 
direction  of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  head,  or  that  fronting 
the  sun,  is  supposed  alike  in  all,  viz.  towards  the  upper  part 
of  the  engraving.  In  these  representations  the  head  itself 
is  omitted,  the  scale  of  the  figures  not  permitting  its  intro- 
duction: e  represents  the  nucleus  and  head  as  seen  October 

•  See  the  exquisite  lithographic  representations  of  these  phenomena  by  liewel. 
Astron.  Nachr.  No.  302.,  and  the  fine  scries  by  Schwabc  in  No.  297.  of  that 
collection,  as  also  the  magnificent  drawings  of  Struve,  from  which  our  figures  o, 
fc,  c,  d,  are  copied. 


382  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

9th  on  a  less  scale.)  The  direction  of  the  principal  jet  was 
observed  meanwhile  to  oscillate  to  and  fro  on  either  side  of 
a  line  directed  to  the  sun  in  the  manner  of  a  compass-needle 
when  thrown  into  vibration  and  oscillating  about  a  mean 
position,  the  change  of  direction  being  conspicuous  even  from 
hour  to  hour.  These  jets,  though  very  bright  at  their  point 
of  emanation  from  the  nucleus,  faded  rapidly  away,  and 
became  diffused  as  they  expanded  into  the  coma,  at  the  same 
time  curving  backwards  as  streams  of  steam  or  smoke  would 
do,  if  thrown  out  from  narrow  orifices,  more  or  less  obliquely 
in  opposition  to  a  powerful  wind,  against  which  they  wero 
unable  to  make  way,  and,  ultimately  yielding  to  its  force,  so 
as  to  be  drifted  back  and  confounded  in  a  vaporous  train, 
following  the  general  direction  of  the  current.  * 

(570.)  Reflecting  on  these  phenomena,  and  carefully  con- 
sidering the  evidence  afforded  by  the  numerous  and  elabo- 
rately executed  drawings  which  have  been  placed  on  record 
by  observers,  it  seems  impossible  to  avoid  the  following  con- 
clusions. 1st.  That  the  matter  of  the  nucleus  of  a  comet  ia 
powerfully  excited  and  dilated  into  a  vaporous  state  by  the 
action  of  the  sun's  rays,  escaping  in  streams  and  jets  at  those 
points  of  its  surface  which  oppose  the  least  resistance,  and  in 
all  probability  throwing  that  surface  or  the  nucleus  itself  into 
irregular  motions  by  its  reaction  in  the  act  of  so  escaping, 
and  thus  altering  its  direction. 

2dly.  That  this  process  chiefly  takes  place  in  that  portion 
of  the  nucleus  which  is  turned  towards  the  sun  ;  the  vapour 
escaping  chiefly  in  that  direction. 

3dly.  That  when  so  emitted,  it  is  prevented  from  proceeding 
in  the  direction  originally  impressed  upon  it,  by  some  force 
directed  from  the  sun,  drifting  it  back  and  carrying  it  out  to 
vast  distances  behind  the  nucleus,  forming  the  tail  or  so  much 
of  the  tail  as  can  be  considered  as  consisting  of  material 
substance. 

4thly.  That  this  force,  whatever  its  nature,  acts  unequally 

*  On  this  point  Schwabe's  and  Besscl's  drawings  urc  very  express  and  un- 
equivocal. Stxuvc's  attention  seems  to  have  been  more  especially  directed  to  Ui« 
Ttvutiny  cf  the  nucleus. 


halley's  comet.  383 

on  the  materials  of  the  comet,  the  greater  portion  remaining 
unvaporized,  and  a  considerable  part  of  the  vapour  actually 
produced,  remaining  in  its  neighbourhood,  forming  the  head 
and  coma. 

othly.  That  the  force  thus  acting  on  the  materials  of  the 
tail  cannot  possibly  be  identical  with  the  ordinary  gravitation 
of  matter,  being  centrifugal  or  repulsive,  as  respects  the  sun, 
and  of  an  energy  very  far  exceeding  the  gravitating  force 
towards  that  luminary.  This  will  be  evident  if  we  consider 
the  enormous  velocity  with  which  the  matter  of  the  tail  is 
carried  backwards,  in  opposition  both  to  the  motion  which  it 
had  as  part  of  the  nucleus,  and  to  that  which  it  acquired  in 
the  act  of  its  emission,  both  which  motions  have  to  be 
destroyed  in  the  first  instance,  before  any  movement  in  the 
contrary  direction  can  be  impressed. 

6thly.  That  unless  the  matter  of  the  tail  thus  repelled 
from  the  sun  be  retained  by  a  peculiar  and  highly  energetic 
attraction  to  the  nucleus,  differing  from  and  exceptional  to 
the  ordinary  power  of  gravitation,  it  must  leave  the  nucleus 
altogether ;  being  in  effect  carried  far  beyond  the  coercive 
power  of  so  feeble  a  gravitating  force  as  would  correspond  to 
the  minute  mass  of  the  nucleus ;  and  it  is  therefore  very 
conceivable  that  a  comet  may  lose,  at  every  approach  to  the 
sun,  a  portion  of  that  peculiar  matter,  whatever  it  be,  on  which 
the  production  of  its  tail  depends,  the  remainder  being  of 
course  less  excitable  by  the  solar  action,  and  more  impassive 
to  his  rays,  and  therefore,  pro  tanto,  more  nearly  approximating 
to  the  nature  of  the  planetary  bodieg. 

7thly.  That  considering  the  immense  distances  to  which 
at  least  some  portion  of  the  matter  of  the  tail  is  carried  from 
the  comet,  and  the  way  in  which  it  is  dispersed  through  the 
system,  it  is  quite  inconceivable  that  the  whole  of  that  matter 
should  be  reabsorbed — that  therefore  it  must  lose  during  its 
perihelion  passage  some  portion  of  its  matter,  and  if,  as  would 
seem  far  from  improbable,  that  matter  should  be  of  a  nature 
to  be  repelled  from,  not  attracted  by,  the  sun,  the  remainder 
will,  by  consequence,  be,  pro  quantitate  inertia,  more  energeti- 
cally attracted  to  the  sun  than  the  mean  of  both.     If  then 


384  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

the  orbit  be  elliptic,  it  will  perform  each  successive  revolution 
in  a  shorter  time  than  the  preceding,  until,  at  length,  the 
whole  of  the  repulsive  matter  is  got  rid  of.  —  But  to  return 
to  the  comet  of  Halley. 

(571.)  After  the  perihelion  passage,  the  comet  was  lost 
sight  of  for  upwards  of  two  months,  and  at  its  reappearance 
(on  the  24th  of  January,  1836)  presented  itself  under  quite 
a  different  aspect,  having  in  the  interval  evidently  undergone 
some  great  physical  change  which  had  operated  an  entire 
transformation  in  its  appearance.  It  no  longer  presented 
any  vestige  of  tail,  but  appeared  to  the  naked  eye  as  a  hazy 
star  of  about  the  fourth  or  fifth  magnitude,  and  in  powerful 
telescopes  as  a  small,  round,  well  defined  disc,  rather  more 
than  2'  in  diameter,  surrounded  with  a  nebulous  chevelure  or 
coma  of  much  greater  extent.  Within  the  disc,  and  somewhat 
excentrically  situated,  a  minute  but  bright  nucleus  appeared, 
from  which  extended  towards  the  posterior  edge  of  the  disc 
(or  that  remote  from  the  sun)  a  short  vivid  luminous  ray. 
(See  fig.  1.  pi.  VI.)  As  the  comet  receded  from  the  sun, 
the  coma  speedily  disappeared,  as  if  absorbed  into  the  disc, 
which,  on  the  other  hand,  increased  continually  in  dimensions, 
and  that  with  such  rapidity,  that  in  the  week  elapsed  from 
January  25th  to  February  1st  (calculating  from  micrometrical 
measures,  and  from  the  known  distance  of  the  comet  from 
the  earth  on  those  days),  the  actual  volume  or  real  solid  con- 
tent of  the  illuminated  space  had  dilated  in  the  ratio  of 
upwards  of  40  to  1.*  And  so  it  continued  to  swell  out  with 
undiminished  rapidity,  until,  from  this  cause  alone,  it  ceased 
to  be  visible,  the  illumination  becoming  fainter  as  the  dmut- 
nitude  increased;  till  at  length  the  outline  became  undistin- 
guishable  from  simple  want  of  light  to  trace  it.      While  (his 

*  On  the  night  of  the  22nd  of  January  the  comet  wasohserved  by  M.  Bogus- 
iawski  of  Breslau,  as  a  star  of  the  sixth  magnitude,  a  bright  concentrated  point, 
which  showed  no  disc  with  a  magnifying  power  of  140,  and  that  it  actually  was 
the  comet  he  assured  himself  by  turning  his  telescope  the  next  night  on  the  place 
where  he  saw  it  (which  he  had  carefully  noted  and  registered).  It  was  gone. 
From  his  observation  it  appears  then  that  at  17h  50m  M.T.  at  Breslau,  Jan.  22. 
the  diameter  of  the  nucleus  witb  its  envelope  was  rigorously  nil,  at  which 
moment)  within  an  hour  one  way  or  the  other,  the  process  of  formation  of  the 
envelope  must  have  commenced 


GREAT   COMET   OF    1680.  385 

increase  of  dimension  proceeded,  the  form  of  the  disc  passed, 
by  gradual  and  successive  additions  to  its  length  in  the  direc- 
tion opposite  to  the  sun,  to  that  of  a  paraboloid,  as  represented 
in^  fig.  1,  plate  VI.,  the  anterior  curved  portion  preserving  its 
planetary  sharpness,  but  the  base  being  faint  and  ill-defined. 
It  is  evident  that  had  this  process  continued  with  sufficient 
light  to  render  the  result  visible,  a  tail  would  have  been, 
ultimately  reproduced ;  but  the  increase  of  dimension  being 
accompanied  with  diminution  of  brightness,  a  short,  im- 
perfect, and  as  it  were  rudimentary  tail  only  was  formed, 
visible  as  such  for  a  few  nights  to  the  naked  eye,  or  in  a  low 
magnifying  telescope,  and  that  only  when  the  comet  itself 
had  begun  to  fade  away  by  reason  of  its  increasing  distance. 

(572.)  While  the  parabolic  envelope  was  thus  continually 
dilating  and  growing  fainter,  the  nucleus  underwent  little 
change,  but  the  ray  proceeding  from  it  increased  in  length 
and  comparative  brightness,  preserving  all  the  time  its  direc- 
tion along  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid,  and  offering  none 
of  those  irregular  and  capricious  phenomena  which  charac- 
terized the  jets  of  light  emitted  anteriorly,  previous  to  the 
perihelion.  If  the  office  of  those  jets  was  to  feed  the  tail, 
the  converse  office  of  conducting  back  its  successively  con- 
densing matter  to  the  nucleus  would  seem  to  be  that  of 
the  ray  now  in  question.  By  degrees  this  also  faded,  and 
the  last  appearance  presented  by  the  comet  was  that  which 
it  offered  at  its  first  appearance  in  August;  viz.  that  of  a 
small  round  nebula  with  a  bright  point  in  or  near  the  center. 

(573.)  Besides  the  comet  of  Halley,  several  other  of  the 
great  comets  recorded  in  history  have  been  surmised  with 
more  or  less  probability  to  return  periodically,  and  therefore 
to  move  in  elongated  ellipses  around  the  sun.  Such  is  the 
great  comet  of  1680,  whose  period  is  estimated  at  575  years, 
and  which  has  been  considered,  with  at  least  a  high  prima  facie 
probability,  to  be  identical  with  a  magnificent  comet  observed 
at  Constantinople  and  in  Palestine,  and  referred  by  con- 
temporary historians,  both  European  and  Chinese,  to  the  year 
a.d.  1106;  with  that  of  A.D.  531,  which  was  seen  at  noon- 
day close  to  the  sun ;  with  the  comet  of  43  B.  Cm  already 

c  c 


386  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

epoken  of  as  having  appeared  after  the  death  of  Caesar,  and 
which  was  also  observed  in  the  day-time ;  and  finally  with 
two  other  comets,  mention  of  which  occurs  in  the  Sibylline 
Oracles,  and  in  a  passage  of  Homer,  and  which  are  referred,  as 
well  as  the  obscurity  of  chronology  and  the  indications  them- 
selves will  allow,  to  the  years  618  and  1194  B.C.  It  is  to 
the  assumed  near  approach  of  this  comet  to  the  earth  about 
the  time  of  the  Deluge,  that  Whiston  ascribed  that  over- 
whelming tide-wave  to  whose  agency  his  wild  fancy  ascribed 
that  great  catastrophe — a  speculation,  it  is  needless  to  remark, 
purely  visionary.  These  coincidences  of  time  are  certainly 
remarkable,  especially  when  it  is  considered  how  very  rare 
are  the  appearances  of  comets  of  this  class.  Professor  Encke, 
however,  has  discussed,  with  all  possible  care,  the  observations 
recorded  of  the  comet  of  1680,  taking  into  consideration  the 
perturbations  of  the  planets  (which  are  of  trifling  importance, 
by  reason  of  the  great  inclination  of  its  orbit  to  the  ecliptic), 
and  his  calculations  show  that  no  elliptic  orbit,  with  such  a 
period  as  575  years,  is  competent  to  represent  them  within 
any  probable  or  even  possible  limits  of  error,  the  most  pro- 
bable period  assigned  by  them  being  8814  Julian  years. 
Independent  of  this  consideration,  there  are  circumstances 
recorded  of  the  comet  of  a.  d.  1106  incompatible  with  its 
motion  in  any  orbit  identical  with  that  of  the  comet  of  1680, 
so  that  the  idea  of  referring  all  these  phenomena  to  one  and 
the  same  comet,  however  seducing,  must  be  relinquished. 

(574.)  Another  great  comet,  whose  return  about  the  year 
1848  had  been  considered  by  more  than  one  eminent  authority 
in  this  department  of  astronomy  *  highly  probable,  is  that 
of  1556,  to  the  terror  of  whose  aspect  some  historians  have 
attributed  the  abdication  of  the  Emperur  Charles  V.  This 
comet  is  supposed  to  be  identical  with  that  of  1264,  men- 
tioned by  many  historians  as  a  great  comet,  and  observed 
also  in  China,  —  the  conclusion  in  this  case  resting  upon 
the  coincidence  of  elements  calculated  on  the  observations, 
euch   as   they   are,   which   have   been   recorded.      On    the 

*   l'ingre,  Cometographie,  i.  411  ;  Lalande,   Astr.  3185 


COMETS    OF    SHORT    PRKIOD. — EKCKE'S  COMET.      387 

Bobject  of  this  coincidence  Mr.  Hind  has  entered  into 
many  elaborate  calculations,  the  result  of  which  is  strongly 
in  favour  of  the  supposed  identity.  This  probability  is 
farther  increased  by  the  fact  of  a  comet,  with  a  tail  of  40° 
and  a  head  bright  enough  to  be  visible  after  sunrise,  having 
appeared  in  a.  d.  975 :  and  of  two  others  having  been  re- 
corded by  the  Chinese  annalists  in  A.  d.  395  and  104.  It 
is  true  that  if  these  be  the  same,  the  mean  period  would 
be  somewhat  short  of  292  years.  But  the  effect  of  planetary 
perturbation  might  reconcile  even  greater  differences,  and 
though  up  to  the  time  of  our  writing  (1858)  no  such  comet 
has  yet  been  observed,  two  or  three  years  must  yet  elapse, 
in  the  opinion  of  those  best  competent  to  judge,  before  its 
return  must  be  considered  hopeless. 

(575.)  In  1661,  1532,  1402,  1145,  891,  and  243  great 
comets  appeared — that  of  1402  being  bright  enough  to  be 
seen  at  noon  day.  A  period  of  129  years  would  conciliate 
all  these  appearances,  and  should  have  brought  back  the 
comet  in  1789  or  1790  (other  circumstances  agreeing). 
That  no  such  comet  was  observed  about  that  time  is  no 
proof  that  it  did  not  return,  since,  owing  to  the  situation 
of  its  orbit,  had  the  perihelion  passage  taken  place  in  July 
it  might  have  escaped  observation.  Mechain,  indeed,  from  an 
elaborate  discussion  of  the  observations  of  1532  and  1661,  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  these  comets  were  not  the  same ;  but 
the  elements  assigned  by  Olbers  to  the  earlier  of  them  differ 
so  widely  from  those  of  Mechain  for  the  same  comet  on  the 
one  hand,  and  agree  so  well  with  those  of  the  last  named 
astronomer  for  the  other  *,  that  we  are  perhaps  justified  in 
regarding  the  question  as  not  yet  set  at  rest. 

(576.)  We  come  now,  however,  to  a  class  of  comets  of 
short  period,  respecting  whose  return  there  is  no  doubt,  in- 
asmuch as  two  at  least  of  them  have  been  identified  as 
having  performed  successive  revolutions  round  the  sun ;  have 
had  their  return  predicted  already  several  times ;  and  have 
on  each  occasion  scrupulously  kept  to  their  appointments. 

*  See  Schumacher's  Catal.  Astron.  Abhandl.  L 
C  C  2 


388  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

The  first  of  these  is  the  comet  of  Encke,  so  called  from 
Professor  Encke  of  Berlin,  who  first  ascertained  its  periodical 
return.  It  revolves  in  an  ellipse  of  great  eccentricity  (though 
not  comparable  to  that  of  Halley's),  the  plane  of  which  is  in- 
clined at  an  angle  of  about  1 3°  22'  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic, 
and  in  the  short  period  of  121 1  days,  or  about  3£  years.  Thia 
remarkable  discovery  was  made  on  the  occasion  of  its  fourth 
recorded  appearance,  in  1819.  From  the  ellipse  then  cal- 
culated by  Encke,  its  return  in  1822  was  predicted  by  him, 
and  observed  at  Paramatta,  in  New  South  Wales,  by  M. 
Riimker,  being  invisible  in  Europe :  since  which  it  has  been 
re-predicted  and  re-observed  in  all  the  principal  observatories, 
both  in  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres,  as  a  phe- 
nomenon of  regular  occurrence. 

(577.)  On  comparing  the  intervals  between  the  successive 
perihelion  passages  of  this  comet,  after  allowing  in  the  most 
careful  and  exact  manner  for  all  the  disturbances  due  to  the 
actions  of  the  planets,  a  very  singular  fact  has  come  to  light, 
viz.  that  the  periods  are  continually  diminishing,  or,  in  other 
words,  the  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  or  the  major  axis  of 
the  ellipse,  dwindling  by  slow  and  regular  degrees  at  the  rate 
of  about  0d#  1 1 1 76  per  revolution.  This  is  evidently  the  effect 
which  would  be  produced  by  a  resistance  experienced  by  the 
comet  from  a  very  rare  ethereal  medium  pervading  the  regions 
in  which  it  moves;  for  such  resistance,  by  diminishing  its 
actual  velocity,  would  diminish  also  its  centrifugal  force,  and 
thus  give  the  sun  more  power  over  it  to  draw  it  nearer. 
Accordingly  this  is  the  solution  proposed  by  Encke,  and  at 
present  generally  received.  Should  this  be  really  the  case, 
it  will,  therefore,  probably  fall  ultimately  into  the  sun,  should 
it  not  first  be  dissipated  altogether, — a  thing  no  way  improb- 
able, when  the  lightness  of  its  materials  is  considered.  The 
considerations  adduced  at  the  end  of  art.  570.  would  seem, 
however,  to  open  out  another  possible  explanation  of  the 
phenomenon  in  question,  not  necessarily  leading  to  such 
a  catastrophe. 

(578.)  By  measuring  the  apparent  magnitude  of  this  comet 
at  different  distances  from  the  sun,  and  thence,  from  a  know- 


biela's  comet.  389 

ledge  of  its  actual  distance  from  the  earth  at  the  time,  con- 
cluding its  real  volume,  it  has  been  ascertained  to  contract 
in  bulk  as  it  approaches  to,  and  to  expand  as  it  recedes 
from,  that  luminary.  M.  Valz,  who  was  the  first  to  notice 
this  fact,  accounts  for  it  by  supposing  it  to  undergo  a  real 
compression  or  condensation  of  volume  arising  from  the 
pressure  of  an  aethereal  medium  which  he  conceives  to  grow 
more  dense  in  the  sun's  neighbourhood.  But  such  an  hypo- 
thesis is  evidently  inadmissible,  since  it  would  require  us  to 
assume  the  exterior  of  the  comet  to  be  in  the  nature  of  a  skin 
or  bag  impervious  to  the  compressing  medium.  The  pha> 
nomenon  is  analogous  to  the  increase  of  dimension  above 
described,  as  observed  in  the  comet  of  Halley,  when  in  the 
act  of  receding  from  the  sun,  and  is  doubtless  referable  to  a 
similar  cause,  viz.  the  alternate  conversion  of  evaporable 
matter  into  the  states  of  visible  cloud  and  invisible  gas,  by 
the  alternating  action  of  cold  and  heat.  This  comet  has  no 
tail,  but  offers  to  the  view  only  a  small  ill-defined  nucleus, 
excentrically  situated  within  a  more  or  less  elongated  oval 
mass  of  vapours,  being  nearest  to  that  vertex  which  is 
towards  the  sun. 

(579.)  Another  comet  of  short  period  is  that  of  Biela,  so 
called  from  M.  Biela,  of  Josephstadt,  who  first  arrived  at  this 
interesting  conclusion  on  the  occasion  of  its  appearance  in 
1826.  It  is  considered  to  be  identical  with  comets  which 
appeared  in  1772,  1805,  &c,  and  describes  its  very  excentric 
ellipse  about  the  sun  in  2410  days,  or  about  6|  years  ;  and  in 
a  plane  inclined  12°  34'  to  the  ecliptic.  It  appeared  again, 
according  to  the  prediction,  in  1832  and  in  1846.  Its  orbit, 
by  a  remarkable  coincidence,  very  nearly  intersects  that  of  the 
earth  ;  and  had  the  latter,  at  the  time  of  its  passage  in  1832, 
been  a  month  in  advance  of  its  actual  place,  it  would  have 
passed  through  the  comet,  —  a  singular  rencontre,  perhaps 
not  unattended  with  danger.* 

•  Should  calculation  establish  the  fact  of  a  resistance  experienced  alio  by  this* 
comet,  the  subject  of  periodical  comets  will  assume  an  extraordinary  degree  ..< 
iiUreat.     It  cannot  be  doubted  that   many   more   will  bo   discovered,  and  \>j 


390  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(580.)  This  comet  is  small  and  hardly  visible  to  the  naked 
eye,  even  when  brightest.  Nevertheless,  as  if  to  make  up 
for  its  seeming  insignificance  by  the  interest  attaching  to  it 
in  a  physical  point  of  view,  it  exhibited  at  its  appearance 
in  1846,  a  phenomenon  which  struck  every  astronomer  with 
amazement,  as  a  thing  without  previous  example  in  the 
history  of  our  system.*  It  was  actually  seen  to  separate 
itself  into  two  distinct  comets,  which,  after  thus  parting 
company,  continued  to  journey  along  amicably  through  an  arc 
of  upwards  of  70°  of  their  apparent  orbit,  keeping  all  the 
while  within  the  same  field  of  view  of  the  telescope  pointed 
towards  them.  The  first  indication  of  something  unusual 
being  about  to  take  place  might  be,  perhaps,  referred  to  the 
1 9th  of  December,  1845,  when  the  comet  appeared  to  Mr.  Hind 
pear-shaped,  the  nebulosity  being  unduly  elongated  in  a  di- 
rection inclining  northward.  But  on  the  1 3th  of  January, 
at  Washington  in  America,  and  on  the  loth  and  subsequently 
in  every  part  of  Europe,  it  was  distinctly  seen  to  have  become 
double ;  a  very  small  and  faint  cometic  body,  having  a  nucleus 
of  its  own,  being  observed  appended  to  it,  at  a  distance  of  about 
2'  (in  arc)  from  its  center,  and  in  a  direction  forming  an  angle 
of  about  328°  with  the  meridian,  running  northwards  from  the 
principal  or  original  comet  (see  art.  204).  From  this  time  the 
separation  of  the  two  comets  went  on  progressively,  though 
slowly.     On  the  30th  of  January,  the  apparent  distance  of 


tlieir  resistance  questions  will  come  to  be  decided,  such  as  the  following: — What 
is  the  law  of  density  of  the  resisting  medium  which  surrounds  the  sun?  Is  it 
at  rest  or  in  motion?  If  the  latter,  in  what  direction  does  it  move?  Circularly 
round  the  sun,  or  traversing  space  ?  If  circularly,  in  what  plane  ?  It  is  obvious 
that  a  circular  or  vorticose  motion  of  the  ether  would  accelerate  some  comets  and 
retard  others,  according  as  their  revolution  was,  relative  to  such  motion,  direct 
or  retrograde.  Supposing  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun  to  be  filled  with  a 
material  fluid,  it  is  not  conceivable  that  the  circulation  of  the  planets  in  it  for 
ages  should  not  have  impressed  upon  it  some  degree  of  rotation  in  their  own 
direction.  And  this  may  preserve  them  from  the  extreme  effects  of  accumulated 
resistance.  —  Note  to  edition  of  1 833. 

*  Perhaps  not  quite  so.  To  say  nothing  of  a  singular  surmise  of  Kepler, 
that  two  great  comets  seen  at  once  in  1618,  might  be  a  single  comet  separated  into 
two,  the  following  passage  of  Hevelius  cited  by  M.  Littrow  (Nachr.  564.)  doe* 
really  seem  to  refer  to  some  phenomenon  bearing  at  least  a  certain  analogy  to  it. 
"  In  ipso  disco,"  he  says  (Cometographia,  p.  326.)  "  quutuor  vel  qvitique  corpus 
cula  quaedam  sivc  nucleus  reliquo  corpore  aliquanto  densiores  ostendebat." 


DOUBLE   COMET   OF    BIELA.  391 

the  nucleus  had  increased  to  3',  on  the  7th  of  February  to  4  , 
and  on  the  13th  to  5',  and  so  on,  until  on  the  5th  of  March 
the  two  comets  were  separated  by  an  interval  of  9'  19",  the 
apparent  direction  of  the  line  of  junction  all  the  while  varying 
but  little  with  respect  to  the  parallel.* 

(581.)During  this  separation,  very  remarkable  changes  were 
observed  to  be  going  on,  both  in  the  original  comet  and  its 
companion.  Both  had  nuclei,  both  had  short  tails,  parallel  in 
direction,  and  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  junction,  but 
whereas  at  its  first  observation  on  January  13th,  the  new  comet 
was  extremely  small  and  faint  in  comparison  with  the  old,  the 
difference  both  in  point  of  light  and  apparent  magnitude  di- 
minished. On  the  10th  of  February,  they  were  nearly  equal, 
although  the  day  before  the  moonlight  had  effaced  the  new  one, 
leaving  the  other  bright  enough  to  be  well  observed.  On  the 
14th  and  16th,  however,  the  new  comet  had  gained  a  decided 
superiority  of  light  over  the  old,  presenting  at  the  same  time 
a  sharp  and  starlike  nucleus,  compared  by  Lieut.  Maury  to  a 
diamond  spark.  But  this  state  of  things  was  not  to  continue. 
Already,  on  the  18th,  the  old  comet  had  regained  its  supe- 
riority, being  nearly  twice  as  bright  as  its  companion,  and 
offering  an  unusually  bright  and  starlike  nucleus.  From 
this  period  the  new  companion  began  to  fade  away,  but 
continued  visible  up  to  the  15th  of  March.  On  the  24th  the 
comet  appeared  again  single,  and  on  the  22nd  of  April  both 
had  disappeared. 

(582.)  While  this  singular  interchange  of  light  was  going 
forwards,  indications  of  some  sort  of  communication  between 
the  comets  were  exhibited.  The  new  or  companion  comet, 
besides  its  tail,  extending  in  a  direction  parallel  to  that  of  the 
other,  threw  out  a  faint  arc  of  light  which  extended  as  a 
kind  of  bridge  from  the  one  to  the  other ;  and  after  the  resto- 
ration of  the  original  comet  to  its  former  preeminence,  it,  on 
its  part,  threw  forth  additional  rays,  so  as  to  present  {on  the 
22nd  and   23rd  February)  the  appearance  of  a  comet  with 

*  By  far  the  greater  portion  of  this  inerease  of  apparent  distance  was  due  t» 
the  comet's  increased  proximity  to  the  earth.  Tbe  real  increase  reduced  to  a- 
distance  =  1  of  the  comet  was  at  the  rate  of  about  3"  per  diem. 


392  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

three  faint  tails  forming  angles  of  about  120°  with  each  other, 
one  of  which  extended  towards  its  companion. 

(583.)  Professor  Plantamour,  director  of  the  observatory 
of  Geneva,  having  investigated  the  orbits  of  both  these 
comets  as  separate  and  independent  bodies,  from  the  exten- 
sive and  careful  series  of  observations  made  upon  them,  ar- 
rived at  the  conclusion  that  the  increase  of  distance  between 
the  two  nuclei,  at  least  during  the  interval  from  February  1  Oth 
to  March  22nd,  was  simply  apparent,  being  due  to  the  va- 
riation of  distance  from  the  earth,  and  to  the  angle  under 
which  their  line  of  junction  presented  itself  to  the  visual  ray; 
the  real  distance  during  all  that  interval  (neglecting  small 
fractions)  having  been  on  an  average  about  thirty-nine  times 
the  semi-diameter  of  the  earth,  or  less  than  two-thirds  the 
distance  of  the  moon  from  its  center.  From  this  it  would 
appear  that  already,  at  this  distance,  the  two  bodies  had 
ceased  to  exercise  any  perceptible  amount  of  perturbative 
gravitation  on  each  other ;  as,  indeed,  from  the  probable 
minuteness  of  cometary  masses  we  might  reasonably  expect. 
It  may  well  be  supposed  that  astronomers  would  not  allow 
so  remarkable  a  duplication  to  pass  unwatched  at  the  next 
return  of  the  comet  in  1852.  In  August  and  September  of 
that  year  both  nuclei  were  observed  by  Professor  Challis  at 
Cambridge,  Sccchi  at  Rome,  and  M.  Struve,  presenting,  as 
regards  direction,  the  same  relative  situation  with  regard  to 
each  other,  so  that  we  have  here  the  historical  proof  of  a  per- 
manent addition  to  the  members  of  our  system  taking  place 
at  a  definite  instant  under  our  very  eye.     (PI.  VI.,  fig.  2.) 

(584.)  A  third  comet,  of  short  period,  has  been  added  to 
our  list  by  M.  Faye,  of  the  observatory  of  Paris,  who  de- 
tected it  on  the  22d  of  November,  1843.  A  very  few  ob- 
servations sufficed  to  show  that  no  parabola  would  satisfy 
the  conditions  of  its  motion,  and  that  to  represent  them  com- 
pletely, it  was  necessary  to  assign  to  it  an  elliptic  orbit  of 
very  moderate  excentricity.     The  calculations  of  M.  Nicolai, 

•  According  to  the  elements  of  this  comet  deduced  by  M.  Santini,  taking 
into  account  all  planetary  perturbation,  its  two  heads  ought  to  have  passed 
their  perihelion  on  January  27  and  January  29,  respectively.  1866.  Its  ap- 
pearance was  anxiously  and  persever'  igly  looked  for,  but  in  vain  ;  nor  has  anj 
probable  cause  been  assigned  for  its  disappearance  ! 


EFFECT  OF  PLANETARY  TERTUKBATION.     393 

subsequently  revised. and  slightly  corrected  by  M.  Leverrier. 
have  shown  that  an  almost  perfect  representation  of  its  mo- 
tions during  the  whole  period  of  its  visibility  would  be 
afforded  by  assuming  it  to  revolve  in  a  period  of  2717d,68 
(or  somewhat  less  than  7£  years)  in  an  ellipse  whose  excen- 
tricity  is  0*55596,  and  inclination  to  the  ecliptic  11°  22'  31"; 
and  taking  this  for  a  basis  of  further  calculation,  and  by 
means  of  these  data  and  the  other  elements  of  the  orbit 
estimating  the  effect  of  planetary  perturbation  during  the 
revolution  now  in  progress,  he  fixed  its  next  return-  to  the 
perihelion  for  the  3d  of  April,  1851,  with  a  probable  error 
one  way  or  other  not  exceeding  one  or  two  days.  This 
prediction  has  been  strikingly  verified.  It  actually  passed 
its  perihelion  on  the  1st  of  April,  1851,  having  been  re- 
discovered by  Professor  Challis  at  Cambridge  in  November, 
1850,  and  followed  beyond  the  perihelion  by  M.  Otto  Struvo 
up  to  March  4.  1851. 

(585.)  The  effect  of  planetary  perturbation  on  the  motion 
of  comets  has  been  more  than  once  alluded  to  in  what  has 
been  above  said.  Without  going  minutely  into  this  part  of 
the  subject,  which  will  be  better  understood  after  the  perusal 
of  a  subsequent  chapter,  it  must  be  obvious,  that  as  the 
orbits  of  comets  are  very  excentric,  and  inclined  in  all  sorts 
of  angles  to  the  ecliptic,  they  must,  in  many  instances,  if  not 
actually  intersect,  at  least  pass  very  near  to  the  orbits  of 
some  of  the  planets.  We  have  already  seen,  for  instance, 
that  the  orbit  of  Biela's  comet  so  nearly  intersects  that  of  the 
earth,  that  an  actual  collision  is  not  impossible,  and  indeed 
(supposing  neither  orbit  variable)  must  in  all  likelihood  happen 
IB  the  lapse  of  some  millions  of  years.  Neither  are  instances 
wanting  of  comets  having  actually  approached  the  earth 
within  comparatively  short  distances,  as  that  of  1770,  which 
on  the  1st  of  July  of  that  year  was  within  little  more  than 
seven  times  the  moon's  distance.  The  same  comet,  in  1767, 
passed  Jupiter  at  a  distance  only  one  58th  of  the  radius 
of  that  planet's  orbit,  and  it  has  been  rendered  extremely 
probable  that  it  is  to  the  disturbance  its  former  orbit  under- 
went during  that  appulse  that  we  owe  its  appearance  within 


394  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

our  own  range  of  vision.  This  exceedingly  remarkable 
comet  was  found  by  Lexell  to  describe  an  elliptic  orbit  with 
an  excentricity  of  0*7858,  with  a  periodic  time  of  about 
five  years  and  a  half,  and  in  a  plane  only  1°  34'  inclined  to 
the  ecliptic,  having  passed  its  perihelion  on  the  13th  of 
August,  1770.  Its  return  of  course  was  eagerly  expected, 
but  in  vain,  for  the  comet  has  never  been  certainly  identified 
with  any  comet  since  seen.  Its  observation  on  its  first  re- 
turn in  1776  was  rendered  impossible  by  the  relative  situ- 
ations of  the  perihelion  and  of  the  earth  at  the  time,  and 
before  another  revolution  could  be  accomplished  (as  has  since 
been  ascertained),  viz.  about  the  23d  of  August,  1779,  by 
a  singular  coincidence  it  again  approached  Jupiter  within 
one  491st  part  of  its  distance  from  the  sun,  being  nearer  to 
that  planet  by  one  fifth  than  its  fourth  satellite.  No  wonder, 
therefore,  that  the  planet's  attraction  (which  at  that  distance 
would  exceed  that  of  the  sun  in  the  proportion  of  at  least 
200  to  1)  should  completely  alter  the  orbit  and  deflect  it 
into  a  curve,  not  one  of  whose  elements  would  have  the  least 
resemblance  to  those  of  the  ellipse  of  Lexell.  It  is  worthy 
of  notice  that  by  this  rencontre  with  the  system  of  Jupiter's 
satellites,  none  of  their  motions  suffered  any  perceptible  de- 
rangement,—  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  smallness  of  its  mass. 
Jupiter,  indeed,  seems,  by  some  strange  fatality,  to  be  con- 
stantly in  the  way  of  comets,  and  to  serve  as  a  perpetual 
stumbling-block  to  them. 

(586.)  On  the  22nd  of  August,  1844,  Signor  de  Vico, 
director  of  the  observatory  of  the  Collegio  Romano,  discovered 
a  comet,  the  motions  of  which,  a  very  few  observations 
sufficed  to  show,  deviated  remarkably  from  a  parabolic  orbit. 
It  passed  its  perihelion  on  the  2nd  of  September,  and  con- 
tinued to  be  observed  until  the  7th  of  December.  Elliptic 
elements  of  this  comet,  agreeing  remarkably  well  with  each 
other,  were  accordingly  calculated  by  several  astronomers, 
from  which  it  appears  that  the  period  of  revolution  is  about 
1990  days,  or  5\  (5-4357)  years,  which  (supposing  its  orbit 
undisturbed  in  the  interim)  would  bring  it  back  to  the  peri- 
helion on  or  about  the  13th   of  January,  1850,  on  which 


COMETS    OF    DE   VICO    AND   BRORSEN. 


395 


occasion,  however,  by  reason  of  its  unfavourable  situation 
with  respect  to  the  sun  and  earth,  it  could  not  be  observed. 
As  the  assemblage  and  comparison  of  these  elements,  thus 
computed  independently,  will  serve  better,  perhaps,  than  any 
other  example,  to  afford  the  student  an  idea  of  the  degree  of 
arithmetical  certainty  capable  of  being  attained  in  this  branch 
of  astronomy,  difficult  and  complex  as  the  calculations  them- 
selves are,  and  liable  to  error  as  individual  observations  of  a 
body  so  ill  defined  as  the  smaller  comets  are  for  the  most 
part,  we  shall  present  them  in  a  tabular  form,  as  on  the  next 
page :  the  elements  being  as  usual ;  the  time  of  perihelion 
passage,  longitude  of  the  perihelion,  that  of  the  ascending 
node,  the  inclination  to  the  ecliptic,  semiaxis  and  excentricity 
of  the  orbit,  and  the  periodic  time. 

This  comet,  when  brightest,  was  visible  to  the  naked  eye, 
and  had  a  small  tail.  It  is  especially  interesting  to  astrono- 
mers from  the  circumstance  of  its  having  been  rendered  ex- 
ceedingly probable  by  the  researches  of  M.  Leverrier,  that  i ; 
is  identical  with  one  which  appeared  in  1678  with  some  of  its 
elements  considerably  changed  by  perturbation.  This  comet 
is  further  remarkable,  from  having  been  concluded  by 
Messrs.  Laugier  and  Mauvais,  to  be  identical  with  the  comet 
of  1585  observed  by  Tycho  Brahe,  and  possibly  also  with 
those  of  1743,  1766,  and  1819. 

(587.)  Elliptic  elements  have  in  like  manner  been  assigned 
to  the  comet  discovered  by  M.  Brorsen,  on  the  26  th  of 
February,  1846,  which,  like  that  last  mentioned,  speedily 
after  its  discovery  began  to  show  evident  symptoms  of 
deviation  from  a  parabola.  These  elements,  with  the  names 
of  their  respective  calculators,  are  as  follow.  The  dates  are 
for  February  1846,  Greenwich  time. 


Computed  by 

Brunnow. 

Hind. 

— i 

Van  Wlllingen 
and  De  Haan. 

Perihelion  passage 

Long,  of  Perihelion 

Long,  of  SI            - 

Inclination 

Semiaxis      ... 

Excentricity 

Period  (tlays) 

25d-  37794 

1 16°  28' 34"  0 

102     39  36-  5 

30     55     6'S 

S'15021 

0-79363 

201'.' 

25d- 33109 

116°  28'  17"-8 

102    45  20-9 

30    49     3-  6 

3- 12292 

079771 

2016 

25d-  02227 

116°  23'  52"- 9 

103    31    25- 7 

SO     SO  30- 2 

2-87052 

0-77313         1 

1776 

396 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


o 
o 

H 
W 

3 
o 
o 

o 
o 

« 
w 

H 
H 

O 

OQ 

H 

W 

w 
w 


<p 

d 

OS 

1-4 

eo 

B 

02 

CN 

O 

•* 

6 

CS 

6 
»o 

cs 

<N 

oo 
oo 

co 

o 

3 
E 

s 

1^ 

© 

eo 

© 

co 

IH 

CQ 

ao 

C* 

o 

co 

CO 

6 

— 

<N 

CO 

CN 

-* 

eo 

>o 

tf 

d 

6 

00 

co 

00 

6 

00 

<N 

co 

¥ 

02 

Tj< 

^ 

«o 

CO 

eo 

A 

eo 

V 

CO 

00 

CN 

3 
J3 

■*"" 
■* 

CO 
W3 

co 

<* 

<N 

o 

o 
co 

OS 

WJ 

oo 

o 

<N 

eo 

eo 
co 

CI 

eo 

6 

"? 

d 

»c 

«5 

CO 

6 

o 

CO 

co 

aJ 

02 

-& 

so 

Tj< 

ot 

eo 

ha 

t— 

OS 

h» 

cs 

00 

CO 

cs 

os 
o 

CO 

OS 

00 

cV 

0 
CN 

CO 

CO 

CO 

<N 

CO 

6 

OS 

gl 

fc 

CN 

-3 

d 

6 

o 

T 
■* 

»b 

OS 

Pi 

H 

8 

02 

eo 

>o 

|-H 

^ 

co 

00 

g 

3 

>c 

os 

00 

*5 

•* 

■ 

*3 

Tf 

CN 

*# 

«o 

T1 

CO 

(N 

O 

00 

•a 

0 
<N 

2* 

eo 

CO 

co 

<N 

CO 

6 

i-. 

d 

CO 

(N 

b 

I— 1 

i— i 

CN 

CO 

"3 

02 

^< 

'J* 

CM 

CO 

•o 

co 
•o 

o 

00 

£ 

5" 

O 

cm 

CO 

<N 

»o 

00 

O 

co 

os 

oo 

C* 

0 

CN 

t 

co 

CO 

co 

<N 

eb 

6 

«p 

3 

"o 

Q 

2 

d 
co 

^ 

»Q 

00 

00 
CN 

eo 

CO 

02 

00 

as 

CN 

eo 

0 
<N 

00 

CO 
CO 

»o 

00 

cs 
o 

CO 

CO 

6 

5* 

OS 

os 

CD 

. 

d 

o 

co 

>-. 

co 

H3 

£. 

to 

*c 

1 

cs 

CO 

o? 

8 

«M 

C-, 

/»*\ 

3 

a. 

a 
6 

a. 

a 
o 

O 
CO 

o 
co 

T3 

d 
.2 

1 

to 

!2 

CO 

,4 

d 
'to 

3 

'to 

".3 

- 

a 

"1 

a 

? 

*n 

s 

c 

^ 

i 

B 

•c 

<o 

9 

o 

V 

J> 

■ 

£ 

J 

h. 

h5 

02 

W 

& 

GREAT    COMET    OF    1843.  397 

This  comet  is  faint,  and  presents  nothing  remarkable  in 
its  appearance.  Its  chief  interest  arises  from  the  great 
similiarity  of  its  parabolic  elements  to  those  of  the  comet  of 
1532,  the  place  of  the  perihelion  and  node,  and  the  inclination 
of  the  orbit,  being  almost  identical. 

(588.)  Elliptic  elements  have  also  been  calculated  by 
M.  D' Arrest,  for  a  comet  discovered  by  M.  Peters,  on  the 
26th  of  June  1846,  which  go  to  assign  it  a  place  among  the 
comets  of  short  period,  viz.  5804d,3,  or  very  nearly  16  years. 
The  excentricity  of  the  orbit  is  0*75672,  its  semiaxis  6*32066, 
and  the  inclination  of  its  plane  to  that  of  the  ecliptic 
31°  2'  14".  This  comet  passed  its  perihelion  on  the  1st  of 
June  1846. 

(589.)  By  far  the  most  remarkable  comet,  however,  which 
has  been  seen  during  the  present  century,  is  that  which 
appeared  in  the  spring  of  1843,  and  whose  tail  became 
visible  in  the  twilight  of  the  17th  of  March  in  England  as 
a  great  beam  of  nebulous  light,  extending  from  a  point 
above  the  western  horizon,  through  the  stars  of  Eridanus  and 
Lepus,  under  the  belt  of  Orion.  This  situation  was  low  and 
unfavourable;  and  it  was  not  till  the  19th  that  the  head  was 
seen,  and  then  only  as  a  faint  and  ill-defined  nebula,  very 
rapidly  fading  on  subsequent  nights.  In  more  southern 
latitudes,  however,  not  only  the  tail  was  seen,  as  a  magnificent 
train  of  light  extending  50°  or  60°  in  length;  but  the  head 
and  nucleus  appeared  with  extraordinary  splendour,  exciting 
in  every  country  where  it  was  seen  the  greatest  astonish- 
ment and  admiration.  Indeed,  all  descriptions  agree  in  repre- 
senting it  as  a  stupendous  spectacle,  such  as  in  superstitious 
ages  would  not  fail  to  have  carried  terror  into  every  bosom. 
In  tropical  latitudes  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  the  tail 
appeared  on  the  3d  of  March,  and  in  Van  Diemen's  Land,  so 
early  as  the  1st,  the  comet  having  passed  its  perihelion  on 
the  27th  of  February.  Already  on  the  3d  the  head  was  so 
far  disengaged  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  sun,  as  to 
appear  for  a  short  time  above  the  horizon  after  sunset.  On 
this  day  when  viewed  through  a  46-inch  achromatic 
telescope  it  presented   a  planetary   disc,  from   which   ray <t 


398  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

emerged  in  the  direction  of  the  tail.  The  tail  was  double, 
consisting  of  two  principal  lateral  streamers,  making  a  very 
small  angle  with  each  other,  and  divided  by  a  comparatively 
dark  line,  of  the  estimated  length  of  25°,  prolonged  however 
on  the  north  side  by  a  divergent  streamer,  making  an  angle 
of  5°  or  6°  with  the  general  direction  of  the  axis,  and  trace- 
able as  far  as  65°  from  the  head.  A  similar  though  fainter 
lateral  prolongation  appeared  on  the  south  side.  A  fine 
drawing  of  it  of  this  date  by  C.  P.  Smyth,  Esq.  of  the 
Royal  Observatory,  C.  Gr.  H.,  represents  it  as  highly  sym- 
metrical, and  gives  the  idea  of  a  vivid  cone  of  light,  with  a 
dark  axis,  and  nearly  rectilinear  sides,  inclosed  in  a  fainter 
cone,  the  sides  of  which  curve  slightly  outwards.  The  light 
of  the  nucleus  at  this  period  is  compared  to  that  of  a  star  of 
the  first  or  second  magnitude ;  and  on  the  1 1th,  of  the  third  ; 
from  which  time  it  degraded  in  light  so  rapidly,  that  on  the 
19th  it  was  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  the  tail  all  the 
while  continuing  brilliantly  visible,  though  much  more  so  at 
a  distance  from  the  nucleus,  with  which,  indeed,  its  connexion 
was  not  then  obvious  to  the  unassisted  sight  —  a  singular 
feature  in  the  history  of  this  body.  The  tail,  subsequent  to 
the  3d,  was  generally  speaking  a  single  straight  or  slightly 
curved  broad  band  of  light,  but  on  the  11th  it  is  recorded  by 
Mr.  Clerihew,  who  observed  it  at  Calcutta,  to  have  shot  forth 
a  lateral  tail  nearly  twice  as  long  as  the  regular  one  but 
fainter,  and  making  an  angle  of  about  18°  with  its  direction 
on  the  southern  side.  The  projection  of  this  ray  (which 
was  not  seen  either  before  or  after  the  day  in  question)  to 
so  enormous  a  length,  (nearly  100°)  in  a  single  day  conveys  an 
impression  of  the  intensity  of  the  forces  acting  to  produce 
such  a  velocity  of  material  transfer  through  space,  such  as 
no  other  natural  phenomenon  is  capable  of  exciting.  It  is 
clear  that  if  we  have  to  deal  here  with  matter,  such  as  we 
conceive  it,  viz.  possessing  inertia  —  at  all,  it  must  be  under 
the  dominion  of  forces  incomparably  more  energetic  than 
gravitation,  and  quite  of  a  different  nature. 

(590.)  There  is  abundant  evidence  of  the  comet  in  question 
having  been  seen  in  full  daylight,  and  in  the  sun's  immediate 
vicinity.     It  was  so  seen  on  the  28th  of  February,  the  day 


GREAT    COMET    OF    1843. 


399 


after  its  perihelion  passage,  by  every  person  on  board  the 
H.  E.  I.  C.  S.  Owen  Glendower,  then  off  the  Cape,  as  a  short 
dagger-like  object  close  to  the  sun  a  little  before  sunset.  On 
the  same  day  at  3b  6m  p.  m.,  and  consequently  in  full  sun- 
shine, the  distance  of  the  nucleus  from  the  sun  was  actually 
measured  with  a  sextant  by  Mr.  Clarke  of  Portland,  United 
States,  the  distance  center  from  center  being  then  only 
3°  50'  43".  He  describes  it  in  the  following  terms :  "  The 
nucleus  and  also  every  part  of  the  tail  were  as  well  defined 
as  the  moon  on  a  clear  day.  The  nucleus  and  tail  bore  the 
same  appearance,  and  resembled  a  perfectly  pure  white  cloud 
without  any  variation,  except  a  slight  change  near  the  head, 
just  sufficient  to  distinguish  the  nucleus  from  the  tail  at  that 
point."  The  denseness  of  the  nucleus  was  so  considerable, 
that  Mr.  Clarke  had  no  doubt  it  might  have  been  visible  upon 
the  sun's  disc,  had  it  passed  between  that  and  the  observer. 
The  length  of  the  visible  tail  resulting  from  these  measures 
was  59'  or  not  far  from  double  the  apparent  diameter  of  the 
eun ;  and  as  we  shall  presently  see  that  on  the  day  in  question 
the  distance  from  the  earth  of  the  sun  and  comet  must  have 
been  very  nearly  equal,  this  gives  us  about  1700000  miles 
for  the  linear  dimensions  of  this  the  densest  portion  of  that 
appendage,  making  no  allowance  for  the  foreshortening, 
which  at  that  time  was  very  considerable. 

(591.)  The  elements  of  this  comet  are  among  the  most  re- 
markable of  any  recorded.  They  have  been  calculated  by 
se^eral  eminent  astronomers,  among  whose  results  we  shall 
specify  only  those  which  agree  best ;  the  earlier  attempts  to 
compute  its  path  having  been  rendered  uncertain  by  the  dif- 
ficulty attending  exact  observations  of  it  in  the  first  part  of 
its  visible  career.  The  following  are  those  which  seem 
entitled  to  most  confidence :  — 


Encke. 

Plantamour. 

Knorre. 

Nicolai. 

Peters. 

Perihel  pan.,  1843 

Feb., mean  time  at 

Greenwich.  - 

274  45096 

VJiAlSV, 

274  39638 

27*43023 

274-41319 

Long,  of  perihel. 

279°  V  30" 

278°  1 8'  8" 

278°  28*  25,/ 

278°  3fi'  33" 

279°  59'  7" 

Long  of  U    - 

4  IS  5 

0  51  4 

1  4*  3 

1  37  55 

3  55  17 

Inclination    • 

3ft  12  38 

35  8  56 

35  35  29 

35  36  29 

35  15  42 

Perihel.  dist. 

0-00*22 

0O0581 

000579 

0-00558 

0<IO42H 

Motion 

Retrograde. 

Retrograde. 

Retrograde. 

I!.  IrogradK 

Retrograde. 

400  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(592.)  What  renders  these  elements  so  remarkable  is  the 
emallness  of  the  perihelion  distance.  Of  all  comets  which 
have  been  recorded  this  has  made  the  nearest  approach  to  the 
sun.  The  sun's  radius  being  the  sine  of  his  apparent 
semi-diameter  (16'  1")  to  a  radius  equal  to  the  earth's  mean 
distance  =1,  is  represented  on  that  scale  by  0'00466,  which 
falls  short  of  0*00534,  the  perihelion  distance  found  by  taking 
a  mean  of  all  the  foregoing  results,  by  only  0*00068,  or  about 
one  seventh  of  its  whole  magnitude.  The  comet,  therefore, 
approached  the  luminous  surface  of  the  sun  within  about  a 
seventh  part  of  the  sun's  radius !  It  is  worth  while  to  con- 
sider what  is  implied  in  such  a  fact.  In  the  first  place,  the 
intensity  both  of  the  light  and  radiant  heat  of  the  sun  at 
different  distances  from  that  luminary  increase  proportionally 
to  the  spherical  area  of  the  portion  of  the  visible  hemisphere 
covered  by  the  sun's  disc.  This  disc,  in  the  case  of  the  earth, 
at  its  mean  distance  has  an  angular  diameter  of  32'  1"*1.  At 
our  comet  in  perihelio  the  apparent  angular  diameter  of  the  sun 
was  no  less  than  121°  32'.  The  ratio  of  the  spherical  surfaces 
thus  occupied  (as  appears  from  spherical  geometry)  is  that  of 
the  squares  of  the  sines  of  the  fourth  parts  of  these  angles  to 
each  other,  or  that  of  1  :  47042.  And  in  this  proportion  are 
to  each  other  the  amounts  of  light  and  heat  thrown  by  the  sun 
on  an  equal  area  of  exposed  surface  on  our  earth  and  at  the 
comet  in  equal  instants  of  time.  Let  any  one  imagine  the 
effect  of  so  fierce  a  glare  as  that  of  47000  suns  such  as  we 
experience  the  warmth  of,  on  the  materials  of  which  the 
earth's  surface  is  composed.  To  form  some  practical  idea  of 
it  we  may  compare  it  with  what  is  recorded  of  Parker's  great 
lens,  whose  diameter  was  32£  inches,  and  focal  length  six  feet 
eight  inches.  The  effect  of  this,  supposing  all  the  light  and 
heat  transmitted,  and  the  focal  concentration  perfect,  (both 
conditions  very  imperfectly  satisfied,)  would  be  to  enlarge  the 
sun's  effective  angular  diameter  to  23°  26',  which,  compared 
on  the  same  principle  with  a  sun  of  32'  in  diameter,  would 
give  a  multiplier  of  only  1915,  and  when  increased  sevenfold 
(as  was  usually  the  case),  by  interposing  a  concentrating  lens, 
13405  instead  of  47000.     The  heat  to  which  the  comet  was 


GREAT    COMET    OF    1843.  401 

subjected  therefore  surpassed  that  in  the  focus  of  the  lens  in 
question,  on  the  lowest  calculation,  in  the  proportion  of  24£ 
to  1  without,  or  3^  to  1  with  the  concentrating  lens.  Yet 
thut  lens,  so  used,  melted  carnelian,  agate,  and  rock  crystal ! 

(593.)  To  this  extremity  of  heat  however  the  comet  was 
exposed  but  for  a  short  time.  Its  actual  velocity  in  perihelio 
was  no  less  than  366  miles  per  second,  and  the  whole  of  that 
segment  of  its  orbit  above  (i.e.  north  of)  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  in  which,  as  will  appear  from  a  consideration  of 
the  elements,  the  perihelion  was  situated,  was  described  in 
little  more  than  two  hours ;  such  being  the  whole  duration 
of  the  time  from  the  ascending  to  the  descending  node,  or  in 
which  the  comet  had  north  latitude.  Arrived  at  the  descend- 
ing node,  its  distance  from  the  sun  would  be  already  doubled, 
and  the  radiation  reduced  to  one  fourth  of  its  maximum 
amount.  The  comet  of  1680,  whose  perihelion  distance  was 
0'0062,  and  which  therefore  approached  the  sun's  surface 
within  one  third  part  of  his  radius  (more  than  double  the 
distance  of  the  comet  now  in  question)  was  computed  by 
Newton  to  have  been  subjected  to  an  intensity  of  heat  2000 
times  that  of  red-hot  iron, — a  term  of  comparison  indeed  of  a 
very  vague  description,  and  which  modern  thermotics  do  not 
recognize  as  affording  a  legitimate  measure  of  radiant  heat.* 

(594.)  Although  some  of  the  observations  of  this  comet 
were  vague  and  inaccurate,  yet  there  seem  good  grounds 
for  believing  that  its  whole  course  cannot  be  reconciled 
with  a  parabolic  orbit,  and  that  it  really  describes  an  ellipse. 
Previous  to  any  calculation,  it  was  remarked  that  in  the 
year  1668  the  tail  of  an  immense  comet  was  seen  in  Lisbon, 
at  Bologna,  in  Brazil,  and  elsewhere,  occupying  nearly  the 
same  situation  among  the  stars,  and  at  the  same  season  of 
the  year,  viz.  on  the  5th  of  March  and  the  following  days. 

*  A  transit  of  the  comet  of  1843  over  the  sun's  disc  must  proh.ililv  huve  taken 
place  shortly  after  its  passage  through  its  descending  node.  It  is  greatly  to  be 
regretted  that  so  interesting  a  phenomenon  should  have  passed  unobserved. 
Whether  it  be  possible  that  some  offset  of  its  tail,  darted  off  so  late  as  the  7th 
of  March,  when  the  comet  was  already  far  south  of  the  ecliptic,  should  have 
crossed  that  plane  and  been  seen  near  the  Pleiades,  may  be  doubted.  Certain  it 
is,  that  on  the  evening  of  that  day,  a  decidedly  cometic  ray  was  seen  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  those  stars  In  Mr  Nasmvth.  (Ast.  Soe  Notices, 
vol.   v.  p,  'J70. ; 

I)  b 


\(V2  OUTLINES    <>I     ASTRONOMY. 

Its  brightness  was  such  that  its  reflected  trace  was  easily 
distinguished  on  the  sea.  The  head,  when  it  at  length  came 
in  sight,  was  comparatively  faint  and  scarce  discernible.  No 
precise  observations  were  made  of  this  comet,  but  the  singula! 
coincidence  of  situation,  season  of  the  year,  and  physical 
resemblance,  excited  a  strong  suspicion  of  the  identity  of  the 
two  bodies,  implying  a  period  of  175  years  within  a  day  or 
two  more  or  less.  This  suspicion  has  been  converted  almost 
into  a  certainty  by  a  careful  examination  of  what  is  recorded 
of  the  older  comet.  Locating  on  a  celestial  chart  the  situa- 
tion of  the  head,  concluded  from  the  direction  and  appearance 
of  the  tail,  when  only  that  was  seen,  and  its  visible  place, 
when  mentioned,  according  to  the  descriptions  given,  it  has 
been  found  practicable  to  derive  a  rough  orbit  from  the 
course  thus  laid  down:  and  this  agrees  in  all  its  features 
so  well  with  that  of  the  modern  comet  as  nearly  to  remove 
all  doubt  on  the  subject.  Comets,  moreover,  are  recorded  to 
have  been  seen  in  a.  d.  268,  442-3,  791,  968,  1143,  1317. 
1494,  which  may  have  been  returns  of  this,  since  the  period 
above-mentioned  would  bring  round  its  appearance  to  the 
years  268,  443,  618,  793,  968,  1143,  1318,  and  1493,  and  a 
certain  latitude  must  always  be  allowed  for  unknown  pertur- 
bations. 

(595.)  But  this  is  not  the  only  comet  on  record  whose 
identity  with  the  comet  of  '43  has  been  maintained.  In 
1689  a  comet  bearing  a  considerable  resemblance  to  it  was 
observed  from  the  8th  to  the  23d  of  December,  and  from 
the  few  and  rudely  observed  places  recorded,  its  elements  had 
been  calculated  by  Pingre,  one  of  the  most  diligent  enquirers 
into  this  part  of  astronomy.*  From  these  it  appears  that 
the  perihelion  distance  of  that  comet  was  very  remarkably 
small,  and  a  sufficient  though  indeed  rough  coincidence  in  the 
places  of  the  perihelion  and  node  tended  to  corroborate  the 
suspicion.  But  the  inclination  (69°)  assigned  to  it  by  Pingre 
appeared  conclusive  against  it.  On  recomputing  the  elements, 
however,  from  his  data,  Professor  Pierce  has  assigned  to  that 
comet    an   inclination   widely  differing   from   Pingrc's,    viz, 

*  Author  of  the  "  Cometofrraphie,"  a  work  indispensable  to  all  who  would 
ttudy  this  interesting  department  of  the  science. 


GREAT    COMET    OF    1843.  403 

30°  4'  *,  and  quite  within  reasonable  limits  or  resemblance. 
But  how  does  this  agree  with  the  longer  period  of  175  years 
before  assigned?  To  reconcile  this  we  must  suppose  that 
these  175  years  comprise  at  least  eight  returns  of  the  comet, 
and  that  in  effect  a  mean  period  of  21y,875  must  be  allowed 
for  its  return.  Now  it  is  worth  remarking  that  this  period 
calculated  backwards  from  1843*156  will  bring  us  upon  a  series 
of  years  remarkable  for  the  appearance  of  great  comets,  many 
of  which,  as  well  as  the  imperfect  descriptions  we  have  or? 
their  appearance  and  situation  in  the  heavens,  offer  at  least 
no  obvious  contradiction  to  the  supposition  of  their  identity 
with  this.  Besides  those  already  mentioned  as  indicated  by 
the  period  of  175  years,  we  may  specify  as  probable  or 
possible  intermediate  returns,  those  of  the  comets  of  1733?  f, 
1689  above-mentioned,  1559?,  1537$,  1515 §,  1471,  1426, 
1405-6,  1383,  1301,  1340 1|,  1296,  1274,  12301,  1208, 
1098,  1056,  1034, 101 2**,  990? ft,  925?,  858??,  684 &  552, 
530§§,  421,  245  or  247  ||||,  180  WT,  158  Should  this  view  of 
the  subject  be  the  true  one,  we  may  expect  its  return  about 

•  United  States  Gazette,  May  29.  1843.  Considering  that  all  the  obser- 
vations lie  near  the  descending  node  of  the  orbit,  the  proximity  of  the  comet  at 
that  time  to  the  sun,  and  the  loose  nature  of  the  recorded  observations,  no 
doubt  almost  any  given  inclination  might  be  deduced  from  them.  The  true 
test  in  such  cases  is  not  to  ascend  from  the  old  incorrect  rlata  to  elements,  but 
to  descend  from  known  and  certain  elements  to  the  older  data,  and  ascertain 
whether  the  recorded  phenomena  can  be  represented  by  them  (perturbations 
included)  within  fair  limits  of  interpretation.  Such  is  the  course  pursued  by 
Clausen. 

f  P.  Passage  1733-781.  The  great  southern  comet  of  May  17th  seems  too 
early  in  the  year. 

t   P.  P.    1536906.      In  January  1537,  a  comet  was  seen  in  Pisces. 

§  P.  P.  1515-031.  A  comet  predicted  the  death  of  Ferdinand  the  Catholic 
He  died  Jan.  23.  1515. 

||  P.P.  1340*031.  Evidently  a  southern  comet,  and  a  very  proliable  appear- 
ance. 

5    P.  P.    1230-6*56,  was  perhaps  a  return  of  Halley's. 

**  P.  P.  1011-906.  In  1012,  a  very  great  comet  in  the  southern  Dart  of  the 
heavens.  "  Son  eclat  blessait  les  yeui."  (Pingre  Com£tographie,  from  whom 
all  these  recorded  appearances  are  taken.) 

■ft  P.  P.  990-031.  "  Comete  fort  epouvantable,"  tome  year  between  989  and 
998. 

ff  P.  P.  683-781.  In  684,  appeared  two  or  three  comets.  Dates  begin  to  be 
obsenri" 

§§  Two  distinct  comets  appeared  in  530  and  531,  the  former  observed  in 
China,  the  latter  in  Europe. 

HI  P.  P.  246-281  ;  both  southern  comets  of  the  Chinese  annals.  The  j/ear  of 
one  or  other  may  be  wrong. 

"H    P.  P.  180  656.    Nov.  6.  a. n.  180.    A  southern  comet  of  the  Chinese  annak 


404  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  end  of  1864  or  beginning  of  1865,  in  which  event  it  will 
be  observable  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere  both  before  and 
after  its  perihelion  passage.* 

(596.)  M.  Clausen,  from  the  assemblage  of  all  the  obser- 
vations of  this  comet  known  to  him,  has  calculated  elliptic 
elements  which  give  the  extraordinarily  short  period  of 
6*38  years.  And  in  effect  it  has  been  suggested  that  a  still 
further  subdivision  of  the  period  of  21*875  into  three  of 
7*292  years  would  reconcile  this  with  other  remarkable 
comets.  This  seems  going  too  far,  but  at  all  events  the 
possibility  of  representing  its  motions  by  so  short  an  ellipse 
will  easily  reconcile  us  to  the  admission  of  a  period  of  21 
years.  That  it  should  only  be  visible  in  certain  apparitions, 
and  not  in  others,  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the  situation 
of  its  orbit. 

(597.)  We  have  been  somewhat  diffuse  on  the  subject  of 
this  comet,  for  the  sake  of  showing  the  degree  and  kind  of 
interest  which  attaches  to  cometic  astronomy  in  the  present 
state  of  the  science.  In  fact,  there  is  no  branch  of  astronomy 
more  replete  with  interest,  and  we  may  add  more  eagerly 
pursued  at  present,  inasmuch  as  the  hold  which  exact  calcu- 
lation gives  us  on  it  may  be  regarded  as  completely  esta- 
blished ;  so  that  whatever  may  be  concluded  as  to  the  motions 
of  any  comet  which  shall  henceforward  come  to  be  observed, 
will  be  concluded  on  sure  grounds  and  with  numerical  pre- 
cision ;  while  the  improvements  which  have  been  introduced 
into  the  calculation  of  cometary  perturbation,  and  the  daily 
increasing  familiarity  of  numerous  astronomers  with  compu- 
tations of  this  nature,  enable  us  to  trace  their  past  and  future 
history  with  a  certainty,  which  at  the  commencement  of  the 
present  century  could  hardly  have  been  looked  upon  as 
attainable.  Every  comet  newly  discovered  is  at  once  sub- 
jected to  the  ordeal  of  a  most  rigorous  enquiry.  Its  elements, 
roughly  calculated  within  a  few  days  of  its  appearance,  are 
gradually  approximated   to  as  observations  accumulate,  by  a 

•  Clausen,  A«srron.  Naehr.  No.  415.  Mr.  Cooper's  remarks  on  this  comet  in 
his  Catalogue  of  Comets  (notes,  p.  xviii.)  go  to  assign  by  tar  the  greatest  freight 
of  probability  to  a  period  of  b5'V  for  this  comet. 


INTEREST    ATTACHED   TO   COMETAKY    ASTRONOMY.     405 

multitude  of  ardent  and  expert  computists.  On  the  least 
judication  of  a  deviation  from  a  parabolic  orbit,  its  elliptic 
elements  become  a  subject  of  universal  and  lively  interest  and 
discussion.  Old  records  are  ransacked,  and  old  observation!* 
reduced,  with  all  the  advantage  of  improved  data  and 
methods,  so  as  to  rescue  from  oblivion  the  orbits  of  ancient 
comets  which  present  any  similarity  to  that  of  the  new  visitor. 
The  disturbances  undergone  in  the  interval  by  the  action  of 
the  planets  are  investigated,  and  the  past,  thus  brought  into 
unbroken  connection  with  the  present,  is  made  to  afford  sub- 
stantial ground  for  prediction  of  the  future.  A  great  impulse 
meanwhile  has  been  given  of  late  years  to  the  discovery  of 
comets  by  the  establishment  in  1840*,  by  his  late  Majesty 
the  King  of  Denmark,  of  a  prize  medal  to  be  awarded  for 
every  such  discovery,  to  the  first  observer,  (the  influence  of 
which  maybe  most  unequivocally  traced  in  the  great  number 
of  these  bodies  which  every  successive  year  sees  added  to  our 
list,)  and  by  the  circulation  of  notices,  by  special  letterf,  of 
every  such  discovery  (accompanied,  when  possible,  by  an 
ephemeris),  to  all  observers  who  have  shown  that  they  take 
an  interest  in  the  enquiry,  so  as  to  ensure  the  full  and  com- 
plete observation  of  the  new  comet  so  long  as  it  remains 
within  the  reach  of  our  telescopes.  Among  the  observers 
who  have  been  most  successful  in  the  discovery  of  comets,  we 
find  no  less  than  29  discovered  by  Pons,  14  by  Messier, 
and  10  by  Mechain,  8  by  De  Vico,  8  by  MissC.  Herschel— 
who,  however,  is  not  the  only  female  observer  of  these  bodies, 
the  comet  of  1847  having  been  independently  detected  by 
two  ladies,  Miss  Maria  Mitchell,  of  Nantucket,  U.S.,  and 
Madame  Rtimker,  of  Hamburg,  the  priority  lying  with  the 
American  astronomess. 

(598.)  It  is  by  no  means  merely  as  a  subject  of  antiquarian 
interest,  or  on  account  of  the  brilliant  spectacle  which  comets 
occasionally  afford,  that  astronomers  attach  a  high  degree  of 
importance  to  all  that  regards  them.  Apart  even  from  the 
singularity  and  mystery  which  appertains  to  their  physical 

*  S«>e  the  announcement  of  this  institution  in  Astron.  Nachr.  No.  400. 

t   By  the  late  Prof.  Schumacher,  Director  of  the  Royal  Observatory  of  Alton;*. 


40G  OUTLINES    OF   A8TUONOXT. 

constitution,  they  have  become,  through  tlie  medium  of  exact 
calculation,  unexpected  instruments  of  enquiry  into  points 
connected  with  the  planetary  system  itself,  of  no  small  im- 
portance. We  have  seen  that  the  movements  of  the  comet 
Encke,  thus  minutely  and  perseveringly  traced  by  the 
eminent  astronomer  whose  name  is  used  to  distinguish  it,  has 
afforded  ground  for  believing  in  the  presence  of  a  resisting 
medium  filling  the  whole  of  our  system.  Similar  enquiries, 
prosecuted  in  the  cases  of  other  periodical  comets,  will  extend, 
confirm,  or  modify  our  conclusions  on  this  head.  The  per- 
turbations, too,  which  comets  experience  in  passing  near  any 
of  the  planets,  may  afford,  and  have  afforded,  information  as 
to  the  magnitude  of  the  disturbing  masses,  which  could  not 
well  be  otherwise  obtained.  Thus  the  approach  of  this  comet 
to  the  planet  Mercury  in  1838  afforded  an  estimation  of  the 
mass  of  that  planet  the  more  precious,  by  reason  of  the  great 
uncertainty  under  which  all  previous  determinations  of  that 
element  laboured.  Its  approach  to  the  same  planet  in  the 
year  1848  was  still  nearer.  On  the  22c1  of  November  their 
mutual  distance  was  only  fifteen  times  the  moon's  distance 
from  the  earth. 

(599.)  It  is,  however,  in  a  physical  point  of  view  that  these 
bodies  offer  the  greatest  stimulus  to  our  curiosity.  There  is, 
beyond  question,  some  profound  secret  and  mystery  of  nature 
concerned  in  the  phenomenon  of  their  tails.  Perhaps  it  is 
not  too  much  to  hope  that  future  observation,  borrowing 
every  aid  from  rational  speculation,  grounded  on  the  progress 
of  physical  science  generally,  (especially  those  branches  of  it 
which  relate  to  the  aetherial  or  imponderable  elements,)  may 
ere  long  enable  us  to  penetrate  this  mystery,  and  to  declare 
whether  it  is  really  matter  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the 
term  which  is  projected  from  their  heads  with  such  extra- 
vagant velocity,  and  if  not  impelled,  at  least  directed  in  its 
course  by  a  reference  to  the  sun,  as  its  point  of  avoidance. 
In  no  respect  is  the  question  as  to  the  materiality  of  the  tail 
more  forcibly  pressed  on  us  for  consideration,  than  in  that  of 
the  enormous  sweep  which  it  makes  round  the  sun  in  perihe- 
lio,  in  the  manner  of  a  straight  and  rigid  rod,  in  defiance  of  the 


GENERAL    REMARKS.  407 

law  of  gravitation,  nay,  even  of  the  received  laws  of  motion, 
extending  (as  we  have  seen  in  the  comets  of  1680  and  1843) 
from  near  the  sun's  surface  to  the  earth's  orbit,  yet  whirled 
round  unbroken  :  in  the  latter  case  through  an  angle  of  180° 
in  little  more  than  two  hours.  It  seems  utterly  incredible 
that  in  such  a  case  it  is  one  and  the  same  material  object 
which  is  thus  brandished.  If  there  could  be  conceived  such 
a  thing  as  a  negative  shadow,  a  momentary  impression  made 
upon  the  luminiferous  asther  behind  the  comet,  this  would 
represent  in  some  degree  the  conception  such  a  phenomenon 
irresistibly  calls  up.  But  this  is  not  all.  Even  such  an  ex- 
traordinary excitement  of  the  aether,  conceive  it  as  we  will, 
will  afford  no  account  of  the  projection  of  lateral  streamers ; 
of  the  effusion  of  light  from  the  nucleus  of  a  comet  towards 
the  sun ;  and  its  subsequent  rejection ;  of  the  irregular  and 
capricious  mode  in  which  that  effusion  has  been  seen  to  take 
place  ;  none  of  the  clear  indications  of  alternate  evaporation 
and  condensation  going  on  in  the  immense  regions  of  space 
occupied  by  the  tail  and  coma,  —  none,  in  short,  of  innu- 
merable other  facts  which  link  themselves  with  almost  equally 
irresistible  cogency  to  our  ordinary  notions  of  matter  and 
force. 

(600.)  The  great  number  of  comets  which  appear  to  move 
in  parabolic  orbits,  or  orbits  at  least  undistinguishable  from 
parabolas  during  their  description  of  that  comparatively  small 
part  within  the  range  of  their  visibility  to  us,  has  given  rise 
vo  an  impression  that  they  are  bodies  extraneous  to  our 
system,  wandering  through  space,  and  merely  yielding  a 
local  and  temporary  obedience  to  its  laws  during  their  sojourn. 
What  truth  there  may  be  in  this  view,  we  may  never  have 
satisfactory  grounds  for  deciding.  On  such  an  hypothesis, 
our  elliptic  comets  owe  their  permanent  denizenship  within 
the  sphere  of  the  sun's  predominant  attraction  to  the  action 
of  one  or  other  of  the  planets  near  which  they  may  have 
passed,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  diminish  their  velocity,  and 
render  it  compatible  with  elliptic  motion.*     A  similar  cause 

*  The  velocity  in  an  ellipse  is  always  less  than  in  a  parabola,  at  equal  dis- 
tance! from  the  sun  ;   in  an  hyperbola  al  ways  greater. 


4()»  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

acting  the  other  way,  might  with  equal  probability  give  rise 
to  a  hyperbolic  motion.  But  whereas  in  the  former  case  the 
comet  would  remain  in  the  system,  and  might  make  an  inde- 
finite number  of  revolutions,  in  the  latter  it  would  return  no 
more.  This  may  possibly  be  the  cause  of  the  exceedingly 
lure  occurrence  of  a  hyperbolic  comet  as  compared  with 
elliptic  ones. 

(601.)  All  the  planets  without  exception,  and  almost 
all  the  satellites,  circulate  in  one  direction.  Retrograde 
comets,  however,  are  of  very  common  occurrence,  which 
certainly  would  go  to  assign  them  an  exterior  or  at  least  an 
independent  origin.  Laplace,  from  a  consideration  of  all  the 
cometary  orbits  known  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  present  cen- 
tury, concluded,  that  the  mean  or  average  situation  of  the 
planes  of  all  the  cometary  orbits,  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic, 
was  so  nearly  that  of  perpendicularity,  as  to  afford  no  pre- 
sumption of  any  cause  biassing  their  directions  in  this  respect. 
Yet  we  think  it  worth  noticing  that  among  the  comets  which 
are  as  yet  known  to  describe  elliptic  orbits,  not  one  whose 
inclination  is  under  17°  is  retrograde  ;  and  that  out  of  thirty- 
six  comets  which  have  had  elliptic  elements  assigned  to  them, 
whether  of  great  or  small  excentricities,  and  without  any 
limit  of  inclination,  only  five  are  retrograde,  and  of  these, 
only  two,  viz.  Halley's  and  the  great  comet  of  1843,  can  be 
regarded  as  satisfactorily  made  out.  Finally,  of  the  125 
comets  whose  elements  are  given  in  the  collection  of  Schu- 
macher and  Olbers,  up  to  1H23,  the  number  of  retrograde 
comets  under  10°  of  inclination  is  only  2  out  of  9,  and  under 
20°,  7  out  of  23.*  A  plane  of  motion,  therefore,  nearly  co- 
incident with  the  ecliptic,  and  a  periodical  return,  are  cir- 
cumstances eminently  favourable  to  direct  revolution  in  the 
cometary  as  they  are  decisive  among  the  planetary  orbits. 
[Here  also  we  may  notice  a  very  curious  remark  of  Mr.  Hind, 
(Ast.  Nachr.  No.  724.)  respecting  periodic  comets,  viz.,  that 
so  far  as  at  present  known,  they  divide  themselves  for  the 
most  part  into  two  families, — the  one  having  periods  of  about 

*  So  in  edition  of  1850.  Sec,  however,  Appendix,  Table  IV.,  for  a  more  re- 
cent  view  of  these  statistical  particulars. 


HUm    ON    PERIODICAL   COMKTS.  409 

75  years,  corresponding  to  a  mean  distance  about  that  of  Ura- 
nus ;  the  other  corresponding  more  nearly  with  those  of  the 
asteroids,  and  with  a  mean  distance  between  these  small 
planets  and  Jupiter.  The  former  group  consists  of  four 
members,  Halley's  comet  revolving  in  76  years,  one  disco- 
vered by  Olbers  in  74,  De  Vico's  4th  comet  in  73,  and  Bror- 
een's  3d  in  75  respectively.  Examples  of  the  latter  group 
are  to  be  seen  in  App.  Table  IV.  at  the  end  of  this  volume.] 

We  may  add,  too,  a  marked  tendency  in  the  major  axes 
of  periodical  comets  to  group  themselves  about  a  certain 
determinate  direction  in  space,  that  is  to  say,  a  line  pointing 
to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  northward  to  70°  long,  and 
30c  N.  lat.  or  nearly  towards  the  star  X,  Persei  (in  the  Milky 
Way),  and  in  the  southern  to  a  point  (also  in  the  Milky  Way) 
diametrically  opposite.     (Ast.  Nachr.  No.  853.) 

(601  a.)  The  third  great  comet  of  the  present  century 
(those  of  1811  and  1843  being  the  other  two)  appeared  from 
June  2,  1858,  to  January,  1859,  being  known  as  Donati's 
comet,  from  its  first  discoverer.  Its  head  was  remarkably 
brilliant ;  and  its  tail,  like  a  vast  aigrette  or  gracefully -curved 
plume,  extended,  when  longest,  over  a  space  of  upwards  of 
30°.  Its  curvature  was  very  marked,  deflecting  towards  the 
region  quitted  by  the  comet,  as  if  left  behind  (no  proof,  as 
generally  supposed,  of  any  resistance  experienced  in  its  mo- 
tion, but  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  combination  of  its 
impulse  outwards  from  the  sun  with  the  proper  velocity  of 
the  comet  at  the  moment  of  its  emission).  The  American 
observers  speak  of  two  long,  narrow,  perfectly  straight  rays 
of  faint  light,  tangents  to  the  limiting  curves  of  the  aigrette 
at  its  quitting  the  head.  The  phaenomena  of  the  nucleus 
under  high  magnifying  powers  were  very  complex  and 
remarkable.  In  each  of  the  years  1861,  1862,  appeared 
great  comets:  that  of  1861,  through,  or  very  near  whose 
tail  the  earth  passed  on  the  30th  of  June,  was  remarkable 
for  the  great  length  and  straitness  of  one  side  of  its  tail ; 
that  of  1862  for  the  high  condensation  of  the  nucleus  and 
of  the  single  jet  issuing  from  it. 


410  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


PART  II. 

OP  THE  LUNAR  AND  PLANETARY  PERTURBATIONS. 

"  Magnus  ab  integro  saeclorum  nascitur  ordo." —  Viao.   Pollio. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

SUBJECT    PROPOUNDED.  —  PROBLEM    OP    THREE     BODIES.  SUPER* 

POSITION  OF  SMALL  MOTIONS.  —  ESTIMATION  OP  THE  DISTURBING 
FORCE. ITS  GEOMETRICAL  REPRESENTATION.  —  NUMERICAL  ES- 
TIMATION IN  PARTICULAR  CASES.  RESOLUTION  INTO  RECT- 
ANGULAR COMPONENTS.  RADIAL,  TRANSVERSAL,  AND  ORTHO- 
GONAL DISTURBING  FORCES. NORMAL  AND  TANGENTIAL.. THEIR 

CHARACTERISTIC  EFFECTS.  — EFFECTS  OF  THE  ORTHOGONAL  FORCE. 

MOTION    OF   THE     NODES. CONDITIONS    OF     THEIR    ADVANCE 

AND    RECESS.  —  CASES  OF    AN    EXTERIOR   PLANET    DISTURBED   HY 

AN  INTERIOR. THE  REVERSE  CASE. IN  EVERY  CASE  THE  NODE 

OF  THE  DISTURBED  ORBIT  RECEDES  ON  THE  PLANE  OF  THE 
DISTURBING  ON  AN  AVERAGE. — COMBINED  EFFECT  OF  MANY  SUCH 

DISTURBANCES.  MOTION  OF    THE    MOON'S  NODES. CHANGE    OF 

INCLINATION.  —  CONDITIONS   OF    ITS   INCREASE    AND   DIMINUTION. 

AVERAGE  EFFECT  IN  A  WHOLE    REVOLUTION. COMPENSATION 

IN     A    COMPLETE     REVOLUTION    OF     THE     NODES.  LAGRANGE'S 

THEOREM  OF  THE  STABILITY  OF  THE  INCLINATIONS  OF  THE  PLA- 
NETARY ORBITS.  —  CHANGE    OF    OBLIQUITY    OF    THE    ECLIPTIC. 

PRECESSION  OF  THE  EQUINOXES  EXPLAINED. NUTATION PRIN- 
CIPLE OF  FORCED  VIBRATIONS. 

(602.)  In  the  progress  of  this  work,  we  have  more  than  once 
called  the  reader's  attention  to  the  existence  of  inequalities 
in  the  lunar  and  planetary  motions  not  included  in  the 
expression  of  Kepler's  laws,  but  in  some  sort  supplementary 
to  them,  and  of  an  order  so  far  subordinate  to  those  leading 
features  of  the  celestial  movements,  as  to  require,  for  then- 
detection,  nicer  observations,  and  longer-continued  comparison 
between  facts  and  theories,  than  suffice  for  the  establishment 
and  verification  of  the  elliptic  theory.     These  inequalities 


PI  UTUUBATIONS.  4  1  I 

are  known,  in  physical  astronomy,  by  the  name  of  perturba- 
tions. They  arise,  in  the  case  of  the  primary  planets,  from 
the  mutual  gravitations  of  these  planets  towards  each  other, 
which  derange  their  elliptic  motions  round  the  sun :  and  in 
that  of  the  secondaries,  partly  from  the  mutual  gravitation  of 
the  secondaries  of  the  same  system  similarly  deranging  their 
elliptic  motions  round  their  common  primary,  and  partly  from 
the  unequal  attraction  of  the  sun  and  planets  on  them  and  on 
their  primary.  These  perturbations,  although  small,  and,  in 
most  instances,  insensible  in  short  intervals  of  time,  yet, 
when  accumulated,  as  some  of  them  may  become,  in  the 
lapse  of  ages,  alter  very  greatly  the  original  elliptic  relations, 
so  as  to  render  the  same  elements  of  the  planetary  orbits, 
which  at  one  epoch  represented  perfectly  well  their  move- 
ments, inadequate  and  unsatisfactory  after  long  intervals  of 
time. 

(603.)  When  Newton  first  reasoned  his  way  from  the 
broad  features  of  the  celestial  motions,  up  to  the  law  of 
universal  gravitation,  as  affecting  all  matter,  and  rendering 
every  particle  in  the  universe  subject  to  the  influence  of 
every  other,  he  was  not  unaware  of  the  modifications  which 
this  generalization  would  induce  upon  the  results  of  a  more 
partial  and  limited  application  of  the  same  law  to  the 
revolutions  of  the  planets  about  the  sun,  and  the  satellites 
about  their  primaries,  as  their  only  centers  of  attraction. 
So  far  from  it,  his  extraordinary  sagacity  enabled  him  to 
perceive  very  distinctly  how  several  of  the  most  important 
of  the  lunar  inequalities  take  their  origin,  in  this  more 
general  way  of  conceiving  the  agency  of  the  attractive  power, 
especially  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  nodes,  and  the  direct 
revolution  of  the  apsides  of  her  orbit.  And  if  he  did  not 
extend  his  investigations  to  the  mutual  perturbations  of  the 
planets,  it  was  not  for  want  of  perceiving  that  such  perturba- 
tions must  exist,  and  might  go  the  length  of  producing  great 
derangements  from  the  actual  state  of  the  system,  but  was 
owing  to  the  then  undeveloped  state  of  the  practical  part  of 
astronomy,  which  had  not  yet  attained  the  precision  requisite 
to  make  such  an  attempt  inviting,  or  indeed  feasible.     What 


412  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

Newton  left  undone,  however,  his  successors  have  accom- 
plished ;  and,  at  this  day,  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  assert  that 
there  is  not  a  single  perturbation,  great  or  small,  which 
observation  has  become  precise  enough  clearly  to  detect  and 
place  in  evidence  which  has  not  been  traced  up  to  its  origin 
in  the  mutual  gravitation  of  the  parts  of  our  system,  and 
minutely  accounted  for,  in  its  numerical  amount  and  value, 
by  strict  calculation  on  Newton's  principles. 

(604.)  Calculations  of  this  nature  require  a  very  high 
analysis  for  their  successful  performance,  such  as  is  far  beyond 
the  scope  and  object  of  this  work  to  attempt  exhibiting. 
The  reader  who  would  master  them  must  prepare  himself  for 
the  undertaking  by  an  extensive  course  of  preparatory  study, 
and  must  ascend  by  steps  which  we  must  not  here  even 
digress  to  point  out.  It  will  be  our  object,  in  this  chapter, 
however,  to  give  some  general  insight  into  the  nature  and 
manner  of  operation  of  the  acting  forces,  and  to  point  out 
what  are  the  circumstances  which,  in  some  cases,  give  them 
a  high  degree  of  efficiency  —  a  sort  of  purchase  on  the  balance 
of  the  system ;  while,  in  others,  with  no  less  amount  of 
intensity,  their  effective  agency  in  producing  extensive  and 
lasting  changes  is  compensated  or  rendered  abortive  ;  as  well 
as  to  explain  the  nature  of  those  admirable  results  respecting 
the  stability  of  our  system,  to  which  the  researches  of 
geometers  have  conducted  them  ;  and  which,  under  the  form 
of  mathematical  theorems  of  great  simplicity  and  elegance, 
involve  the  history  of  the  past  and  future  state  of  the  planetary 
orbits  during  ages,  of  which,  contemplating  the  subject  in  this 
point  of  view,  we  neither  perceive  the  beginning  nor  the 
end. 

(605.)  "Were  there  no  other  bodies  in  the  universe  but  the 
sun  and  one  planet,  the  latter  would  describe  an  exact  ellipse 
about  the  former  (or  both  round  their  common  center  of 
gravity),  and  continue  to  perform  its  revolutions  in  one  and 
the  same  orbit  for  ever;  but  the  moment  we  add  to  our 
combination  a  third  body,  the  attraction  of  this  will  draw 
both  the  former  bodies  out  of  their  mutual  orbits,  and,  by 
acting  on  them  unequally,  will  disturb  their  relation  to  each 


SUPERPOSITION    OF    SMALL    MOTIONS.  413 

other,  and  put  an  end  to  the  rigorous  and  mathematical 
exactness  of  their  elliptic  motions,  not  only  about  a  fixed 
point  in  space,  but  about  one  another.  From  this  way  of 
propounding  the  subject,  we  see  that  it  is  not  the  whole 
attraction  of  the  newly-introduced  body  which  produces  per- 
turbation, but  the  difference  of  its  attractions  on  the  two 
originally  present. 

(606.)  Compared  to  the  sun,  all  the  planets  are  of  extreme 
minuteness;  the  mass  of  Jupiter,  the  greatest  of  them  all, 
being  not  more  than  about  one  1 100th  part  that  of  the  sun. 
Their  attractions  on  each  other,  therefore,  are  all  very  feeble, 
compared  with  the  presiding  central  power,  and  the  effects  of 
their  disturbing  forces  are  proportionally  minute.  In  the 
case  of  the  secondaries,  the  chief  agent  by  which  their  motions 
are  deranged  is  the  sun  itself,  whose  mass  is  indeed  great, 
but  whose  disturbing  influence  is  immensely  diminished  by 
their  near  proximity  to  their  primaries,  compared  to  their 
distances  from  the  sun,  which  renders  the  difference  of 
attractions  on  both  extremely  small,  compared  to  the  whole 
amount.  In  this  case  the  greatest  part  of  the  sun's  attraction, 
viz.  that  which  is  common  to  both,  is  exerted  to  retain  both 
primary  and  secondary  in  their  common  orbit  about  itself, 
and  prevent  their  parting  company.  Only  the  small  overplus 
of  force  on  one  as  compared  with  the  other  acts  as  a 
disturbing  power.  The  mean  value  of  this  overplus,  in  the 
case  of  the  moon  disturbed  by  the  sun,  is  calculated  by 
Newton  to  amount  to  no  higher  a  fraction  than  zj~S75oJ5  °^ 
gravity  at  the  earth's  surface,  or  T|-g  of  the  principal  force 
which  retains  the  moon  in  its  orbit. 

(607.)  From  this  extreme  minuteness  of  the  intensities 
of  the  disturbing,  compared  to  the  principal  forces,  and  the 
consequent  smallness  of  their  momentary  effects,  it  happens 
that  we  can  estimate  each  of  these  effects  separately,  as  if 
the  others  did  not  take  place,  without  fear  of  inducing  error 
in  our  conclusions  beyond  the  limits  necessarily  incident  to  a 
first  approximation.  It  is  a  principle  in  mechanics,  im- 
mediately flowing  from  the  primary  relations  between  forces 
and  the  motions  they  produce,  that  when  a  number  of  very 


414  OUTLJNES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

minute  forces  act  at  once  on  a  system,  their  joint  effect  is  the 
sum  or  aggregate  of  their  separate  effects,  at  least  within 
such  limits,  that  the  original  relation  of  the  parts  of  the 
system  shall  not  have  been  materially  changed  by  their 
action.  Such  effects  supervening  on  the  greater  movements 
due  to  the  action  of  the  primary  forces  may  be  compared  to 
the  small  ripplings  caused  by  a  thousand  varying  breezes  on 
the  broad  and  regular  swell  of  a  deep  and  rolling  ocean, 
which  run  on  as  if  the  surface  were  a  plane,  and  cross  in  all 
directions  without  interfering,  each  as  if  the  other  had  no 
existence.  It  is  only  when  their  effects  become  accumulated 
ID  lapse  of  time,  so  as  to  alter  the  primary  relations  or  data 
of  the  system,  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  have  especial 
regard  to  the  changes  correspondingly  introduced  into  the 
estimation  of  their  momentary  efficiency,  by  which  the  rate 
of  the  subsequent  changes  is  affected,  and  periods  or  cycles 
of  immense  length  take  their  origin.  From  this  consideration 
arise  some  of  the  most  curious  theories  of  physical  astronomy. 

(608.)  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  in -estimating  the  disturb- 
ing influence  of  several  bodies  forming  a  system,  in  which 
one  has  a  remarkable  preponderance  over  all  the  rest,  we 
need  not  embarrass  ourselves  with  combinations  of  the  dis- 
turbing powers  one  among  another,  unless  where  immensely 
long  periods  are  concerned;  such  as  consist  of  many  hundreds 
of  revolutions  of  the  bodies  in  question  about  their  common 
center.  So  that,  in  effect,  so  far  as  we  propose  to  go  into 
its  consideration,  the  problem  of  the  investigation  of  the 
perturbations  of  a  system,  however  numerous,  constituted  as 
ours  is,  reduces  itself  to  that  of  a  system  of  three  bodies :  a 
predominant  central  body,  a  disturbing,  and  a  disturbed ;  the 
two  latter  of  which  may  exchange  denominations,  according 
as  the  motions  of  the  one  or  the  other  are  the  subject  of 
enquiry. 

(609.)  Both  the  intensity  and  direction  of  the  disturbing 
force  are  continually  varying,  according  to  the  relative  situ- 
ation of  the  disturbing  and  disturbed  body  with  respect  to 
the  sun.  If  the  attraction  of  the  disturbing  bcdv  M,  on  the 
?entral  body  S,  and  the  disturbed  body  P,  (by  wluch  desig- 


NATURE    OF    THE    DISTURBING   FORCE.  415 

nations,  for  brevity,  we  shall  hereafter  indicate  them,)  were 
equal,  and  acted  in  parallel  lines,  whatever  might  otherwise 
be  its  law  of  variation,  there  would  be  no  deviation  caused 
in  the  elliptic  motion  of  P  about  S,  or  of  each  about  the 
other.  The  case  would  be  strictly  that  of  art.  454. ;  the 
attraction  of  M,  so  circumstanced,  being  at  every  moment 
exactly  analogous  in  its  effects  to  terrestrial  gravity,  which 
acts  in  parallel  lines,  and  is  equally  intense  on  all  bodies, 
great  and  small.  But  this  is  not  the  case  of  nature.  What- 
ever is  stated  in  the  subsequent  article  to  that  last  cited,  of 
the  disturbing  effect  of  the  sun  and  moon,  is,  mutatis  mu- 
tandis, applicable  to  every  case  of  perturbation  ;  and  it  must 
be  now  our  business  to  enter,  somewhat  more  in  detail,  into 
the  general  heads  of  the  subject  there  merely  hinted  at. 

(610.)  To  obtain  clear  ideas  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
disturbing  force  produces  its  various  effects,  we  must  ascer- 
tain at  any  given  moment,  and  in  any  relative  situations  of 
the  three  bodies,  its  direction  and  intensity  as  compared  with 
the  gravitation  of  P  towards  S,  in  virtue  of  which  latter  force 
alone  P  would  describe  an  ellipse  about  S  regarded  as  fixed, 
or  rather  P  and  S  about  their  common  center  of  gravity  in 
virtue  of  their  mutual  gravitation  to  each  other.  In  the 
treatment  of  the  problem  of  three  bodies,  it  is  convenient, 
and  tends  to  clearness  of  apprehension,  to  regard  one  of  them 
as  fixed,  and  refer  the  motions  of  the  others  to  it  as  to  a  rela 
tive  center.  In  the  case  of  two  planets  disturbing  each 
other's  motions,  the  sun  is  naturally  chosen  as  this  fixed 
center ;  but  in  that  of  satellites  disturbing  each  other,  or 
disturbed  by  the  sun,  the  center  of  their  primary  is  taken  as 
their  point  of  reference,  and  the  sun  itself  is  regarded  in  the 
light  of  a  very  distant  and  massive  satellite  revolving  about 
the  primary  in  a  relative  orbit,  equal  and  similar  to  that 
which  the  primary  describes  absolutely  round  the  sun.  Thus 
the  generality  of  our  language  is  preserved,  and  when,  re- 
ferring to  any  particular  central  body,  we  speak  of  an  exterior 
and  an  interior  planet,  we  include  the  cases  in  which  the 
former  is  the  sun  and  the  latter  a  satellite  ;  as,  for  example, 
in  the  Lunar  theory      It  is  a  principle  in  dynamics,  that  the 


416  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

relative  motions  of  a  system  of  bodies  inter  se  are  no  way 
altered  by  impressing  on  all  of  them  a  common  motion  or 
motions,  or  a  common  force  or  forces  accelerating  or  retard- 
ing them  all  equally  in  common  directions,  L  e.  in  parallel  lines. 
Suppose,  therefore,  we  apply  to  all  the  three  bodies,  S,  P,  and 
M,  alike,  forces  equal  to  those  with  which  M  and  P  attract 
S,  but  in  opposite  directions.  Then  will  the  relative  motions 
both  of  M  and  P  about  S  be  unaltered ;  but  S,  being  now 
urged  by  equal  and  opposite  forces  to  and  from  both  M  and 
P,  will  remain  at  rest.  Let  us  now  consider  how  either  of 
the  other  bodies,  as  P,  stands  affected  by  these  newly -intro- 
duced forces,  in  addition  to  those  which  before  acted  on  it. 
It  is  clear  that  now  P  will  be  simultaneously  acted  on  by 
four  forces  ;  firstly,  the  attraction  of  S  in  the  direction  P  IS ; 
secondly,  an  additional  force,  in  the  same  direction,  equal  to 
its  attraction  on  S ;  thirdly,  the  attraction  of  M  in  the  direc- 
tion P  M  ;  and  fourthly,  a  force  parallel  to  M  S,  and  equal 
to  M's  attraction  on  S.  Of  these,  the  two  first,  following  the 
same  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  S  P,  may  be 
regarded  as  one  force,  precisely  as  if  the  sum  of  the  masses  of 
S  and  P  were  collected  in  S ;  and  in  virtue  of  their  joint 
action,  P  will  describe  an  ellipse  about  S,  except  in  so  far  as 
that  elliptic  motion  is  disturbed  by  the  other  two  forces. 
Thus  we  see  that  in  this  view  of  the  subject  the  relative  dis- 
turbing: force  acting  on  P  is  no  longer  the  mere  single 
attraction  of  M,  but  a  force  resulting  from  the  composition  of 
that  attraction  with  M's  attraction  on  S  transferred  to  P  in  a 
contrary  direction. 

(611.)  Let  C  P  A  be  part  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  dis- 
turbed, and  M  B  of  the  disturbing  body,  their  planes  inter- 
secting in  the  line  of  nodes  SAB,  and  having  to  each  other 
the  inclination  expressed  by  the  spherical  angle  P  Ao.  In 
M  P,  produced  if  required,  take  M  N  :  M  S ::  M  S2  :  M  P2. 
Th^n,  if  S  M  *  be  taken  to  represent,  in  quantity  and  direction, 
the  accelerative  attraction  of  M  on  S,    MS  will  represent 

•  The  reader  will  be  careful  to  observe  the  order  of  the  letters,  wnere  force* 
are  represented  by  lines.  M  S  represents  a  force  acting  from  M  toward*  ?>,  S  M 
from  8  towards  M. 


ESTIMATION    OF    THE    DISTURBING    FORCE.  417 

in  quantity  and  direction  the  new  force  applied  to  P,  parallel 
to  that  line,  and  N  M  will  represent  on  the  same  scale  the 
accelerative  attraction  of  M  on  P.  Consequently,  the  dis- 
turbing force  acting  on  P  will  be  the  resultant  of  two  forces 
applied  at  P,  represented  respectively  by  N  M  and  M  S, 


which  by  the  laws  of  dynamics  are  equivalent  to  a  single 
force  represented  in  quantity  and  direction  by  N  S,  but  having 
P  for  its  point  of  application. 

(612.)  The  line  NS,  is  easily  calculated  by  trigonometry, 
when  the  relative  situations  and  real  distances  of  the  bodies 
are  known;  and  the  force  expressed  by  that  line  is  directly 
comparable  with  the  attractive  forces  of  S  on  P  by  the  fol- 
lowing proportions,  in  which  M,  S,  represent  the  masses  of 
those  bodies  which  are  supposed  to  be  known,  and  to  which, 
at  equal  distances,  their  attractions  are  proportional :  — 
Disturbing  force  :  M's  attraction  on  S : :  N  S  :  S  M  ; 
M's  attraction  on  S  :  S's  attraction  on  M .:  M  :  S: 

S's  attraction  on  M  :  S's  attraction  on  P  ::  S  PJ  :  S  M*; 
by  compounding  which  proportions  we  collect  as  follows :  — 

Disturbing  force  :  S's  attraction  on  P  ::  M  .  N  S.  S  P2  : 
S.SM3. 

A  few  numerical  examples  are  subjoined,  exhibiting  the 
results  of  this  calculation  in  particular  cases,  chosen  so  as  to 
exemplify  its  application  under  very  various  circumstances, 

E  E 


418 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTUONOMY. 


throughout  the  planetary  system.  In  each  case  the  numbers 
set  down  express  the  proportion  in  which  the  central  force 
retaining  the  disturbed  body  in  its  elliptic  orbit  exceeds  the 
disturbing  force,  to  the  nearest  whole  number.  The  calcula- 
tion is  made  for  three  positions  of  the  disturbing  body  —  viz. 
at  its  greatest,  its  least,  and  its  mean  distance  from  the  dis- 
turbed. 


Ratio  Ht  the 

Ratio  at  the 

Katio  at  the 

Disiui  bing  Body. 

Disturbed  Body. 

greatest  Dis- 
tance :  1. 

mean  Distance. 

:  i. 

least  Distance. 
:  l. 

The  Sun 

Tlie  Moon 

90 

179 

89 

Jupiter  - 

Saturn     - 

351 

312 

128 

Jupiter  - 

The  Karth 

9.5683 

147575 

53268 

Venus    - 

The  Earth       - 

255208 

210245 

26833 

Neptune 

Uranus  - 

57  4 'JO 

56592 

5519 

Mercury 

Neptune 

845 

845 

845 

Jupiter  - 

Ceres 

6433 

6937 

1033 

i  Saturn   - 

Jupiter  - 

20248 

21579 

3065 

(613.)  If  the  orbit  of  the  disturbing  body  be  circular,  S  M 
is  invariable.  In  this  case,  N  S  will  continue  to  represent  the 
disturbing  force  on  the  same  invariable  scale,  whatever  may 
be  the  configuration  of  the  three  bodies  with  respect  to  each 
other.  If  the  orbit  of  M  be  but  little  elliptic,  the  same  will 
be  nearly  the  case.  In  what  follows  throughout  this  chapter, 
except  where  the  contrary  is  expressly  mentioned,  we  shall 
neglect  the  excentricity  of  the  disturbing  orbit. 

(614.)  If  P  be  nearer  to  M  than  S  is,  M  N  is  greater  than 
M  P,  and  N  lies  in  M  P  prolonged,  and  therefore  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  plane  of  P's  orbit  from  that  on  which  M 
is  situated.  The  force  N  S  therefore  urges  P  towards  M's 
plane,  and  towards  a  point  X,  situated  between  S  and  M,  in 
the  line  S  M.  If  the  distance  M  P  be  equal  to  M  S  as  when 
P  is  situated,  suppose,  at  D  or  E,  M  N  is  also  equal  to  M  P 
or  M  S,  so  that  N  coincides  with  P,  and  therefore  X  with  S, 
the  disturbing  forces  being  in  these  cases  directed  towards 
the  central  body.  But  if  M  P  be  greater  than  MS,  M  N  is 
less  than  M  P,  and  N  lies  between  M  and  P,  or  on  the  same 
side  of  the  plane  of  P's  orbit  that  M  is  situated  on.  The 
force  N  S,  therefore,  applied  at  P,  urges  P  towards  the  con- 
trary side  of  that  plane  towards  a  point  in  the  line  M  S  pro- 


ESTIMATION    OF    THE    DISTURBING    FOKCE. 


419 


duced.  so  that  X  now  shifts  to  the  farther  side  of  S.  In  all 
vvises,  the  disturbing  force  is  wholly  effective  in  the  plane 
M  P  S,  in  which  the  three  bodies  lie. 


It  is  very  important  for  the  student  to  fix  distinctly  and 
bear  constantly  in  his  mind  these  relations  of  the  disturbing 
agency  considered  as  a  single  unresolved  force,  since  their  re- 
collection will  preserve  him  from  many  mistakes  in  con- 
ceiving the  mutual  actions  of  the  planets,  &c.  on  each  other. 
For  example,  in  the  figures  here  referred  to,  that  of  Art.  611. 
corresponds  to  the  case  of  a  nearer  disturbed  by  a  more 
distant  body,  as  the  earth  by  Jupiter,  or  the  moon  by  the 
Sun ;  and  that  of  the  present  article  to  the  converse  case : 
as,  for  instance,  of  Mars  disturbed  by  the  earth.  Now,  in 
this  latter  class  of  cases,  whenever  M  P  is  greater  than  M  S, 
or  S  P  greater  than  2  S  M,  N  lies  on  the  same  side  of  the 
plane  of  P's  orbit  with  M,  so  that  N  S,  the  disturbing  force, 
contrary  to  what  might  at  first  be  supposed,  always  urges 
the  disturbed  planet  out  of  the  plane  of  its  orbit  towards  the 
opposite  side  to  that  on  which  the  disturbing  planet  lies.  It 
will  tend  greatly  to  give  clearness  and  definiteness  to  his 
ideas  on  the  subject,  if  he  will  trace  out  on  various  sup- 
positions as  to  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  disturbing  and 
disturbed  orbits  (supposed  to  lie  in  one  plane)  the  form  of 
the  oval  about  M  considered  as  a  fixed  point,  in  which  the 
point  N  lies  when  P  makes  a  complete  revolution  round  S. 

(615.)  Although  it  is  necessary  for  obtaining  in  the  first 

K  F.2 


420  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

instance  a  clear  conception  of  the  action  of  the  disturbing 
force,  to  consider  it  in  this  way  as  a  single  force  having  a 
definite  direction  in  space  and  a  determinate  intensity,  yet  as 
that  direction  is  continually  varying  with  the  position  of 
N  S,  both  with  respect  to  the  radii  S  P,  S  M,  the  distance 
P  M,  and  the  direction  of  P's  motion,  it  would  be  impossible, 
by  so  considering  it,  to  attain  clear  views  of  its  dynamical 
effect  after  any  considerable  lapse  of  time,  and  it  therefore 
becomes  necessary  to  resolve  it  into  other  equivalent  forces 
acting  in  such  directions  as  shall  admit  of  distinct  and  sepa- 
rate consideration.  Now  this  may  be  done  in  several  different 
modes.  First,  we  may  resolve  it  into  three  forces  acting  in 
fixed  directions  in  space  rectangular  to  one  another,  and  by 
estimating  its  effect  in  each  of  these  three  directions  sepa- 
rately, conclude  the  total  or  joint  effect.  This  is  the  mode 
of  procedure  which  affords  the  readiest  and  most  advan- 
tageous handle  to  the  problem  of  perturbations  when  taken 
up  in  all  its  generality,  and  is  accordingly  that  resorted  to  by 
geometers  of  the  modern  school  in  all  their  profound  re- 
searches on  the  subject.  Another  mode  consists  in  resolving 
it  also  into  three  rectangular  components,  not,  however,  in 
fixed  directions,  but  in  variable  ones,  viz.  in  the  directions 
of  the  lines  N  Q,  Q  L,  and  L  S,  of  which  L  S  is  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  radius  vector  S  P,  Q  L  in  a  direction  perpendiculai 
to  it,  and  in  the  plane  in  which  S  P  and  a  tangent  to  P's 
orbit  at  P  both  lie ;  and  lastly,  N  Q  in  a  direction  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  in  which  P  is  at  the  instant  moving 
about  S.  The  first  of  these  resolved  portions  we  may  term 
the  radial  component  of  the  disturbing  force,  or  simply  the 
radial  disturbing  force;  the  second  the  transversal;  and  the 
third  the  orthogonal.*  When  the  disturbed  orbit  is  one  of 
small  excentricity,the  transversal  component  acts  nearly  in  the 
direction  of  the  tangent  to  P's  orbit  at  P,  and  is  therefore 
confounded  with  that  resolved  component  which  we  shall 
presently  describe  (art.  618.)  under  the  name  of  the  tangential 

•    This  is  a  term  coined  for  the  occasion.      The  want  of  some  appellation  (m 
tr  II  component  of  the  disturbing  force  is  often  felt. 


RESOLUTION    OF    THE    DISTURBING    FORCE.  421 

force.  This  is  the  mode  of  resolving  the  disturbing  force 
followed  by  Newton  and  his  immediate  successors. 

(616.)  The  immediate  actions  of  these  components  of  the 
disturbing  force  are  evidently  independent  of  each  other, 
being  rectangular  in  their  directions;  and  they  affect  the 
movement  of  the  disturbed  body  in  modes  perfectly  distinct 
and  characteristic.  Thus,  the  radial  component,  being 
directed  to  or  from  the  central  body,  has  no  tendency  to 
disturb  either  the  plane  of  P's  orbit,  or  the  equable  descrip- 
tion of  areas  by  P  about  S,  since  the  law  of  areas  propor- 
tional to  the  times  is  not  a  character  of  the  force  of  gravity 
only,  but  holds  good  equally,  whatever  be  the  force  which 
retains  a  body  in  an  orbit,  provided  only  its  direction  is  always 
towards  a  fixed  center.*  Inasmuch,  however,  as  its  law  of 
variation  is  not  conformable  to  the  simple  law  of  gravity,  it 
alters  the  elliptic  form  of  P's  orbit,  by  directly  affecting  both 
its  curvature  and  velocity  at  every  point.  In  virtue,  there- 
fore, of  the  action  of  this  disturbing  force,  the  orbit  deviates 
from  the  elliptic  form  by  the  approach  or  recess  of  P  to  or 
from  S,  so  that  the  effect  of  the  perturbations  produced  by 
this  part  of  the  disturbing  force  falls  wholly  on  the  radius 
vector  of  the  disturbed  orbit. 

(617.)  The  transversal  disturbing  force  represented  by 
Q  L,  on  the  other  hand,  has  no  direct  action  to  draw  P  to  or 
from  S.  Its  whole  efficiency  is  directed  to  accelerate  or 
retard  P's  motion  in  a  direction  at  ri^ht  angles  to  S  P.  Now 
the  area  momentarily  described  by  P  about  S,  is,  ceteris 
■paribus,  directly  as  the  velocity  of  P  in  a  direction  perpendicular 
to  S  P.  Whatever  force,  therefore,  increases  this  transverse 
velocity  of  P,  accelerates  the  description  of  areas,  and  vice 
versa.  With  the  area  A  S  P  is  directly  connected,  by  the 
nature  of  the  ellipse,  the  angle  ASP  described  or  to  be 
described  by  P  from  a  fixed  line  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  so 
that  any  change  in  the  rate  of  description  of  areas  ultimately 
resolves  itself  into  a  change  in  the  amount  of  angular  motion 
about  S,  and  gives  rise  to  a  departure  from  the  elliptic  laws. 
Hence  arise  what  are  called   in  the  perturbational  theory 

•  New  ton,  i.  I. 


422  OUTLINES    OP    ASTUOXOMT. 

equations  (i.e.  changes  or  fluctuations  to  and  fro  about 
an  average  quantity)  of  the  mean  motion  of  the  disturbed 
body. 

(618.)  There  is  yet  another  mode  of  resolving  the  dis- 
turbing force  into  rectangular  components,  which,  though  not 
so  well  adapted  to  the  computation  of  results,  in  reducing 
to  numerical  calculation  the  motions  of  the  disturbed  body, 
is  fitted  to  afford  a  clearer  insight  into  the  nature  of  the 
modifications  which  the  form,  magnitude,  and  situation  of 
its  orbit  undergo  in  virtue  of  its  action,  and  which  we  shall 
therefore  employ  in  preference.  It  consists  in  estimating 
the  components  of  the  disturbing  force,  which  lie  in  the 
plane  of  the  orbit,  not  in  the  direction  we  have  termed 
radial  and  transversal,  i.  e.  in  that  of  the  radius  vector  P  S 
and  perpendicular  to  it,  but  in  the  direction  of  a  tangent 
to  the  orbit  at  P,  and  in  that  of  a  normal  to  the  curve, 
and  at  right  angles  to  the  tangent,  for  which  reason  these 
components  may  be  called  the  tangential  and  normal  disturbing 
forces.  When  the  orbit  of  the  disturbed  body  is  circular,  or 
nearly  so,  this  mode  of  resolution  coincides  with  or  differs  but 
little  from  the  former,  but  when  the  ellipticity  is  consider- 
able, these  directions  may  deviate  from  the  radial  and  trans- 
versal directions  to  any  extent.  As,  in  the  Newtonian  mode 
of  resolution,  the  effect  of  the  one  component  falls  wholly 
upon  the  approach  and  recess  of  the  body  P  to  the  central 
body  S,  and  of  the  other  wholly  on  the  rate  of  description  of 
areas  by  P  round  S,  so  in  this  which  we  are  now  con- 
sidering, the  direct  effect  of  the  one  component  (the  normal) 
falls  wholly  on  the  curvature  of  the  orbit  at  the  point  of  its 
action,  increasing  that  curvature  when  the  normal  force  acts 
inwards,  or  towards  the  concavity  of  the  orbit,  and  diminish- 
ing it  when  in  the  opposite  direction;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  tangential  component  is  directly  effective  on  the 
velocity  of  the  disturbed  body,  increasing  or  diminishing  it 
according  as  its  direction  conspires  with  or  opposes  its 
motion.  It  is  evident  enough  that  where  the  object  is  to 
trace  simply  the  changes  produced  by  the  disturbing  force, 
in  angle  and  distance  from  the  central  body,  the  former  mode 


EFFECTS   OF    THE    ORTHOGONAL    FORCE.  423 

of  resolution  must  have  the  advantage  in  perspicuity  of  view 
and  applicability  to  calculation.  It  is  less  obvious,  but  will 
abundantly  appear  in  the  sequel  that  the  latter  offers  pe- 
culiar advantages  in  exhibiting  to  the  eye  and  the  reason 
the  momentary  influence  of  the  disturbing  force  on  the 
elements  of  the  orbit  itself. 

(619.)  Neither  of  the  last  mentioned  pairs  of  resolved  por- 
tions of  the  disturbing  force  tends  to  draw  P  out  of  the  plane 
of  its  orbit  PSA.  But  the  remaining  or  orthogonal  por- 
tion N  Q  acts  directly  and  solely  to  produce  that  effect.  In 
consequence,  under  the  influence  of  this  force,  P  must  quit 
that  plane,  and  (the  same  cause  continuing  in  action)  must 
describe  a  curve  of  double  curvature  as  it  is  called,  no  two 
consecutive  portions  of  which  lie  in  the  same  plane  passing 
through  S.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  produce  a  continual  va- 
riation in  those  elements  of  the  orbit  of  P  on  which  the 
situation  of  its  plane  in  space  depends ;  i.  e.  on  its  inclination 
to  a  fixed  plane,  and  the  position  in  such  a  plane  of  the  node 
or  line  of  its  intersection  therewith.  As  this,  among  all  the 
various  effects  of  perturbation,  is  that  which  is  at  once  the 
most  simple  in  its  conception,  and  the  easiest  to  follow 
into  its  remoter  consequences,  we  shall  begin  with  its  ex- 
planation. 

(620)  Suppose  that  up  to  P  (Art.  611.  614.)  the  body 
were  describing  an  undisturbed  orbit  C  P.  Then  at  P  it 
would  be  moving  in  the  direction  of  a  tangent  P  R  to  the 
ellipse  P  A,  which  prolonged  will  intersect  the  plane  of  M's 
orbit  some  where  in  the  line  of  nodes,  as  at  R.  Now,  at  P, 
let  the  disturbing  force  parallel  to  N  Q  act  momentarily  on 
P ;  then  P  will  be  deflected  in  the  direction  of  that  force,  and 
instead  of  the  arc  P  p,  which  it  would  have  described  in  the 
next  instant  if  undisturbed,  will  describe  the  arc  P  g  lying  in 
the  state  of  things  represented  in  Art.  611.  below,  and  in  Art. 
614.  above,  P p  with  reference  to  the  plane  PSA.  Thus, 
by  this  action  of  the  disturbing  force,  the  plane  of  P's  orbit 
will  have  shifted  its  position  in  space  from  P  Sp  (an  elementan 
portion  of  the  old  orbit)  to  P  S  7,  one  of  the  new.  Now  the 
line  of  nodes  S  A  B  in  the  former  is  determined  by  prolonging 


424  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

Pp  into  the  tangent  P  R,  intersecting  the  plane  M  S  B  in  R, 
ami  joining  S  R.  And  in  like  manner,  if  we  prolong  P  q  into 
the  tangent  P  r,  meeting  the  same  plane  in  r,  and  join  S  r, 
this  will  be  the  new  line  of  nodes.  Thus  we  see  that,  under  the 
circumstances  expressed  in  the  former  figure,  the  momentary 
action  of  the  orthogonal  disturbing  force  will  have  caused  the 
line  of  nodes  to  retrograde  upon  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  the 
disturbing  body,  and  under  those  represented  in  the  latter 
to  advance.  And  it  is  evident  that  the  action  of  the  other 
resolved  portions  of  the  disturbing  force  will  not  in  the  least 
interfere  with  this  result,  for  neither  of  them  tends  either  to 
carry  P  out  of  its  former  plane  of  motion,  or  to  prevent  its 
quitting  it.  Their  influence  would  merely  go  to  transfer  the 
points  of  intersection  of  the  tangents  P  p  or  P  q  from  R  or  r 
to  R'  or  r',  points  nearer  to  or  farther  from  S  than  R  r,  but 
in  the  same  lines. 

(621.)  Supposing,  now,  M  to  lie  to  the  left  instead  of  the 
right  side  of  the  line  of  nodes  in  fig.  1.,  P  retaining  its  situation, 
and  M  P  being  less  than  M  S,  so  that  X  shall  still  lie  between 
M  and  S.  In  this  situation  of  things  (or  configuration,  as  it  is 
termed  of  the  three  bodies  with  respect  to  each  other),  N  will 
lie  below  the  plane  ASP,  and  the  disturbing  force  will  tend 
to  raise  the  body  P  above  the  plane,  the  resolved  orthogonal 
portion  N  Q  in  this  case  acting  upwards.  The  disturbed  arc 
P  q  will  therefore  lie  above  P  p,  and  when  prolonged  to  meet 
the  plane  MSB,  will  intersect  it  in  a  point  in  advance  of  R ; 
so  that  in  this  configuration  the  node  will  advance  upon  the 
plane  of  the  orbit  of  M,  provided  always  that  the  latter  orbit 
remains  fixed,  or,  at  least,  does  not  itself  shift  its  position 
in  such  a  direction  as  to  defeat  this  result. 

(622.)  Generally  speaking,  the  node  of  the  disturbed  orbit 
will  recede  upon  any  plane  which  we  may  consider  as  fixed* 
whenever  the  action  of  the  orthogonal  disturbing  force  tends 
to  bring  the  disturbed  body  nearer  to  that  plane ;  and  vice 
versa.  This  will  be  evident  on  a  mere  inspection  of  the 
annexed  figure,  in  which  C  A  represents  a  semicircle  of  the 
projection  of  the  fixed  plane  as  seen  from  S  on  the  sphere  of 
the  heavens,  and  C  P  A  that  of  the  plane  of  P's  undisturbed 


MOTION    OF    THE    NODES.  4'2b 

orlnt,  the  motion  of  P  being  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow, 
from  C  the  ascending,  to  A  the  descending  node.     It  w  at 


once  seen,  by  prolonging  P  q,  P  q*  into  arcs  of  great 
circles,  P  r,  P  r',  (forwards  or  backwards,  as  the  case  may 
be)  to  meet  C  A,  that  the  node  will  have  retrograded 
through  the  arc  A  r,  or  C  r,  whenever  P  q  lies  between 
C  P  A  and  C  A,  or  when  the  perturbing  force  carries  P 
towards  the  fixed  plane,  but  will  have  advanced  through  A  r1 
or  C  /  when  P  q'  lies  above  C  P  A,  or  when  the  disturbing 
impulse  has  lifted  P  above  its  old  orbit  or  away  from  the 
fixed  plane,  and  this  without  any  reference  to  whether  the  un- 
disturbed orhitual  motion  of  V  at  the  moment  is  carrying  it 
tmoards  the  plane  C  A  or  from  it,  as  in  the  two  cases 
represented  in  the  figure. 

(623.)  Let  us  now  consider  the  mutual  disturbance  of  two 
bodies  M  and  P,  in  the  various  configurations  in  which  they 
may  be  presented  to  each  other  and  to  their  common  central 
body.  And  first,  let  us  take  the  case,  as  the  simplest,  where 
the  disturbed  orbit  is  exterior  to  that  of  the  disturbing  body 
(as  in  fig.  art.  614.),  and  the  distance  between  the  orbits 
greater  than  the  semiaxis  of  the  smaller.  First,  let  both 
planets  lie  on  the  same  side  of  the  line  of  nodes.  Then  (as 
in  art.  620.)  the  direction  of  the  whole  disturbing  force,  and 
therefore  also  that  of  its  orthogonal  component,  will  be  towards 
the  opposite  side  of  the  plane  of  P's  orbit  from  that  on  which 
M  lies.  Its  eifect  therefore  will  be,  to  draw  P  out  of  its  plane 
in  a  direction  from  the  plane  of  M's  orbit,  so  that  in  this  state 
of  things  the  node  will  advance  on  the  latter  plane,  however 
P  and  M  may  be  situated  in  these  semicircumferences  of  their 
respective  orbits.  Suppose,  next,  M  transferred  to  the 
opposite  side  of  the  line  of  nodes,  then  will  the  direction  of 
its  action  on  P,  with  respect  to  the  plane  of  P's  orbit,  be 
reversed,  and  P  in  quitting  that  plane  will  now  approach  to 


426 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTKOKOMY 


instead  of  receding  from  the  plane  of  M's  orbit,  so  that  ils 
node  will  now  recede  on  that  plane. 

(624.)  Thus,  while  M  and  P  revolve  about  S,  and  in  tlie 
course  of  many  revolutions  of  each  are  presented  to  each 
other  and  to  S  in  all  possible  configurations,  the  node  of  P's 
orbit  will  always  advance  on  M's  when  both  bodies  are  on 
the  same  side  of  the  line  of  nodes,  and  recede  when  on  the 
opposite.  They  will  therefore,  on  an  average,  advance  and 
recede  during  equal  times  (supposing  the  orbits  nearly 
circular).  And,  therefore,  if  their  advance  were  at  each 
instant  of  its  duration  equally  rapid  with  their  recess  at  each 
corresponding  instant  during  that  phase  of  the  movement,  they 


would  merely  oscillate  to  and  fro  about  a  mean  position, 
without  any  permanent  motion  in  either  direction.  But  this 
is  not  the  case.  The  rapidity  of  their  recess  in  every  position 
favourable  to  recess  is  greater  than  that  of  their  advance  in 
the  corresponding  opposite  position.  To  show  this,  let  us 
consider  any  two  configurations  in  which  M's  phases  are 
diametrically  opposite,  so  that  the  triangles  PSM,  PSM', 
shall  lie  in  one  plane,  having  any  inclination  to  P's  orbit, 
according  to  the  situation  of  P.  Produce  P  8,  and  draw 
Mm,  M'm'  perpendicular  to  it,  which  will  therefore  be 
equal.  Take  M  N  :  M  S  ::  M  S2  :  M  P2,  and  M'  N'  :  M'  S 
::  M'  S2  :  M'P2:  then,  if  the  orbits  be  nearly  circles,  and 
therefore  MS  =  M'S,  N'M'  will  be  less  than  MN;  and 
therefore  (since   PM'  is    greater  than    P  M)    PN'  :  PM 


MOTION    OF    THE    NODE9.  427 

in  a  greater  ratio  than  P  N  :  PM;  and  consequently,  by 
similar  triangles,  drawing  N  n,  N'n'  perpendicular  to  PS, 
N'  n'  :  M'  m'  in  a  greater  ratio  than  N»  :  Mm,  and 
therefore  N '  n '  is  greater  than  N  n.  Now  the  piano 
PM  M'  intersects  P's  orbit  in  PS,  and  being  inclined  to 
that  orbit  at  the  same  angle  through  its  whole  extent,  if  from 
N  and  N' perpendiculars  be  conceived  let  fall  on  that  orbit, 
these  will  be  to  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  Nn,  N'  n' ; 
and  therefore  the  perpendicular  from  N'  will  he  greater  than 
that  from  N.  Now  since  by  art.  611.  N '  S  and  N  S  repre- 
sent in  quantity  and  direction  the  total  disturbing  forces  of 
M'  and  M  on  P  respectively,  therefore  these  perpendiculars 
express  (art.  615.)  the  orthogonal  disturbing  forces,  the 
former  of  which  tends  (as  above  shown)  to  make  the  nodes 
recede,  and  the  latter  to  advance  ;  and  therefore  the  prepon- 
derance in  every  such  pair  of  situations  of  M  is  in  favour  of 
a  retrograde  motion. 

(625.)  Let  us  next  consider  the  case  where  the  distance 
between  the  orbits  is  less  than  the  semiaxis  of  the  interior, 
or  in  which  the  least  distance  of  M  from  P  is  less  than  M  i>. 


Take  any  situation  of  P  with  respect  to  the  line  of  nodes 
A  C.  Then  two  points  d  and  e,  distant  by  less  than  120°, 
can  be  taken  on  the  orbit  of  M  equidistant  from  P  with  S. 
Suppose  M  to  occupy  successively  every  possible  situation  in 
its  orbit,  P  retaining  its  place  ;  —  then,  if  it  were  not  for  the 
existence  of  the  arc  de,  in  which  the  relations  of  art.  624.  are 
reversed,  it  would  appear  by  the  reasoning  of  that  article 
that  the  motion  of  the  node  is  direct  when  M  occupies  any 
part  of  the  semiorbit  F  M  B,  and  retrograde  when  it  is  in 
the  opposite,  but  that  the  retrograde  motion  on  the  whole 
would  predominate.     Much  more  then  will  it  predominate 


428  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

when  there  exists  an  arc  dMe  within  which  if  M  be  placed, 
its  action  will  produce  a  retrograde  instead  of  a  direct  motion. 
(626.)  This  supposes  that  the  arc  de  lies  wholly  in  the 
semicircle  FdB.  But  suppose  it  to  lie,  as  in  the  annexed 
figure,  partly  within  and  partly  without  th^t  circle.  The 
greater  part  dB  necessarily  lies  within  it,  and  not  only  so, 

but  within  that  portion,  the 
point  of  M's  orbit  nearest  to 
P,  in  which,  therefore,  the 
retrograding  force  has  its 
maximum,  is  situated.  Al- 
though, therefore,  in  the  por- 
tion B  e,  it  is  true,  the  retrograde  tendency  otherwise  general 
over  the  whole  of  that  semicircle  (Art.  624.)  will  be  re- 
versed, yet  the  effect  of  this  will  be  much  more  than  coun- 
terbalanced by  the  more  energetic  and  more  prolonged  re- 
trograde action  over  dB  ;  and,  therefore,  in  this  case  also, 
on  the  average  of  every  possible  situation  of  M,  the  motion 
of  the  node  will  be  retrograde. 

(627.)  Let  us  lastly  consider  an  interior  planet  disturbed  by 
an  exterior.  Take  M  D  and  M  E  (fig.  of  ;irt.  6^1.)  each  equal 
to  MS.  Then  first,  when  P  is  between  D  and  the  node  A, 
being  nearer  than  S  to  M,  the  disturbing  force  acts  towards 
M's  orbit  on  the  side  on  which  M  lies,  and  the  node  recedes.  1 1 
also  recedes  when  (M  retaining  the  same  situation)  P  is  in 
any  part  of  the  arc  E  C  from  E  to  the  other  node,  because  in 
that  situation  the  direction  of  the  disturbing  force,  it  is  true, 
is  reversed,  but  that  portion  of  P's  orbit  being  also  reversely 
situated  with  respect  to  the  plane  of  M's,  P  is  still  urged 
towards  the  latter  plane,  but  on  the  side  opposite  to  M. 
Thus,  (M  holding  its  place)  whenever  P  is  anywhere  in 
DA  or  E  C,  the  node  recedes.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
advances  whenever  P  is  between  A  and  E  or  betweeu 
C  and  D,  because,  in  these  arcs,  only  one  of  the  two  deter- 
mining elements  (viz.  the  direction  of  the  disturbing  force 
with  respect  to  the  plane  of  P's  orbit ;  and  the  situation  of 
the  one  plane  with  respect  to  the  other  as  to  above  and  below) 
has  undergone  reversal.     Now  first,  whenever  M  is  anywhere 


MOTION   OF   THE   NODE8.  429 

but  in  the  line  of  nodes,  the  sum  of  the  arcs  D  A  and  E  C 
exceeds  a  semicircle,  and  that  the  more,  the  nearer  M  is  to 
a  position  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  nodes.  Secondly, 
the  arcs  favourable  to  the  recess  of  the  node  comprehend  those 
situations  in  which  the  orthogonal  disturbing  force  is  most 
powerful,  and  vice  versd.  This  is  evident,  because  as  P 
approaches  D  or  E,  this  component  decreases,  and  vanishes 
at  those  points  (612.).  The  movement  of  the  node  itseF 
also  vanishes  when  P  comes  to  the  node,  for  although  in  this 
position  the  disturbing  orthogonal  force  neither  vanishes  nor 
changes  its  direction,  yet,  since  at  the  instant  of  P's  passing 
the  node  (A)  the  recess  of  the  node  is  changed  into  an 
advance,  it  must  necessarily  at  that  point  be  stationary.* 
Owing  to  both  these  causes,  therefore,  (that  the  node  recedes 
during  a  longer  time  than  it  advances,  and  that  a  more 
energetic  force  acting  in  its  recess  causes  it  to  recede  more 
rapidly,)  the  retrograde  motion  will  preponderate  on  the 
whole  in  each  complete  synodic  revolution  of  P.  And  it  is 
evident  that  the  reasoning  of  this  and  the  foregoing  articles, 
is  no  way  vitiated  by  a  moderate  amount  of  excentricity  in 
either  orbit. 

(628.)  It  is  therefore  a  general  proposition,  that  on  the 
average  of  each  complete  synodic  revolution,  the  node  of 
every  disturbed  planet  recedes  upon  the  orbit  of  the  disturb- 
ing one,  or  in  other  words,  that  in  every  pair  of  orbits,  the 

•  It  would  seem,  at  first  sight,  as  if  a  change  per  saltum  took  place  here,  bul 
the  continuity  of  the  node's  motion  will  be  apparent  from  an  inspection  of  the 
anmied  figure,  where  bad  is  a  portion  of  P's  disturbed  path  near  the  node  A, 


concave  towards  the  plane  G  A.  The  momentary  place  of  the  moving  node  u 
determined  by  the  intersection  of  the  tangent  b  e  with  A  G,  which  as  b  pii^s.* 
through  a  tori,  recedes  from  A  to  a,  rests  there  for  an  instant,  and  theu  aiivan-je» 
attain. 


430  OUTLINES  OP  ASTRONOMY. 

node  of  each  recedes  upon  the  other,  and  of  course  upon  any 
intermediate  plane  which  we  may  regard  as  fixed.  On  a 
plane  not  intermediate  between  them,  however,  the  node  of  one 
orbit  will  advance,  and  that  of  the  other  will  recede.  Suppose 
for  instance,  C  A  C  to  be  a  plane  intermediate  between  P  P 


and  M  M  the  two  orbits.  If  p p  and  mm  be  the  new 
positions  of  the  orbits,  the  node  of  P  on  M  will  have  receded 
from  A  to  5,  that  of  M  on  P  from  A  to  4,  that  of  P  and  M 
on  C  C  respectively  from  A  to  1  and  from  A  to  2.  But  if 
F  A  F  be  a  plane  not  intermediate,  the  node  of  M  on  that 
plane  has  receded  from  A  to  6,  but  that  of  P  will  have 
advanced  from  A  to  7.  If  the  fixed  plane  have  not  a  common 
intersection  with  those  of  both  orbits,  it  is  equally  easy  tc 
see  that  the  node  of  the  disturbed  orbit  may  either  recede  on 
both  that  plane  and  the  disturbing  orbit  or  advance  on  the 
one  and  recede  on  the  other,  according  to  the  relative  situation 
of  the  planes. 

(629.)  This  is  the  case  with  the  planetary  orbits.  They 
do  not  all  intersect  each  other  in  a  common  node.  Although 
perfectly  true,  therefore,  that  the  node  of  any  one  planet 
would  recede  on  the  orbit  of  any  and  each  other  by  the  in- 
dividual action  of  that  other,  yet,  when  all  act  together,  recess 
on  one  plane  may  be  equivalent  to  advance  on  another,  so 
that  the  motion  of  the  node  of  any  one  orbit  on  a  given  plane, 
arising  from  their  joint  action,  taking  into  account  the  different 
situations  of  all  the  planes,  becomes  a  curiously  complicated 
phenomenon  whose   law  cannot   be  very  easily  expressed  in 


MOTION   OP   THE   NODES.  431 

worrta  though  reducible  to  strict  numerical  statement,  being, 
in  ract,  a  mere  geometrical  result  of  what  is  above  shown. 

(630.)  The  nodes  of  all  the  planetary  orbits  on  the  true 
ecliptic,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  retrograde,  though  they  are 
not  all  so  on  a  fixed  plane,  such  as  we  may  conceive  to  exist 
in  the  planetary  system,  and  to  be  a  plane  of  reference 
unaffected  by  their  mutual  disturbances.  It  is,  however,  to 
the  ecliptic,  that  we  are  under  the  necessity  of  referring 
their  movements  from  our  station  in  the  system  ;  and  if  we 
would  transfer  our  ideas  to  a  fixed  plane,  it  becomes  necessary 
to  take  account  of  the  variation  of  the  ecliptic  itself,  produced 
by  the  joint  action  of  all  the  planets. 

(631.)  Owing  to  the  smallness  of  the  masses  of  the  planets, 
and  their  great  distances  from  each  other,  the  revolutions  of 
their  nodes  are  excessively  slow,  being  in  every  case  less 
than  a  single  degree  per  century,  and  in  most  cases  not 
amounting  to  half  that  quantity.  It  is  otherwise  with  the 
moon,  and  that  owing  to  two  distinct  reasons.  First,  that 
the  disturbing  force  itself  arising  from  the  sun's  action,  (as 
appears  from  the  table  given  in  art.  612.)  bears  a  much 
larger  proportion  to  the  earth's  central  attraction  on  the 
moon  than  in  the  case  of  any  planet  disturbed  by  any  other. 
And  secondly,  because  the  synodic  revolution  of  the  moon, 
within  which  the  average  is  struck,  (and  always  on  the  side 
of  recess)  is  only  29|  days,  a  period  much  shorter  than  that 
of  any  of  the  planets,  and  vastly  so  than  that  of  several 
among  them.  All  this  is  agreeable  to  what  has  already  been 
stated  (art.  407,  408.)  respecting  the  motion  of  the  moon's 
nodes,  and  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  mention  that,  when  cal- 
culated, as  it  has  been,  a  priori  from  an  exact  estimation 
of  all  the  acting  forces,  the  result  is  found  to  coincide  with 
perfect  precision  with  that  immediately  derived  from  obser- 
vation, so  that  not  a  doubt  can  subsist  as  to  this  being  the 
real  process  by  which  so  remarkable  an  effect  is  produced. 

(632.)  So  far  as  the  physical  condition  of  each  planet  is 
concerned,  it  is  evident  that  the  position  of  their  nodes  can 
be  of  little  importance.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  mutual 
inclinations  of  their  orbits  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  to 


432  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  equator  of  each.  A  variation  in  the  position  of  the 
eciiptic,  for  instance,  by  which  its  pole  should  shift  its  distance 
from  the  pole  of  the  equator,  would  disturb  our  seasone. 
Should  the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit,  for  instance,  ever  be  so 
changed  as  to  bring  the  ecliptic  to  coincide  with  the  equator, 
we  should  have  perpetual  spring  over  all  the  world ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  should  it  coincide  with  a  meridian,  the 
extremes  of  summer  and  winter  would  become  intolerable. 
The  enquiry,  then,  of  the  variations  of  inclination  of  the 
planetary  orbits  inter  se,  is  one  of  much  higher  practical 
interest  than  those  of  their  nodes. 

(633.)  Referring  to  the  figures  of  art.  610.  et  seq.,  it  is 
evident  that  the  plane  S  P  q,  in  which  the  disturbed  body 
moves  during  an  instant  of  time  from  its  quitting  P,  's 
differently  inclined  to  the  orbit  of  M,  or  to  a  fixed  plane, 
from  the  original  or  undisturbed  plane  PS/?.  The  difference 
of  absolute  position  of  these  two  planes  in  space  is  the  angle 
made  between  the  planes  PSR  and  P  S  r,  and  is  therefore 
calculable  by  spherical  trigonometry,  when  the  angle  RSr 
or  the  momentary  recess  of  the  node  is  known,  and  also 
the  inclination  of  the  planes  of  the  orbits  to  each  other. 
We  perceive,  then,  that  between  the  momentary  change  of 
inclination,  and  the  momentary  recess  of  the  node  there 
exists  an  intimate  relation,  and  that  the  research  of  the  one 
is  in  fact  bound  up  in  that  of  the  other.  This  may  be, 
perhaps,  made  clearer,  by  considering  the  orbit  of  P  to  be 
not  merely  an  imaginary  line,  but  an  actual  circle  or  elliptic 
hoop  of  some  rigid  material,  without  inertia,  on  which,  as  on 
a  wire,  the  body  P  may  slide  as  a  bead.  It  is  evident  that 
the  position  of  this  hoop  will  be  determined  at  any  instant, 
by  its  inclination  to  the  ground  plane  to  which  it  is  referred, 
and  by  the  place  of  its  intersection  therewith,  or  node.  It 
will  also  be  determined  by  the  momentary  direction  of  P's 
motion,  which  (having  no  inertia)  it  must  obey ;  and  any 
change  by  which  P  should,  in  the  next  instant,  alter  its 
orbit,  would  be  equivalent  to  a  shifting,  bodily,  of  the  whole 
hoop,  changing  at  once  its  inclination  and  nodes. 

(034.)  One    immediate    conclusion    from   what   has    been 


CHANGE    OF    INCLINATION.  433 

pointed  out  above,  is  that  where  the  orbits,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  planetary  system  and  the  moon,  are  slightly  inclined  to 
one  another,  the  momentary  variations  of  the  inclination  are 
of  an  order  much  inferior  in  magnitude  to  those  in  the  place 
of  the  node.  This  is  evident  on  a  mere  inspection  of  our 
figure,  the  angle  B,  P  r  being,  by  reason  of  the  small  in- 
clination of  the  planes  SPR  and  II  S  r,  necessarily  much 
smaller  than  the  angle  RSr.  In  proportion  as  the  planes 
of  the  orbits  are  brought  to  coincidence,  a  very  trifling 
angular  movement  of  P  p  about  P  S  as  an  axis  will  make  a 
great  variation  in  the  situation  of  the  point  r,  where  its 
prolongation  intersects  the  ground  plane. 

(635.)  Referring  to  the  figure  of  art.  622.,  we  perceive 
that  although  the  motion  of  the  node  is  retrograde  whenever 
the  momentary  disturbed  arc  P  Q  lies  between  the  planes 
C  A  and  C  G  A  of  the  two  orbits,  and  vice  versa,  indifferently 
whether  P  be  in  the  act  of  receding  from  the  plane  C  A,  as 
in  the  quadrant  C  G,  or  of  approaching  to  it,  as  in  G  A,  yet 
the  same  identity  as  to  the  character  of  the  change  does  not 
subsist  in  respect  of  the  inclination.  The  inclination  of  the 
disturbed  orbit  (t.  e.  of  its  momentary  element)  P  q  or  Yq', 
is  measured  by  the  spherical  angle  P  r  H  or  Pr'H.  Now 
in  the  quadrant  C  G,  PrH  is  less,  and  P  /  H  greater  than 
PCH;  but  in  G  A,  the  converse.  Hence  this  rule:  — 
1st.,  If  the  disturbing  force  urge  P  towards  the  plane  of 
M's  orbit,  and  the  undisturbed  motion  of  P  carry  it  also 
towards  that  plane ;  and  2dly,  if  the  disturbing  force  urge 
P  from  that  plane,  wrhile  P's  undisturbed  motion  also  carries 
it  from  it,  in  either  case  the  inclination  momentarily  in- 
creases ;  but  if,  3dly,  the  disturbing  force  act  to,  and  P's 
motion  carry  it  from — or  if  the  force  act  from,  and  the 
motion  carry  it  to,  that  plane,  the  inclination  momentarily 
diminishes.  Or  (including  ail  the  cases  under  one  alternative) 
if  the  action  of  the  disturbing  force  and  the  undisturbed 
motion  of  P  with  reference  to  the  plane  of  M's  orbit  be  of 
the  same  character,  the  inclination  increases ;  if  of  contrary 
characters,  it  diminishes. 

(636.)  To  pass  from  the  momentary  changes  wliich  take 

F  F 


434  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

place  in  the  relations  of  nature  to  the  accumulated  effect  h 
produced  in  considerable  lapses  of  time  by  the  continued 
action  of  the  same  causes,  under  circumstances  varied  by 
these  very  effects,  is  the  business  of  the  integral  calculus. 
Without  going  into  any  calculations,  however,  it  will  be 
easy  for  us  to  demonstrate  from  the  principles  above  laid 
down,  the  leading  features  of  this  part  of  the  planetary 
theory,  viz.  the  periodic  nature  of  the  change  of  the  inclina- 
tions of  two  orbits  to  each  other,  the  re-establishment  of 
their  original  values,  and  the  consequent  oscillation  of  each 
plane  about  a  certain  mean  position.  As  in  explaining  the 
motion  of  the  nodes,  we  will  commence,  as  the  simplest  case, 
with  that  of  an  exterior  planet  disturbed  by  an  interior  one 
at  less  than  half  its  distance  from  the  central  body.  Let 
A  C  A'  be  the  great  circle  of  the  heavens  into  which  M's 
orbit  seen  from  S  is  projected,  extended  into  a  straight  line, 
and  A  g  C  h  A'  the  corresponding  projection  of  the  orbit 
of  P  so  seen.  Let  M  occupy  some  fixed  situation,  suppose 
in  the  semicircle  A  C,  and  let  P  describe  a  complete  revolu- 
tion from  A  through  g  C  h  to  A'.  Then  while  it  is  between 
A  and  g  or  in  its  first  quadrant,  its  motion  is  from  the  plane 
of  M's  orbit,  and  at  the  same  time  the  orthogonal  force  acts 


t-      s      d 


from  that  plane  :  the  inclination,  therefore,  (art.  635.)  in- 
creases. In  the  second  quadrant  the  motion  of  P  is  to,  but 
the  force  continues  to  act  from,  the  plane,  and  the  inclination 
again  decreases.  A  similar  alternation  takes  place  in  its 
course  through  the  quadrants  C  h  and  h  A.  Thus  the  plane 
of  P's  orbit  oscillates  to  and  fro  about  its  mean  position  twice 
in  each  revolution  of  P.  During  this  process  if  M  held  a 
fixed  position  at  G,  the  forces  being  symmetrically  alike  on 
either  side,  the  extent  of  these  oscillations  would  be  exactly 
equal,  and  the  inclination  at  the  end  of  one  revolution  of  P 


CHANGE    OF    INCLINATION.  435 

would  revert  precisely  to  its  original  value.  But  if  M  be 
elsewhere,  this  will  not  be  the  case,  and  in  a  single  revolution 
of  P,  only  a  partial  compensation  will  be  operated,  and  an 
overplus  on  the  side,  suppose  of  diminution,  will  remain  out- 
standing. But  when  M  comes  to  M',  a  point  equidistant 
from  G  on  the  other  side,  this  effect  will  be  precisely  reversed 
(supposing  the  orbits  circular).  On  the  average  of  both 
situations,  therefore,  the  effect  will  be  the  same  as  if  M  were 
divided  into  two  equal  portions,  one  placed  at  M  and  the 
other  at  M',  which  will  annihilate  the  preponderance  in 
question  and  effect  a  perfect  restoration.  And  on  an  average 
of  all  possible  situations  of  M,  the  effect  will  in  like  manner 
be  the  same  as  if  its  mass  were  distributed  over  the  whole 
circumference  of  its  orbit,  forming  a  ring,  each  portion  of 
which  will  exactly  destroy  the  effect  of  that  similarly  situated 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  line  of  nodes. 

(637.)  The  reasoning  is  precisely  similar  for  the  more 
complicated  cases  of  arts.  (625.)  and  (627.).  Suppose  that 
owing  either  to  the  proximity  of  the  two  orbits,  (in  the  case 
of  an  exterior  disturbed  planet)  or  to  the  disturbed  orbit 
being  interior  to  the  disturbing  one,  there  were  a  larger  or 
less  portion,  d  e,  of  P's  orbit  in  which  these  relations  were 
reversed.  Let  M  be  the  position  of  M'  corresponding  to 
de,  then  taking  G  M'  =  G  M,  there  will  be  a  similar  portion 
d'  e'  bearing  precisely  the  same  reversed  relation  to  M',  and 
therefore,  the  actions  of  M'  M,  will  equally  neutralize  each 
other  in  this  as  in  the  former  state  of  things. 

(638.)  To  operate  a  complete  and  rigorous  compensation, 
however,  it  is  necessary  that  M  should  be  presented  to  P  in 
every  possible  configuration,  not  only  with  respect  to  P  itself, 
but  to  the  line  of  nodes,  to  the  position  of  which  line  the 
whole  reasoning  bears  reference.  In  the  case  of  the  moon  for 
example,  the  disturbed  body  (the  moon)  revolves  in  27d,322, 
the  disturbing  (the  sun)  in  365d,256,  and  the  line  of  nodes 
in  6793d,391,  numbers  in  proportion  to  each  other  about  as 
1  to  13  and  249  respectively.  Now  in  13  revolutions  of  P, 
and  one  of  M,  if  the  node  remained  fixed,  P  would  have 
been  presented  to  M  so  nearly  in  every  configuration  as  to 


436  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

operate  an  almost  exact  compensation.  But  in  1  revolution 
of  M,  or  1 3  of  P,  the  node  itself  has  shifted  2^3?  or  about  Tg 
of  a  revolution,  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  revolutions  of 
M  and  P,  so  that  although  P  has  been  brought  back  to  the 
same  configuration  with  respect  to  M,  both  are  Tg  of  a 
revolution  in  advance  of  the  same  configuration  as  respects 
the  node.  The  compensation,  therefore,  will  not  be  exact, 
and  to  make  it  so,  this  process  must  be  gone  through  19 
times,  at  the  end  of  which  both  the  bodies  will  be  restored 
to  the  same  relative  position,  not  only  with  respect  to  each 
other,  but  to  the  node.  The  fractional  parts  of  entire 
revolutions,  which  in  this  explanation  have  been  neglected, 
are  evidently  no  farther  influential  than  as  rendering  the 
compensation  thus  operated  in  a  revolution  of  the  node 
slightly  inexact,  and  thus  giving  rise  to  a  compound  period 
of  greater  duration,  at  the  end  of  which  a  compensation  almost 
mathematically  rigorous,  will  have  been  effected. 

(639.)  It  is  clear  then,  that  if  the  orbits  be  circles,  the 
lapse  of  a  very  moderate  number  of  revolutions  of  the  bodies 
will  very  nearly,  and  that  of  a  revolution  of  the  node  almost 
exactly,  bring  about  a  perfect  restoration  of  the  inclinations. 
If,  however,  we  suppose  the  orbits  excentric,  it  is  no  less 
evident,  owing  to  the  want  of  symmetry  in  the  distribution 
of  the  forces,  that  a  perfect  compensation  will  not  be  effected 
either  in  one  or  in  any  number  of  revolutions  of  P  and  M, 
independent  of  the  motion  of  the  node  itself,  as  there  will 
always  be  some  configuration  more  favourable  to  either  an 
increase  of  inclination  than  its  opposite  is  unfavourable. 
Thus  will  arise  a  change  of  inclination  which,  were  the 
nodes  and  apsides  of  the  orbits  fixed,  would  be  always  pro- 
gressive in  one  direction  until  the  planes  were  brought  to 
coincidence.  But,  1st,  half  a  revolution  of  the  nodes  would  of 
itself  reverse  the  direction  of  this  progression  by  making  the 
position  in  question  favour  the  opposite  movement  of  in- 
clination ;  and,  2dly,  the  planetary  apsides  are  themselves 
in  motion  with  unequal  velocities,  and  thus  the  configuration 
whose  influence  destroys  the  balance,  is,  itself,  always 
shifting  its  place  on  the  orbits.     The  variations  of  inclination 


STABILITY    OF    THE    PLANETARY    INCLINATIONS.     437 

dependent  on  the  excentricities  are  therefore,  like  those 
independent  of  them,  periodical,  and  being,  moreover,  of  an 
order  more  minute  (by  reason  of  the  smallness  of  the 
excentricities)  than  the  latter,  it  is  evident  that  the  total 
variation  of  the  planetary  inclinations  must  fluctuate  within 
very  narrow  limits.  Geometers  have  accordingly  demon- 
strated by  an  accurate  analysis  of  all  the  circumstances,  and 
an  exact  estimation  of  the  acting  forces,  that  such  is  the  case ; 
and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  asserting  the  stability  of  the 
planetary  system  as  to  the  mutual  inclinations  of  its  orbits. 
By  the  researches  of  Lagrange  (of  whose  analytical  conduct 
it  is  impossible  here  to  give  any  idea),  the  following  elegant 
theorem  has  been  demonstrated :  — 

"If  the  mass  of  every  planet  be  multiplied  by  the  square  root 
of  the  major  axis  of  its  orbit,  and  the  product  by  the  square 
of  the  tangent  of  its  inclination  to  a  fixed  plane,  the  sum  of  all 
these  products  will  be  constantly  the  same  under  the  influence  of 
their  mutual  attraction."  If  the  present  situation  of  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic  be  taken  for  that  fixed  plane  (the  ecliptic  itself 
being  variable  like  the  other  orbits),  it  is  found  that  this  sum  is 
actually  very  small:  it  must,  therefore,  always  remain  so.  This 
remarkable  theorem  alone,  then,  would  guarantee  the  stability 
of  the  orbits  of  the  greater  planets ;  but  from  what  has  above 
been  shown  of  the  tendency  of  each  planet  to  work  out  a 
compensation  on  every  other,  it  is  evident  that  the  minor 
ones  are  not  excluded  from  this  beneficial  arrangement. 

(640.)  Meanwhile,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic  does  actually  vary  by  the  actions  of  the  planets. 
The  amount  of  this  variation  is  about  48"  per  century,  and 
has  long  been  recognized  by  astronomers,  by  an  increase 
of  the  latitudes  of  all  the  stars  in  certain  situations,  and  their 
diminution  in  the  opposite  regions.  Its  effect  is  to  bring  the 
ecliptic  by  so  much  per  annum  nearer  to  coincidence  with 
the  equator;  but  from  what  we  have  above  seen,  this 
diminution  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  will  not  go  on 
beyond  certain  very  moderate  limits,  after  which  (although 
in  an  immense  period  of  ages,  being  a  compv>und  cyle 
resulting  from  the  joint  action  of  all  the  planets,)  it  will 


438  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

again  increase,  and  thus  oscillate  backward  and  forward  about 
a  mean  position,  the  extent  of  its  deviation  to  one  side  and 
the  other  being  less  than  1°  21'. 

(641.)  One  effect  of  this  variation  of  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic, —  that  which  causes  its  nodes  on  a  fixed  plane  to 
change, —  is  mixed  up  with  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes, 
and  undistinguishable  from  it,  except  in  theory.  This  last- 
mentioned  phenomenon  is,  however,  due  to  another  cause, 
analagous,  it  is  true,  in  a  general  point  of  view,  to  those  above 
considered,  but  singularly  modified  by  the  circumstances 
under  which  it  is  produced.  We  shall  endeavour  to  render 
these  modifications  intelligible,  as  far  as  they  can  be  made  so 
without  the  intervention  of  analytical  formulae. 

(642.)  The  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  as  we  have  shown 
in  art.  312.,  consists  in  a  continual  retrogradation  of  the  node 
of  the  earth's  equator  on  the  ecliptic  ;  and  is,  therefore, 
obviously  an  effect  so  far  analogous  to  the  general  phe- 
nomenon of  the  retrogradation  of  the  nodes  of  the  orbits 
on  each  other.  The  immense  distance  of  the  planets, 
however,  compared  v/ith  the  size  of  the  earth,  and  the 
smallness  of  their  masses  compared  to  that  of  the  sun,  puts 
their  action  out  of  the  question  in  the  enquiry  of  its  cause, 
and  we  must,  therefore,  look  to  the  massive  though  distant 
sun,  and  to  our  near  though  minute  neighbour,  the  moon,  for  its 
explanation.  This  will,  accordingly,  be  found  in  their  dis- 
turbing action  on  the  redundant  matter  accumulated  on  the 
equator  of  the  earth,  by  which  its  figure  is  rendered  spheroidal, 
combined  with  the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis.  It  is  to  the 
sagacity  of  Newton  that  we  owe  the  discovery  of  this  singular 
mode  of  action. 

(643.)  Suppose  in  our  figure  (art.  611.)  that  instead  of 
one  body,  P,  revolving  round  S,  there  were  a  succession  of 
particles  not  coherent,  but  forming  a  kind  of  fluid  ring,  free 
to  change  its  form  by  any  force  applied.  Then,  while  this 
ring  revolved  round  S  in  its  own  plane,  under  the  disturbing 
influence  of  the  distant  body  M,  (which  now  represents  the 
moon  or  the  sun,  as  P  does  one  of  the  particles  of  the 
earth's  equator,)  two  things    would  happen :  1st,  its  figure 


PRECESSION    OF    THE    EQUINOXES.  43JJ 

would  be  bent  out  of  a  plane  into  an  undulated  form,  those 
parts  of  it  within  the  arcs  D  A  and  E  C  being  rendered  more 
inclined  to  the  plane  of  M's  orbit,  and  those  within  the  arcs 
A  E,  CD,  less  so  than  they  would  otherwise  be ;  2dly, 
the  nodes  of  this  ring,  regarded  as  a  whole,  without  re- 
spect to  its  change  of  figure,  would  retreat  upon  that 
plane. 

(644.)  But  suppose  this  ring,  instead  of  consisting  of  discrete 
molecules  free  to  move  independently,  to  be  rigid  and 
incapable  of  such  flexure,  like  the  hoop  we  have  supposed  in 
art.  633.,  but  having  inertia,  then  it  is  evident  that  the  effort 
of  those  parts  of  it  which  tend  to  become  more  inclined  will 
act  through  the  medium  of  the  ring  itself  (as  a  mechanical 
engine  or  lever)  to  counteract  the  effort  of  those  which  have  at 
the  same  instant  a  contrary  tendency.  In  so  far  only,  then,  as 
there  exists  an  excess  on  the  one  or  the  other  side  will 
the  inclination  change,  an  average  being  struck  at  every 
moment  of  the  ring's  motion  ;  just  as  was  shown  to  happen 
in  the  view  we  have  taken  of  the  inclinations,  in  every  com- 
plete revolution  of  a  single  disturbed  body,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  a  fixed  disturbing  one. 

(645.)  Meanwhile,  however,  the  nodes  of  the  rigid  ring 
will  retrograde,  the  general  or  average  tendency  of  the  nodes 
of  every  molecule  being  to  do  so.  Here,  as  in  the  other  case, 
a  struggle  will  take  place  by  the  counteracting  efforts  of  the 
molecules  contrarily  disposed,  propagated  through  the  solid 
substance  of  the  ring ;  and  thus  at  every  instant  of  time,  an 
average  will  be  struck,  which  being  identical  in  its  nature 
with  that  effected  in  the  complete  revolution  of  a  single 
disturbed  body,  will,  in  every  case,  be  in  favour  of  a  recess 
of  the  node,  save  only  when  the  disturbing  body,  be  it  sun 
or  moon,  is  situated  in  the  plane  of  the  earth's  equator. 

(646.)  This  reasoning  is  evidently  independent  of  any 
consideration  of  the  cause  which  maintains  the  rotation  of  the 
ring;  whether  the  particles  be  small  satellites  retained  in 
circular  orbits  under  the  equilibrated  action  of  attractive  and 
centrifrugal  forces,  or  whether  they  be  small  masses  conceived 
as  attached  to   a   set  of  imaginary  spokes,   as  of  a  wheel. 


'MO  OUTLINES    OF    ASTUONOMY 

centering  in  S,  and  free  only  to  shift  their  planes  by  a  mo- 
tion of  those  spokes  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  wheel. 
This  makes  no  difference  in  the  general  effect ;  though  the 
different  velocities  of  rotation,  which  may  be  impressed  on 
such  a  system,  may  and  will  have  a  very  great  influence  both 
on  the  absolute  and  relative  magnitudes  of  the  two  effects  in 
question  —  the  motion  of  the  nodes  and  change  of  inclination. 
This  will  be  easily  understood,  if  we  suppose  the  ring  without 
a  rotatory  motion,  in  which  extreme  case  it  is  obvious  that  so 
long  as  M  remained  fixed  there  would  take  place  no  recess 
of  nodes  at  all,  but  only  a  tendency  of  the  ring  to  tilt  its  plane 
round  a  diameter  perpendicular  to  the  position  of  M,  bringing 
it  towards  the  line  S  M. 

(647.)  The  motion  of  such  a  ring,  then,  as  we  have  been 
considering,  would  imitate,  so  far  as  the  recess  of  the  nodes 
goes,  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  only  that  its  nodes  would 
retrograde  far  more  rapidly  than  the  observed  precession,  which 
is  excessively  slow.  But  now  conceive  this  ring  to  be  loaded 
with  a  spherical  mass  enormously  heavier  than  itself,  placed 
concentrically  within  it,  and  cohering  firmly  to  it,  but  in- 
different, or  very  nearly  so,  to  any  such  cause  of  motion ;  and 
suppose,  moreover,  that  instead  of  one  such  ring  there  are  a 
vast  multitude  heaped  together  around  the  equator  of  such 
a  globe,  so  as  to  form  an  elliptical  protuberance,  enveloping 
it  like  a  shell  on  all  sides,  but  whose  mass,  taken  together, 
should  form  but  a  very  minute  fraction  of  the  whole  spheroid. 
We  have  now  before  us  a  tolerable  representation  of  the  case 
of  nature  *  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  rings,  having  to  drag 
round  with  them  in  their  nodal  revolution  this  great  inert 

•  That  a  perfect  sphere  would  be  so  inert  and  indifferent  as  to  a  revolution 
of  the  nodes  of  its  equator  under  the  influence  of  a  distant  attracting  body  appears 
from  this, — that  the  direction  of  the  resultant  attraction  of  such  a  body,  or  of 
that  single  force  which,  opposed,  would  neutralize  and  destroy  its  whole  action, 
is  necessarily  in  a  line  passing  through  the  center  of  the  sphere,  and,  therefore, 
can  have  no  tendency  to  turn  the  sphere  one  way  or  other.  It  may  be  objected 
by  the  reader,  that  the  whole  sphere  may  be  conceived  as  consisting  of  rings 
parallel  to  its  equator,  of  every  possible  diameter,  and  that,  therefore,  its  nodes 
should  retrograde  even  without  a  protuberant  equator  The  inference  is  incorrect, 
but  our  limits  will  not  allow  us  to  go  into  an  exposition  of  the  fallacy.  We 
should,  however,  caution  him,  generally,  that  no  dynamical  subject  is  open  to 
more  mistakes  of  this  kind,  which  nothing  but  the  closest  attention,  in  eviTy 
varied  point  of  view,  will  detect. 


PRECESSION    AND    NUTATION    EXPLAINED.  441 

mass,  will  have  their  velocity  of  retrogradation  proportionally 
diminished.  Thus,  then,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  a  motion 
similar  to  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  and,  like  it, 
characterized  by  extreme  slowness,  will  arise  from  the  causes 
in  action.  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  paradoxical  that  the 
whole  effect  of  the  external  attraction  should  terminate  in  the 
production  of  such  a  movement,  without  producing  any 
change  in  the  inclination  of  the  equator  to  the  ecliptic.  But 
a  due  consideration  of  the  reasoning  in  arts.  636,  637.  will 
make  it  evident  that  for  every  particle  in  the  revolving  ring, 
(in  every  situation  of  the  disturbing  body)  whose  change  of 
motion  would  tend  to  create  a  change  of  inclination  in  one 
direction,  there  exists  another,  exercising  an  equal  tendency 
of  an  opposite  kind. 

(648.)  Now  a  recess  of  the  node  of  the  earth's  equator, 
upon  a  given  plane,  corresponds  to  a  conical  motion  of  its  axis 
round  a  perpendicular  to  that  plane.  But  in  the  case  before 
us,  that  plane  is  not  the  ecliptic,  but  the  moon's  orbit  for  the 
time  being ;  and  it  may  be  asked  how  we  are  to  reconcile  this 
with  what  is  stated  in  art.  317.  respecting  the  nature  of  the 
motion  in  question.  To  this  we  reply,  that  the  nodes  of  the 
lunar  orbit,  being  in  a  state  of  continual  and  rapid  retrograda- 
tion, while  its  inclination  is  preserved 
nearly  invariable,  the  point  in  the  sphere 
of  the  heavens  round  which  the  pole  of 
the  earth's  equator  revolves  (with  that 
extreme  slowness  characteristic  of  the 
precession)  is  itself  in  a  state  of  con- 
tinual circulation  round  the  pole  of  the 
ecliptic,  with  that  much  more  rapid  mo- 
tion which  belongs  to  the  lunar  node. 
A  glance  at  the  annexed  figure  will  ex- 
plain this  better  than  words.  P  is  the 
pole  of  the  ecliptic,  A  the  pole  of  the  moon's  orbit,  moving 
round  the  small  circle  A  B  C  D  in  19  years ;  a  the  pole  of 
the  earth's  equator,  which  at  each  moment  of  its  progress 
has  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  varying  position  of  the 
line  A  a,  and  a  velocity  depending  on  the  varying  intensity 


442  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOM1. 

of  the  acting  causes  during  the  period  of  the  nodes.  This 
velocity  however  being  extremely  small,  when  A  comes  to 
Bj  C,  D,  E,  the  line  A  a  will  have  taken  up  the  positions 
B  b,  C  c,  D  d,  E  e,  and  the  earth's  pole  a  wili  thus,  in  one 
tropical  revolution  of  the  node,  have  arrived  at  e,  having 
described  not  an  exactly  circular  arc  a  e,  but  a  single  undu- 
lation of  a  wave-shape  or  epicycloidal  curve,  a  b  c  d  e,  with 
a  velocity  alternately  greater  and  less  than  its  mean  motion, 
and  this  will  be  repeated  in  every  succeeding  revolution  of 
the  node. 

(649.)  Now  this  is  precisely  the  kind  of  motion  which,  as 
we  have  seen  in  art.  325.,  the  pole  of  the  earth's  equator 
really  h;is  round  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  in  consequence  of  the 
joint  effects  of  precession  and  nutation,  which  are  thus 
uranographically  represented.  If  we  superadd  to  the  effect 
of  lunar  precession  that  of  the  solar,  which  alone  would  cause 
the  pole  to  describe  a  circle  uniformly  about  P,  this  will 
only  affect  the  undulations  of  our  waved  curve,  by  extending 
them  in  length,  but  will  produce  no  effect  on  the  depth 
of  the  waves,  or  the  excursions  of  the  earth's  axis  to  and  from 
the  pole  of  the  ecliptic.  Thus  we  see  that  the  two  phenomena 
of  nutation  and  precession  are  intimately  connected,  or  rather 
both  of  them  essential  constituent  parts  of  one  and  the  same 
phenomenon.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  a  rigorous 
analysis  of  this  great  problem,  by  an  exact  estimation  of  all 
the  acting  forces  and  summation  of  their  dynamical  effects, 
leads  to  the  precise  value  of  the  coefficients  of  precession 
and  nutation,  which  observation  assigns  to  them.  The  solar 
and  lunar  portions  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  that  is 
to  say,  those  portions  which  are  uniform,  are  to  each  other 
in  the  proportion  of  about  2  to  5. 

(650.)  In  the  nutation  of  the  earth's  axis  we  have  an  ex- 
ample (the  first  of  its  kind  which  has  occurred  to  us)  of  a 
periodical  movement  in  one  part  of  the  system,  giving  rise  to 
a  motion  having  the  same  precise  period  in  another.  The 
motion  of  the  moon's  nodes  is  here,  we  see,  represented, 
though  under  a  very  different  form,  yet  in  the  same  exact 
periodic  time,  by  a  movement  of  a  peculiar  oscillatory  kind 


PRINCIPLE    OF    FORCED    VIBRATIONS.  443 

impressed  on  the  solid  mass  of  the  earth.  We  must  not  let 
the  opportunity  pass  of  generalizing  the  principle  involved  in 
this  result,  as  it  is  one  which  we  shall  find  again  and  again 
exemplified  in  every  part  of  physical  astronomy,  nay,  in  every 
department  of  natural  science.  It  may  be  stated  as  "  the 
principle  of  forced  oscillations,  or  of  forced  vibrations,"  and 
thus  generally  announced :  — 

If  one  part  of  any  system  connected  either  by  material  ties,  or 
by  the  mutual  attractions  of  its  members,  be  continually  main- 
tained by  any  cause,  whether  inherent  in  the  constitution  of  the 
system  or  external  to  it,  in  a  state  of  regular  periodic  motion, 
that  motion  toill  be  propagated  throughout  the  whole  system 
and  will  give  rise,  in  every  member  of  it,  and  in  every  part  of 
each  member,  to  periodic  movements  executed  in  equal  period, 
with  that  to  which  they  owe  their  origin,  though  not  necessarily 
synchronous  with  them  in  their  maxima  and  minima.  * 

The  system  may  be  favourably  or  unfavourably  constituted 
for  such  a  transfer  of  periodic  movements,  or  favourably  in 
some  of  its  parts  and  unfavourably  in  others  ;  and  accordingly 
as  it  is  the  one  or  the  other,  the  derivative  oscillation  (as  it 
may  be  termed)  will  be  imperceptible  in  one  case,  of  appre- 
tiable  magnitude  in  another,  and  even  more  perceptible  in  its 
visible  effects  than  the  original  cause  in  a  third ;  of  this  last 
kind  we  have  an  instance  in  the  moon's  acceleration,  to  be 
hereafter  noticed. 

(651.)  It  so  happens  that  our  situation  on  the  earth,  and 
the  delicacy  which  our  observations  have  attained,  enable  us 
to  make  it  as  it  were  an  instrument  to  feel  these  forced 
vibrations,  —  these  derivative  motions,  communicated  from 
various  quarters,  especially  from  our  near  neighbour,  the 
moon,  much  in  the  same  way  as  we  detect,  by  the  trembling 
of  a  board  beneath  us,  the  secret  transfer  of  motion  by  which 
the  sound  of  an  organ  pipe  is  dispersed  through  the  air,  and 
carried  down  into  the  earth.     Accordingly,  the  monthly  re- 

•  See  a  demonstration  of  this  theorem  for  the  forced  vihrations  of  system, 
connected  by  material  ties  of  imperfect  elasticity,  in  my  treatise  on  Sound, 
Encyc.  Metrop.  art.  99%.  The  demonstration  is  easily  extended  and  generalized 
to  take  in  other  systems. 


444  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

volution  of  the  moon,  and  the  annual  motion  of  the  sun, 
produce,  each  of  them,  small  nutations  in  the  earth's  axis, 
whose  periods  are  respectively  half  a  month  and  half  a  year, 
each  of  which,  in  this  view  of  the  subject,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  one  portion  of  a  period  consisting  of  two  equal  and  similar 
parts.  But  the  most  remarkable  instance,  by  far,  of  this 
propagation  of  periods,  and  one  of  high  importance  to  man- 
kind, is  that  of  the  tides,  which  are  forced  oscillations,  excited 
by  the  rotation  of  the  earth  in  an  ocean  disturbed  from  its 
figure  by  the  varying  attractions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  each 
revolving  in  its  own  orbit,  and  propagating  its  own  period 
into  the  joint  phenomenon.  The  explanation  of  the  tides, 
however,  belongs  more  properly  to  that  part  of  the  general 
subject  of  perturbations  which  treats  of  the  action  of  the 
radial  component  of  the  disturbing  force,  and  is  therefore 
postponed  to  a  subsequent  chapter. 


445 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

THEORY    OF    THE    AXES,    PERIHELIA,    AND    EXCEN- 
TRICITIES. 

"  Incipiunt  magni  procedere  menses." — Virg.  Putlut. 

VARIATION    OF    ELEMENTS    IN    GENERAL. DISTINCTION    BETWEEN 

PERIODIC  AND  SECULAR  VARIATIONS.  —  GEOMETRICAL  EXPRESSION 

OF  TANGENTIAL  AND  NORMAL  FORCES. VARIATION  OF  THE  MAJOR 

AXIS   PRODUCED  ONLY  BY  THE  TANGENTIAL  tORCE. LAGRANGE'S 

THEOREM  OF  THE    CONSERVATION    OF    THE  MEAN   DISTANCES   AND 

PERIODS. THEORY  OF  THE    PERIHELIA   AND    EXCENTRIC1T1ES. — 

GEOMETRICAL  REPRESENTATION  OF  THEIR  MOMENTARY  VARIA- 
TIONS.   ESTIMATION    OF    THE     DISTURBING    FORCES    IN    NEARLY 

CIRCULAR  ORBITS. APPLICATION  TO   THE  CASE  OF  THE  MOON. 

THEORY  OF  THE  LUNAR  APSIDES  AND  EXCENTRIC1TY.  EXPE- 
RIMENTAL ILLUSTRATION.  —  APPLICATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING 
PRINCIPLES     TO    THE    PLANETARY    THEORY.  —  COMPENSATION    IN 

ORBITS    VERY  NEARLY    CIRCULAR. EFFECTS   OF    ELLIPT1C1TY.  — 

GENERAL  RESULTS.  —  LAGRANGE'S  THEOREM  OF  THE  STABILITY 
OF  THE  EXCENTRICITIES. 

(652.)  In  the  foregoing  chapter  we  have  sufficiently  ex- 
plained the  action  of  the  orthogonal  component  of  the  dis- 
turbing force,  and  traced  it  to  its  results  in  a  continual 
displacement  of  the  plane  of  the  disturbed  orbit,  in  virtue  of 
which  the  nodes  of  that  plane  alternately  advance  and  recede 
upon  the  plane  of  the  disturbing  body's  orbit,  with  a  general 
preponderance  on  the  side  of  advance,  so  as  after  the  lapse 
of  a  long  period  to  cause  the  nodes  to  make  a  complete  reso- 
lution and  come  round  to  their  former  situation.  At  the 
same  time  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  disturbed  mo- 
tion continually  changes,  alternately  increasing  and  diminish- 
ing ;  the  increase  and  diminution  however  compensating  each 
other,  nearly  in  single  revolutions  of  the  disturbed  and  dis- 
turbing bodies,  more  exactly  in   many,   and   with   perfect 


446  OUTLINES   OF    A8TRONOMV. 

accuracy  in  long  periods,  such  :is  those  of  a  complete  revo- 
lution of  the  nodes  and  apsides.  In  the  present  and  follow- 
ing chapters  we  shall  endeavour  to  trace  the  effects  of  the 
other  components  of  the  disturbing  force,  —  those  which  act 
in  the  plane  (for  the  time  being)  of  the  disturbed  orDit,  and 
which  tend  to  derange  the  elliptic  form  of  the  orbit,  and  the 
laws  of  elliptic  motion  in  that  plane.  The  fmall  inclination, 
generally  speaking,  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  and  satellites 
to  each  other,  permits  us  to  separate  these  effects  in  theory 
one  from  the  other,  and  thereby  greatly  to  simplify  their 
consideration.  Accordingly,  in  what  follows,  we  shall  through- 
out neglect  the  mutual  inclination  of  the  orbits  of  the  dis- 
turbed and  disturbing  bodies,  and  regard  all  the  forces  as 
acting  and  all  the  motions  as  performed  in  one  plane. 

(653.)  In  considering  the  changes  induced  by  the  mutual 
action  of  two  bodies  in  different  aspects  with  respect  to  each 
other  on  the  magnitudes  and  forms  of  their  orbits  and  in 
their  positions  therein,  it  will  be  proper  in  the  first  instance 
to  explain  the  conventions  under  which  geometers  and  as- 
tronomers have  alike  agreed  to  use  the  language  and  laws  of 
the  elliptic  system,  and  to  continue  to  apply  them  to  disturbed 
orbits,  although  those  orbits  so  disturbed  are  no  longer,  in 
mathematical  strictness,  ellipses,  or  any  knowTn  curves.  This 
they  do,  partly  on  account  of  the  convenience  of  conception 
and  calculation  which  attaches  to  this  system,  but  much  more 
for  this  reason, — that  it  is  found,  and  may  be  demonstrated 
from  the  dynamical  relations  of  the  case,  that  the  departure 
of  each  planet  from  its  ellipse,  as  determined  at  any  epoch,  is 
capable  of  being  truly  represented,  by  supposing  the  ellipse 
itself  to  be  slowly  variable,  to  change  its  magnitude  and 
excentricity,  and  to  shift  its  position  and  the  plane  in  which 
it  lies  according  to  certain  laws,  while  the  planet  all  the  time 
continues  to  move  in  this  ellipse,  just  as  it  would  do  if  the 
ellipse  remained  invariable  and  the  disturbing  forces  had  no 
existence.  By  this  way  of  considering  the  subject,  the  whole 
effect  of  the  disturbing  forces  is  regarded  as  thrown  upon 
the  orbit,  while  the  relations  of  the  planet  to  that  orbit 
remain  unchanged.  This  course  of  procedure,  indeed,  is  the 
most    natural,   and   is   in   some  sort  forced   upon   us  bv  the 


VARIATION   OF    ELEMENTS.  447 

extreme  slowness  with  which  the  variations  of  the  elements, 
at  least  where  the  planets  only  are  concerned,  develope 
themselves.  For  instance,  the  fraction  expressing  the  ex- 
centricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  changes  no  more  than  0*00004 
in  its  amount  in  a  century ;  and  the  place  of  its  perihelion,  as 
referred  to  the  sphere  of  the  heavens,  by  only  19'  39"  in  the 
name  time.  For  several  years,  therefore,  it  would  be  next 
to  impossible  to  distinguish  between  an  ellipse  so  varied  and 
one  that  had  not  varied  at  all ;  and  in  a  single  revolution,  the 
difference  between  the  original  ellipse  and  the  curve  really 
represented  by  the  varying  one,  is  so  excessively  minute, 
that,  if  accurately  drawn  on  a  table,  six  feet  in  diameter,  the 
nicest  examination  with  microscopes,  continued  along  the 
whole  outlines  of  the  two  curves,  would  hardly  detect  any 
perceptible  interval  between  them.  Not  to  call  a  motion  so 
minutely  conforming  itself  to  an  elliptic  curve,  elliptic,  would 
be  affectation,  even  granting  the  existence  of  trivial  departures 
alternately  on  one  side  or  on  the  other:  though,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  neglect  a  variation,  which  continues  to  accumulate 
from  age  to  age,  till  it  forces  itself  on  our  notice,  would  be 
wilful  blindness. 

(654.)  Geometers,  then,  have  agreed  in  each  single  re- 
volution, or  for  any  moderate  interval  of  time,  to  regard  the 
motion  of  each  planet  as  elliptic,  and  performed  according  to 
Kepler's  laws,  with  a  reserve  in  favour  of  those  very  small 
and  transient  fluctuations  which  take  place  within  that  time, 
but  at  the  same  time  to  regard  all  the  elements  of  each  ellipse 
as  in  a  continual,  though  extremely  slow,  state  of  change ; 
and,  in  tracing  the  effects  of  perturbation  on  the  system,  they 
take  account  principally,  or  entirely,  of  this  change  of  the 
elements,  as  that  upon  which  any  material  change  in  the 
great  features  of  the  system  will  ultimately  depend. 

(655.)  And  here  we  encounter  the  distinction  between 
what  are  termed  secular  variations,  and  such  as  are  rapidly 
periodic,  and  are  compensated  in  short  intervals.  In  our 
exposition  of  the  variation  of  the  inclination  of  a  disturbed 
orbit  (art.  636.),  for  instance,  we  showed  that,  in  each  single 
revolution  of  the  disturbed  body,  the  plane  of  its  motion 
underwent  fluctuations  to  and  fro  in  its  inclination  to  that  of 


448  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  disturbing  body,  which  nearly  compensated  each  other; 
leaving,  however,  a  portion  outstanding,  which  again  is 
nearly  compensated  by  the  revolution  of  the  disturbing  body, 
yet  still  leaving  outstanding  and  uncompensated  a  minute 
portion  of  the  change  which  requires  a  whole  revolution  of 
the  node  to  compensate  and  bring  it  back  to  an  average  or 
mean  value.  Now,  the  two  first  compensations  which  are 
operated  by  the  planets  going  through  the  succession  of 
configurations  with  each  other,  and  therefore  in  comparatively 
short  periods,  are  called  periodic  variations ;  and  the  deviations 
thus  compensated  are  called  inequalities  depending  on  configu- 
rations ;  while  the  last,  which  is  operated  by  a  period  of  the 
node  (one  of  the  elements),  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  con- 
figurations of  the  individual  planets,  requires  a  very  long 
period  of  time  for  its  consummation;  and  is,  therefore,  distin- 
guished from  the  former  by  the  term  secular  variation. 

(656.)  It  is  true,  that,  to  afford  an  exact  representation  01 
the  motions  of  a  disturbed  body,  whether  planet  or  satellite, 
both  periodical  and  secular  variations,  with  their  corresponding 
inequalities,  require  to  be  expressed ;  and,  indeed,  the  former 
even  more  than  the  latter ;  seeing  that  the  secular  inequalities 
are,  in  fact,  nothing  but  what  remains  after  the  mutual 
destruction  of  a  much  larger  amount  (as  it  very  often  is)  of 
periodical.  But  these  are  in  their  nature  transient  and 
temporary :  they  disappear  in  short  periods,  and  leave  no 
trace.  The  planet  is  temporarily  drawn  from  its  orbit  (its 
slowly  varying  orbit),  but  forthwith  returns  to  it,  to  deviate 
presently  as  much  the  other  way,  while  the  varied  orbit 
accommodates  and  adjusts  itself  to  the  average  of  these 
excursions  on  either  side  of  it ;  and  thus  continues  to  present, 
for  a  succession  of  indefinite  ages,  a  kind  of  medium  picture 
of  all  that  the  planet  has  been  doing  in  their  lapse,  in  which 
the  expression  and  character  is  preserved ;  but  the  individual 
features  are  merged  and  lost.  These  periodic  inequalities, 
however,  are,  as  we  have  observed,  by  no  means  neglected, 
but  it  is  more  convenient  to  take  account  of  them  by  a  separate 
process,  independent  of  the  secular  variations  of  the  elements. 

(657.)  In  order  to  avoid  complication,  while  endeavouring 


GEOMETRICAL    EXPRESSION    OF    FORCE.  449 

to  give  the  reader  an  insight  into  both  kinds  of  variations, 
we  shall  for  the  present  conceive  all  the  orbits  to  lie  in  one 
plane,  and  confine  our  attention  to  the  case  of  two  only,  that 
of  the  disturbed  and  disturbing  body,  a  view  of  the 
subject  which  (as  we  have  seen)  comprehends  the  case  of  the 
moon  disturbed  by  the  sun,  sinoe  any  one  of  the  bodies  may 


be  regarded  as  fixed  at  pleasure,  provided  we  conceive  all  its 
motions  transferred  in  a  contrary  direction  to  each  of  the 
others.  Let  therefore  A  P  B  be  the  undisturbed  elliptic 
orbit  of  a  planet  P ;  Ma  disturbing  body,  join  M  P,  and 
supposing  M  K  =  M  S  take  M  N  :  M  K ::  M  K8  :  M  P2. 
Then  if  S  N  be  joined,  N  S  will  represent  the  disturbing 
force  of  M  on  P,  on  the  same  scale  that  S  M  represents  M's 
attraction  on  S.  Suppose  ZPY  a  tangent  at  P,  S  Y  per- 
pendicular to  it,  and  NT,  NL  perpendicular  respectively  to 
S  Y  and  P  S  produced.  Then  wUl  N  T  represent  the  tan- 
gential, T  S  the  normal,  N  L  the  transversal,  and  L  S  the 
radial  components  of  the  disturbing  force.  In  circular  orbita 
or  orbits  only  slightly  elliptic,  the  directions  P  S  L  and  S  Y 
are  nearly  coincident,  and  the  former  pair  of  forces  will  differ 
but  slightly  from  the  latter.  We  shall  here,  however,  take  the 
general  case,  and  proceed  to  investigate  in  an  elliptic  orbit 
of  any  degree  of  excentricity  the  momentary  changes  pro- 
duced by  the  action  of  the  disturbing  force  in  those  clement* 

G  G 


450  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

on  which  the  magnitude,  situation,  and  form  of  the  orbit 
depend  (i.e.  the  length  and  position  of  the  major  axis  and 
the  excentricity),  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  last  chapter  we 
determined  the  momentary  changes  of  the  inclination  and 
node  similarly  produced  by  the  orthogonal  force. 

(658.)  We  shall  begin  with  the  momentary  variation  in 
the  length  of  the  axis,  an  element  of  the  first  importance,  as 
on  it  depend  (art.  487)  the  periodic  time  and  mean  angular 
motion  of  the  planet,  as  well  as  the  average  supply  of  light 
and  heat  it  receives  in  a  given  time  from  the  sun,  any  perma- 
nent or  constantly  progressive  change  in  which  would  alter 
most  materially  the  conditions  of  existence  of  living  beings 
on  its  surface.  Now  it  is  a  property  of  elliptic  motion  per- 
formed under  the  influence  of  gravity,  and  in  conformity  with 
Kepler's  laws,  that  if  the  velocity  with  which  a  planet  moves 
at  any  point  of  its  orbit  be  given,  and  also  the  distance  of 
that  point  from  the  sun,  the  major  axis  of  the  orbit  is  thereby 
also  given.  It  is  no  matter  in  what  direction  the  planet  may 
be  moving  at  that  moment.  This  will  influence  the  excen- 
tricity and  the  position  of  its  ellipse,  but  not  its  length.  This 
property  of  elliptic  motion  has  been  demonstrated  by  Newton, 
and  is  one  of  the  most  obvious  and  elementary  conclusions 
from  his  theory.  Let  us  now  consider  a  planet  describing  an 
indefinitely  small  arc  of  its  orbit  about  the  sun,  under  the 
joint  influence  of  its  attraction,  and  the  disturbing  power  of 
another  planet.  This  arc  will  have  some  certain  curvature 
and  direction,  and,  therefore,  may  be  considered  as  an  arc  of 
a  certain  ellipse  described  about  the  sun  as  a  focus,  for  this 
plain  reason,  —  that  whatever  be  the  curvature  and  direction 
of  the  arc  in  question,  an  ellipse  may  always  be  assigned, 
whose  focus  shall  be  in  the  sun,  and  which  shall  coincide 
with  it  throughout  the  whole  interval  (supposed  indefinitely 
email)  between  its  extreme  points.  This  is  a  matter  of  pure 
geometry.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the  ellipse  thus 
instantaneously  determined  will  have  the  same  elements  as  that 
similarly  determined  from  the  arc  described  in  either  the 
previous  or  the  subsequent  instant.  If  the  disturbing  force 
did  not   exist,  this  would  be  the   case  ;  but,   by  its  action,  a 


VARIATION    OF    THE    MAJOR    AXIS.  451 

variation  of  the  element  from  instant  to  instant  is  produced, 
and  the  ellipse  so  determined  is  in  a  continual  state  of  change. 
Now  when  the  planet  has  reached  the  end  of  the  small  aro 
under  consideration,  the  question  whether  it  will  in  the  next 
instant  describe  an  arc  of  an  ellipse  having  the  same  or  a 
varied  axis  will  depend,  not  on  the  new  direction  impressed 
upon  it  by  the  acting  forces, —  for  the  axis,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  independent  of  that  direction,  —  not  on  its  change  of  distance 
from  the  sun,  while  describing  the  former  arc, — for  the 
elements  of  that  arc  are  accommodated  to  it,  so  that  one  and 
the  same  axis  must  belong  to  its  beginning  and  its  end. 
The  question,  in  short,  whether  in  the  next  arc  it  shall  take 
up  a  new  major  axis  or  go  on  with  the  old  one  will  depend 
solely  on  this  —  whether  its  velocity  has  or  has  not  undergone 
a  change  by  the  action  of  the  disturbing  force.  For  the 
central  force  residing  in  the  focus  can  impress  on  it  no  such 
change  of  velocity  as  to  be  incompatible  with  the  permanence 
of  its  ellipse,  seeing  that  it  is  by  the  action  of  that  force  that 
the  velocity  is  maintained  in  that  due  proportion  to  the 
distance  which  elliptic  motion,  as  such,  requires. 

(659.)  Thus  we  see  that  the  momentary  variation  of  the 
major  axis  depends  on  nothing  but  the  momentary  deviation 
from  the  law  of  elliptic  velocity  produced  by  the  disturbing 
force,  without  the  least  regard  to  the  direction  in  which  that 
extraneous  velocity  is  impressed,  or  the  distance  from  the  sun 
at  which  the  planet  may  be  situated,  at  the  moment  of  its 
impression.  Nay,  we  may  even  go  farther,  for,  as  this  holds 
good  at  every  instant  of  its  motion,  it  will  follow,  that  after 
the  lapse  of  any  time,  however  great,  the  total  amount  of 
change  which  the  axis  may  have  undergone  will  be  determined 
only  by  the  total  deviation  produced  by  the  action  of  the 
disturbing  force  in  the  velocity  of  the  disturbed  body  from 
that  which  it  would  have  had  in  its  undisturbed  ellipse,  at  the 
same  distance  from  the  center,  and  that  therefore  the  total 
amount  of  change  produced  in  the  axis  in  any  lapse  of  time 
may  be  estimated,  if  we  know  at  every  instant  the  efficacy 
of  the  disturbing  force  to  alter  the  velocity  of  the  body's 
motion,  and  that  without  any  regard  to  the  alterations  which 


452  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  action  of  that  force  may  have  produced  in  the  other 
elements  of  the  motion  in  the  same  time. 

(660.)  Now  it  is  not  the  whole  disturbing  force  which  is  effec- 
tive in  changing  P's  velocity ,  but  only  its  tangential  component. 
The  normal  component  tends  merely  to  alter  the  curvature  of 
the  orbit  or  to  deflect  it  into  conformity  with  a  circle  of  cur- 
vature of  greater  or  lesser  radius,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  in 
no  way  to  alter  the  velocity.  Hence  it  appears  that  the 
variation  of  the  length  of  the  axis  is  due  entirely  to  the  tangen- 
tial force,  and  is  quite  independent  on  the  normal.  Now  it  is 
easily  shown  that  as  the  velocity  increases,  the  axis  increases 
(the  distance  remaining  unaltered  *)  though  not  in  the  same 
exact  proportion.  Hence  it  follows  that  if  the  tangential 
disturbing  force  conspires  with  the  motion  of  P,  its  momentary 
action  increases  the  axis  of  the  disturbed  orbit,  whatever  be 
the  situation  of  P  in  its  orbit,  and  vice  versa. 

(661.)  Let  A  S  B  (fig.  art.  657.)  be  the  major  axis  of  the 
ellipse  A  P  B,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  A  B  take  two  points 
P'  and  M',  similarly  situated  with  respect  to  the  axis  with  P 
and  M  on  their  side.  Then  if  at  P'  and  M'  bodies  equal  to 
P  and  M  be  placed,  the  forces  exerted  by  M'  on  P'  and  S 
will  be  equal  to  those  exerted  by  M  on  P  and  S,  and  there- 
fore the  tangential  disturbing  force  of  M'  on  P'  exerted  in 
the  direction  P'  Z'  (suppose)  will  equal  that  exerted  by  M  on 
P  in  the  direction  P  Z.  P'  therefore  (supposing  it  to  revoh  e 
in  the  same  direction  round  S  as  P)  will  be  retarded  (or  acce- 
lerated, as  the  case  may  be)  by  precisely  the  same  force  by 
which  P  is  accelerated  (or  retarded),  so  that  the  variation  in 
the  axis  of  the  respective  orbits  of  P  and  P'  will  be  equal 
in  amount,  but  contrary  in  character.  Suppose  now  M'a 
orbit  to  be  circular.  Then  (if  the  periodic  times  of  M  and  P 
be  not  commensurate,  so  that  a  moderate  number  of  revolutions 
may  bring  them  back  to  the  same  precise  relative  positions)  it 
will  necessarily  happen,  that  in  the  course  of  a  very  great 


*  If  a  be  the  semiaxis,  r  the  radius  vector,  and  v  the  velocity  of  P  in  »ny 
oint  of  an  ellipse,  a  is  given 
force  being  properly  assumed. 


2      1 
point  of  an  ellipse,  a  is  given  by  the  relation  »*=   —    ,  the  units  of  velocity  and 


VARIATION   OF    THE    MAJOR   AXIS.  453 

number  of  revolutions  of  both  bodies,  P  will  have  been  pre- 
sented to  M  on  one  side  of  the  axis,  at  some  one  moment,  in 
the  same  manner  as  at  some  other  moment  on  the  other. 
Whatever  variation  may  have  been  effected  in  its  axis  in  the 
one  situation  will  have  been  reversed  in  that  symmetrically 
opposite,  and  the  ultimate  result,  on  a  general  average  of  an 
infinite  number  of  revolutions,  will  be  a  complete  and  exact 
compensation  of  the  variations  in  one  direction  by  those  in 
the  direction  opposite. 

(662.)  Suppose,  next,  P's  orbit  to  be  circular.  If  now  M's 
orbit  were  so  also,  it  is  evident  that  in  one  complete  synodic 
revolution,  an  exact  restoration  of  the  axis  to  its  original 
length  would  take  place,  because  the  tangential  forces  would 
be  symmetrically  equal  and  opposite  during  each  alternate 
quarter  revolution.  But  let  M,  during  a  synodic  revolution, 
have  receded  somewhat  from  S,  then  will  its  disturbing  powei 
have  become  gradually  weaker,  so  that,  in  a  synodic  revolution 
the  tangential  force  in  each  quadrant,  though  reversed  in 
direction  being  inferior  in  power,  an  exact  compensation  will 
not  have  been  effected,  but  there  will  be  left  an  outstanding 
uncompensated  portion,  the  excess  of  the  stronger  over  the 
feebler  effects.  But  now  suppose  M  to  approach  by  the 
same  gradations  as  it  before  receded.  It  is  clear  that  this 
result  will  be  reversed ;  since  the  uncompensated  stronger 
actions  will  all  lie  in  the  opposite  direction.  Now  suppose 
M's  orbit  to  be  elliptic.  Then  during  its  recess  from  S  or  in 
the  half  revolution  from  its  perihelion  to  its  aphelion,  a  con- 
tinual uncompensated  variation  will  go  on  accumulating  in  one 
direction.  But  from  what  has  been  said,  it  is  clear  that  this 
will  be  destroyed,  during  M's  approach  to  S  in  the  other  half 
of  its  orbit,  so  that  here  again,  on  the  average  of  a  multitude 
of  revolutions  during  which  P  has  been  presented  to  M  in 
every  situation  for  every  distance  of  M  from  S,  the  restoration 
will  be  effected. 

(663.)  If  neither  P's  nor  M's  orbit  be  circular,  and  if  more- 
over the  directions  of  their  axes  be  different,  this  reasoning, 
drawn  from  the  symmetry  of  their  relations  to  each  other,  does 
not  apply,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  take  a  more  general 


454  OUTLINES    OF    ASTKONOM  r. 

view  of  the  matter.  Among  the  fundamental  relations  of 
dynamics,  relations  which  presuppose  no  particular  law  of 
force  like  that  of  gravitation,  but  which  express  in  general 
terms  the  results  of  the  action  of  force  on  matter  during  time, 
to  produce  or  change  velocity,  is  one  usually  cited  as  the 
"  Principle  of  the  conservation  of  the  vis  viva,"  which  applies 
directly  to  the  case  before  us.  This  principle  (or  rather  this 
theorem)  declares  that  if  a  body  subjected  at  every  instant  of 
its  motion  to  the  action  of  forces  directed  to  fixed  centers  (no 
matter  how  numerous),  and  having  their  intensity  dependent 
only  on  the  distances  from  their  respective  centers  of  action, 
travel  from  one  point  of  space  to  another,  the  velocity  which 
it  has  on  its  arrival  at  the  latter  point  will  differ  from  that 
which  it  had  on  setting  out  from  the  former,  by  a  quantity 
depending  only  on  the  different  relative  situations  of  these  two 
points  in  space,  without  the  least  reference  to  the  form  of  the 
curve  in  which  it  may  have  moved  in  passing  from  one  point 
to  the  other,  whether  that  curve  have  been  described  freely 
under  the  simple  influence  of  the  central  forces,  or  the  body 
have  been  compelled  to  glide  upon  it,  as  a  bead  upon  a  smooth 
wire.  Among  the  forces  thus  acting  may  be  included  any 
constant  forces,  acting  in  parallel  directions,  which  may  be 
regarded  as  directed  to  fixed  centers  infinitely  distant.  It 
follows  from  this  theorem,  that,  if  the  body  return  to  the  point 
P  from  which  it  set  out,  its  velocity  of  arrival  will  be  the  same 
with  that  of  its  departure  ;  a  conclusion  which  (for  the  purpose 
we  have  in  view)  sets  us  free  from  the  necessity  of  entering 
into  any  consideration  of  the  laws  of  the  disturbing  force, 
the  change  which  its  action  may  have  induced  in  the  form  of 
the  orbit  of  P,  or  the  successive  steps  by  which  velocity  gene- 
rated at  one  point  of  its  intermediate  path  is  destroyed  at 
another,  by  the  reversed  action  of  the  tangential  force.  Now 
to  apply  this  theorem  to  the  case  in  question,  let  M  be  sup- 
posed to  retain  a  fixed  position  during  one  whole  revolution 
of  P.  P  then  is  acted  on,  during  that  revolution,  by  three 
forces :  1  st.  by  the  central  attraction  of  S  directed  always  to 
S ;  2nd.  by  that  to  M,  always  directed  to  M ;  3rd.  by  a  force 
equal  to  M's  attraction  on  S;  but  in  the  direction  M  S,  which 


variation  of  the  major  axis.  455 

therefore  is  a  constant  force,  acting  always  in  parallel  direc- 
tions. On  completing  its  revolution,  then,  P's  velocity,  and 
therefore  the  major  axis  of  its  orbit,  will  be  found  unaltered, 
at  least  neglecting  that  excessively  minute  difference  which 
will  result  from  the  non-arrival  after  a  revolution  at  the  exact 
point  of  its  departure  by  reason  of  the  perturbations  in  the 
orbit  produced  in  the  interim  by  the  disturbing  force,  which 
for  the  present  we  may  neglect. 

(664.)  Now  suppose  M  to  revolve,  and  it  will  appear,  by 
a  reasoning  precisely  similar  to  that  of  art.  66'2.,  that  what- 
ever uncompensated  variation  of  the  velocity  arises  in  suc- 
cessive revolutions  of  P  during  M's  recess  from  S  will  be 
destroyed  by  contrary  uncompensated  variations  arising  during 
its  approach.  Or,  more  simply  and  generally  thus :  whatever  M's 
situation  may  be,  for  every  place  which  P  can  have,  there  must 
exist  some  other  place  of  P  (as  P'),  in  which  the  action  of 
M  shall  be  precisely  reversed.  Now  if  the  periods  be  incom- 
mensurable, in  an  indefinite  number  of  revolutions  of  both 
bodies,  for  every  possible  combination  of  situations  (M,  P) 
there  will  occur,  at  some  time  or  other,  the  combination  (M,  P') 
which  neutralizes  the  effect  of  the  other,  when  carried  to  the 
general  account ;  so  that  ultimately,  and  when  very  long 
periods  of  time  are  embraced,  a  complete  compensation  will 
be  found  to  be  worked  out. 

(665.)  This  supposes,  however,  that  in  such  long  periods 
the  orbit  of  M  is  not  so  altered  as  to  render  the  occurrence 
of  the  compensating  situation  (M,  P')  impossible.  This  would 
be  the  case  if  M's  orbit  were  to  dilate  or  contract  indefinitely 
by  a  variation  in  its  axis.  But  the  same  reasoning  which 
applies  to  P,  applies  also  to  M.  P  retaining  &  fixed  situation, 
M's  velocity,  and  therefore  the  axis  of  its  orbit,  would  be 
exactly  restored  at  the  end  of  a  revolution  of  M  ;  so  that  for 
every  position  P  M  there  exists  a  compensating  position 
P  M'.  Thus  M's  orbit  is  maintained  of  the  same  magnitude, 
and  the  possibility  of  the  occurrence  of  the  compensating 
situation  (M,  P')  is  secured. 

(666.)  To  demonstrate  as  a  rigorous  mathematical  truth 
the  complete  and  absolute  ultimate  compensation  of  the  v*r 


456  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

nations  in  question,  it  would  be  requisite  to  show  that  the 
minute  outstanding  changes  due  to  the  non-arrivals  of  P  and 
M  at  the  same  exact  points  at  the  end  of  each  revolution, 
cannot  accumulate  in  the  course  of  infinite  ages  in  one. 
direction.  Now  it  will  appear  in  the  subsequent  part  of  this 
chapter,  that  the  effect  of  perturbation  on  the  excentricities 
und  apsides  of  the  orbits  is  to  cause  the  former  to  undergo 
only  periodical  variations,  and  the  latter  to  revolve  and  take 
up  in  succession  every  possible  situation.  Hence  in  the 
oourse  of  infinite  ages,  the  points  of  arrival  of  P  and  M 
at  fixed  lines  of  direction,  S  P,  S  M,  in  successive  revolutions, 
though  at  one  time  they  will  approach  S,  at  another  will 
recede  from  it,  fluctuating  to  and  fro  about  mean  points 
from  which  they  never  greatly  depart.  And  if  the  arrival 
of  either  of  them  as  P,  at  a  point  nearer  S,  at  the  end  of  a 
complete  revolution,  cause  an  excess  of  velocity,  its  arrival 
at  a  more  distant  point  will  cause  a  deficiency,  and  thus,  as 
the  fluctuations  of  distance  to  and  fro  ultimately  balance 
each  other,  so  will  also  the  excesses  and  defects  of  velocity, 
though  in  periods  of  enormous  length,  being  no  less  than 
that  of  a  complete  revolution  of  P's  apsides  for  the  one  cause 
of  inequality,  and  of  a  complete  restoration  of  its  excentricity 
for  the  other. 

(667.)  The  dynamical  proposition  on  which  this  reasoning 
is  based  is  general,  and  applies  equally  well  to  cases  wherein 
the  forces  act  in  one  plane,  or  are  directed  to  centers  any- 
where situated  in  space.  Hence,  if  we  take  into  considera- 
tion the  inclination  of  P's  orbit  to  that  of  M,  the  same 
reasoning  will  apply.  Only  that  in  this  case,  upon  a  com- 
plete revolution  of  P,  the  variation  of  inclination  and  the 
motion  of  the  nodes  of  P's  orbit  will  prevent  its  returning 
to  a  point  in  the  exact  plane  of  its  original  orbit,  as  that  of 
the  excentricity  and  perihelion  prevent  its  arrival  at  the 
<;ame  exact  distance  from  S.  But  since  it  has  been  shown 
that  the  inclination  fluctuates  round  a  mean  state  from  which 
it  never  departs  much,  and  since  the  node  revolves  and  makes 
a  complete  circuit,  it  is  obvious  that  in  a  complete  period  of 
the  Utter  the  points  of  arrival  of  P  at  the  same  longitude 


VARIATION    OF    THE    MAJOK    AXIS.  457 

will  deviate  as  often  and  by  the  same  quantities  above  as 
below  its  original  point  of  departure  from  exact  coincidence ; 
and,  therefore,  that  on  the  average  of  an  infinite  number 
of  revolutions,  the  effect  of  this  cause  of  non-compensation 
will  also  be  destroyed. 

(668.)  It  is  evident,  also,  that  the  dynamical  proposition 
in  question  being  general,  and  applying  equally  to  any  num- 
ber of  fixed  centers,  as  well  as  to  any  distribution  of  them  in 
space,  the  conclusion  would  be  precisely  the  same  whatever 
be  the  number  of  disturbing  bodies,  only  that  the  periods  of 
compensation  would  become  more  intricately  involved.  We 
are,  therefore,  conducted  to  this  most  remarkable  and  im- 
portant conclusion,  viz.  that  the  major  axes  of  the  planetary 
(and  lunar)  orbits,  and,  consequently,  also  their  mean  mo- 
tions and  periodic  times,  are  subject  to  none  but  periodical 
changes ;  that  the  length  of  the  year,  for  example,  in  the 
lapse  of  infinite  ages,  has  no  preponderating  tendency  either 
to  increase  or  diminution,  —  that  the  planets  will  neither  re- 
cede indefinitely  from  the  sun,  nor  fall  into  it,  but  continue, 
so  far  as  their  mutual  perturbations  at  least  are  concerned, 
to  revolve  for  ever  in  orbits  of  very  nearly  the  same  dimen 
sions  as  at  present. 

(669.)  This  theorem  (the  Magna  Charta  of  our  system), 
the  discovery  of  which  is  due  to  Lagrange,  is  justly  regarded 
as  the  most  important,  as  a  single  result,  of  any  which  have 
hitherto  rewarded  the  researches  of  mathematicians  in  this 
application  of  their  science;  and  it  is  especially  worthy  of 
remark,  and  follows  evidently  from  the  view  here  .taken  of 
it,  that  it  would  not  be  true  but  for  the  influence  of  the 
perturbing  forces  on  other  elements  of  the  orbit,  viz.  the 
perihelion  and  excentricity,  and  the  inclination  and  nodes; 
since  we  have  seen  that  the  revolution  of  the  apsides  and 
nodes,  and  the  periodical  increase  and  diminution  of  the  ex- 
centricities  and  inclinations,  are  both  essential  towards  ope- 
rating that  final  and  complete  compensation  which  gives  it  a 
character  of  mathematical  exactness.  We  have  here  an  in- 
tst-vnce  of  a  perturbation  of  one  kind  operating  on  a  perturba- 
tion of  another  to  annihilate  an  effect  which  would  otherwise 


458  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY". 

accumulate  to  the  destruction  of  the  system.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  borne  in  mind,  that  it  is  the  smallness  of  the  excen- 
tricities  of  the  more  influential  planets,  which  gives  this 
theorem  its  practical  importance,  and  distinguishes  it  from  a 
mere  barren  speculative  result.  Within  the  limits  of  ulti- 
mate restoration,  it  is  this  alone  which  keeps  the  periodical 
fluctuations  of  the  axis  to  and  fro  about  a  mean  value  within 
moderate  and  reasonable  limits.  Although  the  earth  might 
not  fall  into  the  sun,  or  recede  from  it  beyond  the  present 
limits  of  our  system,  any  considerable  increase  or  diminution 
of  its  mean  distance,  to  the  extent,  for  instance,  of  a  tenth  of 
its  actual  amount,  would  not  fail  to  subvert  the  conditions  on 
which  the  existence  of  the  present  race  of  animated  beings 
depends.  Constituted  as  our  system  is,  however,  changes  to 
anything  like  this  extent  are  utterly  precluded.  The  great- 
est departure  from  the  mean  value  of  the  axis  of  any  pla- 
netary orbit  yet  recognized  by  theory  or  observation  (that  of 
the  orbit  of  Saturn  disturbed  by  Jupiter),  does  not  amount 
to  a  thousandth  part  of  its  length.*  The  effects  of  these 
fluctuations,  however,  are  very  sensible,  and  manifest  them- 
selves in  alternate  accelerations  and  retardations  in  the  an- 
gular motions  of  the  disturbed  about  the  central  body,  which 
cause  it  alternately  to  outrun  and  to  lag  behind  its  elliptic 
place  in  its  orbit,  giving  rise  to  what  are  called  equations  in 
its  motion,  some  of  the  chief  instances  of  which  will  be  here- 
after specified  when  we  come  to  trace  more  particularly  in 
detail  the  effects  of  the  tangential  force  in  various  configu- 
rations of  the  disturbed  and  disturbing  bodies,  and  to  explain 
the  consequences  of  a  near  approach  to  commensurability  in 
their  periodic  times.  An  exact  commensurability  in  this 
respect,  such,  for  instance,  as  would  bring  both  planets  round 
to  the  same  configuration  in  two  or  three  revolutions  of  one 
of  them,  would  appear  at  first  sight  to  destroy  one  of  the 
essential  elements  of  our  demonstration.  But  even  supposing 
such  an  exact  adjustment  to  subsist  at  any  epoch,  it  could 

*  Greater  deviations  will  probably  be  found  to  exist  in  the  orbits  of  the  small 
extra-tropical  planets.  But  these  are  too  insignificant  members  of  our  system 
to  need  special  notice  in  a  work  of  this  nature. 


DISPLACEMENT    OF    THE    UPPER    FOCUS. 


459 


not  remain  permanent,  since  by  a  remarkable  property  of 
perturbations  of  this  class,  which  geometers  have  demon- 
strated, but  the  reasons  of  which  we  cannot  stop  to  explain, 
any  cliange  produced  on  the  axis  of  the  disturbed  planet's 
orbit  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  contrary 
direction  in  that  of  the  disturbing,  so  that  the  periods  would 
recede  from  commensurability  by  the  mere  effect  of  their 
mutual  action.  Cases  are  not  wanting  in  the  planetary  sys- 
tem of  a  certain  approach  to  commensurability,  and  in  one 
very  remarkable  case  (that  of  Uranus  and  Neptune)  of  a 
considerably  near  one,  not  near  enough,  however,  in  the 
smallest  degree  to  affect  the  validity  of  the  argument,  but 
only  to  give  rise  to  inequalities  of  very  long  periods,  of  which 
more  presently.* 

(670.)  The  variation  of  the  length  of  the  axis  of  the 
disturbed  orbit  is  due  solely  to  the  action  of  the  tangential 
disturbing  force.  It  is  otherwise  with  that  of  its  excentricity 
and  of  the  position  of  its  axis,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the 
longitude  of  its  perihelion.  Both  the  normal  and  tangential 
components  of  the  disturbing  force  affect  these  elements. 
We  shall,  however,  consider  separately  the  influence  of  each, 


and,  commencing,  as  the  simplest  case,  with  that  of  the  tan- 
gential force  ;  —  let  P  be  the  place  of  the  disturbed  planet 
in  its  elliptic  orbit  A  P  B,  whose  axis  at  the  moment  is  A  S  B 
and  focus  S.     Suppose  Y  P  Z  to  be  a  tangent  to  this  orbit  at 

*  41   revolutions  of  Neptune  are  nearly  equal  to  SI  of  Uranus,  giving  rbe 
to  an  inequality,  having  6805  years  for  its  period. 


460  OUTLINES    OF    ASTKONOMT. 

P.  Then,  if  we  suppose  AB=2a,  the  other  focus  of  the 
ellipse,  H,  will  be  found  by  making  the  angle  ZPH  =  YPS 
or  Y  P  H  =  180°—  Y  P  Z,  or  S  P  H  =  180°  —  2  Y  P  S,  and 
taking  P  H  =  2  a —  S  P.  This  is  evident  from  the  nature 
of  the  ellipse,  in  which  lines  drawn  from  any  point  to  the  two 
foci  make  equal  angles  with  the  tangent,  and  have  their  sum 
equal  to  the  major  axis.  Suppose,  now,  the  tangential  force 
to  act  on  P  and  to  increase  its  velocity.  It  will  therefore 
increase  the  axis,  so  that  the  new  value  assumed  by  a  (viz.  a') 
will  be  greater  than  a.  But  the  tangential  force  does  not 
alter  the  angle  of  tangency,  so  that  to  find  the  new  posi- 
tion (H')  of  the  upper  focus,  we  must  measure  off  along 
the  same  line  P  H,  a  distance  PH/(=2a/  —  SP)  greater 
than  P  H.  Do  this  then,  and  join  S  IP  and  produce  it. 
Then  will  A'  B'  be  the  new  position  of  the  axis,  and  £  S  IP 
the  new  excentricity.  Hence  we  conclude,  1st,  that  the 
new  position  of  the  perihelion  A'  will  deviate  from  the  old 
one  A  towards  the  same  side  of  the  axis  A  B  on  which 
P  is  when  the  tangential  force  acts  to  increase  the  velocity, 
whether  P  be  moving  from  perihelion  to  aphelion,  or 
the  contrary.  2dly,  That  on  the  same  supposition  as  to 
the  action  of  the  tangential  force,  the  excentricity  increases 
when  P  is  between  the  perihelion  and  the  perpendicular  to 
the  axis  F  H  G  drawn  through  the  upper  focus,  and  dimi- 
nishes when  between  the  aphelion  and  the  same  perpendicular. 
3dly,  That  for  a  given  change  of  velocity,  i.  e.  for  a  given 
value  of  the  tangential  force,  the  momentary  variation  in  the 
place  of  the  perihelion  is  a  maximum  when  P  is  at  F  or  G, 
from  which  situation  of  P  to  the  perihelion  or  aphelion,  it 
decreases  to  nothing,  the  perihelion  being  stationary  when  P 
is  at  A  or  B.  4thly,  That  the  variation  of  the  excentricity 
due  to  this  cause  is  complementary  in  its  law  of  increase 
and  decrease  to  that  of  the  perihelion,  being  a  maximum  for 
a  given  tangential  force  when  P  is  at  A  or  B,  and  vanishing 
when  at  G  or  F.  And  lastly,  that  where  the  tangential  force 
acts  to  diminish  the  velocity,  all  these  results  are  reversed. 
If  the  orbit  be  very  nearly  circular*  the  points  F,  G,  will  be 

*  So  nearly  that  the  cube  of  the  excentricity  maj  be  neglected. 


DISPLACEMENT   OF    THE    UPPER    FOCUS. 


40 1 


so  situated  that,  although  not  at  opposite  extremities  of  a 
diameter,  the  times  of  describing  A  F,  F  B,  B  G,  and  G  A 
will  be  all  equal,  and  each  of  course  one  quarter  of  the  whole 
periodic  time  of  P. 

(671.)  Let  us  now  consider  the  effects  of  the  normal  com- 
ponent of  the  disturbing  force  upon  the  same  elements.  The 
direct  effect  of  this  force  is  to  increase  or  diminish  the  curva- 
ture of  the  orbit  at  the  point  P  of  its  action,  without  pro- 
ducing any  change  on  the  velocity,  so  that  the  length  of  the 


axis  remains  unaltered  by  its  action.  Now,  an  increase  of 
curvature  at  P  is  synonymous  with  a  decrease  in  the  angle 
of  tangency  SPY  when  P  is  approaching  towards  S,  and  with 
an  increase  in  that  angle  when  receding  from  S.  Suppose 
the  former  case,  and  while  P  approaches  S  (or  is  moving 
from  aphelion  to  perihelion),  let  the  normal  force  act  inwards 
or  towards  the  concavity  of  the  ellipse.  Then  will  the  tangent 
P  Y  by  the  action  of  that  force  have  taken  up  the  position 
P  Y'.  To  find  the  corresponding  position  H'  taken  up  by 
the  focus  of  the  orbit  so  disturbed,  we  must  make  the  angle 
S  P  H'=  180°  -  2  S  P  Y',  or,  which  comes  to  the  same,  draw 
PH"on  the  side  of  P  H  opposite  to  S,  making  the  angle 
H  PH"  =  twice  the  angle  of  deflection  YPY'  and  in  P  H" 
take  PH'  =  P  H.  Joining,  then,  SH'  and  producing  it, 
A'  S  H'  M'  will  be  the  new  position  of  the  axis,  A'  the  new 
perihelion,  and  \  S  H'  the  new  excentricity.  Hence  we 
conclude,  1st,  that  the  normal  f^rce  acting  inwards,  and  P 
moving  towards  the  perihelion,  the  new  direction  S  A'  of  the 
perihelion  is  in  advance  (with  reference  to  the  direction  of  P's 


4tJ2  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

revolution)  of  the  old  —  or  the  apsides  advance  —  when  P  Is 
anywhere  situated  between  F  and  A  (since  when  at  F  the 
point  H'  falls  upon  H  M  between  H  and  M).  When  P  is 
at  F  the  apsides  are  stationary,  but  when  P  is  anywhere 
between  M  and  F  the  apsides  retrograde,  H'  in  this  case 
lying  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  axis.  2dly,  That  the  same 
directions  of  the  normal  force  and  of  P's  motion  being 
supposed,  the  excentricity  increases  while  P  moves  through 
the  whole  semiellipse  from  aphelion  to  perihelion  —  the  rate 
of  its  increase  being  a  maximum  when  P  is  at  F,  and  nothing 
at  the  aphelion  and  perihelion.  3dly,  That  these  effects  are 
reversed  in  the  opposite  half  of  the  orbit,  A  G  M,  in 
which  P  passes  from  perihelion  to  aphelion  or  recedes  from  S. 
4thly,  That  they  are  also  reversed  by  a  reversal  of  the 
direction  of  the  normal  force,  outwards,  in  place  of  inwards, 
othly,  That  here  also  the  variations  of  the  excentricity  and 
perihelion  are  complementary  to  each  other;  the  one  vari- 
ation being  most  rapid  when  the  other  vanishes,  and  vice 
versa.  6thly,  And  lastly,  that  the  changes  in  the  situation 
of  the  focus  H  produced  by  the  actions  of  the  tangential 
and  normal  components  of  the  disturbing  force  are  at  right 
angles  to  each  other  in  every  situation  of  P,  and  therefore 
where  the  tangential  force  is  most  efficacious  (in  proportion 
to  its  intensity)  in  varying  either  the  one  or  the  other  of  the 
elements  in  question,  the  normal  is  least  so,  and  vice  versa. 

(672.)  To  determine  the  momentary  efiect  of  the  whole 
disturbing  force  then,  we  have  only  to  resolve  it  into  its 
tangential  and  normal  components,  and  estimating  by  these 
principles  separately  the  effects  of  either  constituent  on  both 
elements,  add  or  subtract  the  results  according  as  they  con- 
spire or  oppose  each  other.  Or  we  may  at  once  make  the 
angle  H  P  H"  equal  to  twice  the  angle  of  deflection  produced 
by  the  normal  force,  and  lay  off  PH"  =  PH  + twice  the 
variation  of  a  produced  in  the  same  moment  of  time  by  the 
tangential  force,  and  H"  will  be  the  new  focus.  The  mo- 
mentary velocity  generated  by  the  tangential  force  is  cal- 
culable from  a  knowledge  of  that  force  by  the  ordinary  prin- 
ciples of  dynamics  ;  and  from  this,  the  variation  of  the  axis  is 


EFFECTS   ON    THE    APSIDES   AND    EXCENTRICITIES.      463 

sasily  derived.  *  The  momentary  velocity  generated  by  the 
normal  force  in  its  own  direction  ia  in  like  manner  calculable 
from  a  knowledge  of  that  force,  and  dividing  this  by  the 
linear  velocity  of  P  at  that  instant,  we  deduce  the  angular 
velocity  of  the  tangent  about  P,  or  the  momentary  variation 
of  the  angle  of  tangency  SPY,  corresponding. 

(673.)  The  following  resume  of  these  several  results  in  a 
tabular  form  includes  every  variety  of  case  according  as  P  is 
approaching  to  or  receding  from  S ;  as  it  is  situated  in  the 
arc  F  A  G  of  its  orbit  about  the  perihelion  or  in  the  remoter 
arc  G  M  F  about  the  aphelion,  as  the  tangential  force  accele- 
rates or  retards  the  disturbed  body,  or  as  the  normal  acts  in- 
wards or  outwards  with  reference  to  the  concavity  of  the  orbit 

EFFECTS    OF    THE    TANGENTIAL    DISTURBING   FORCE. 


Direction  ol  P's  motion. 

Situation  of  P  in  orbit. 

Action  of  Tangential 
Force. 

Effect  on  Elements. 

Approaching  S. 

Anywhere. 

Accelerating  P. 

Apsides  recede. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Retarding  P. 

advance. 

Receding  from  S. 

Ditto. 

Accelerating  P. 

advance. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Retarding  P. 

recede. 

Indifferent. 

About  Aphelion. 

Accelerating  P. 

Exccntr.  decreases. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Retarding  P. 

increases. 

Ditto. 

About  Perihelion. 

Accelerating  P. 

increases.! 

Ditto 

Ditto. 

Retarding  P. 

decreases.) 

EFFECTS    OF    THE    NORMAL    DISTURBING    FORCE. 


Direction  of  P's  motion . 

1 

Situation  of  P  in  orbit 

Action  of  Normal 
Force. 

i 
Effect  on  Kit  rnr?t#. 

Indifllrent. 

About  Aphelion. 

Inwards. 

Apsides  recede. 

\         Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Outwards. 

advance. 

Ditto. 

About  Perihelion. 

Inwards. 

advance. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Outwards. 

recede. 

Approaching  S. 

Anv  where. 

Inwards. 

Excentr.  increases. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

Outwards. 

decreases. 

Receding  from  S. 

Ditto. 

Inwards. 

decreases. 

Ditfx 

Ditto. 

Outwards. 

increases. 

1      '£ 


—  ?*,  and  '  = —  v1  *  A~ — =  v*  —  v"  =  (»  +v')  (o  —  r')  or  when  in- 


finitesimal variations  only  are  considered 


•  =  2»(t>'  —  v)  or  r.''-a«=2a't>  (V  —  v) 


from  which  it  appears  that  the  variation  of  the  axis  arising  from  a  given  va- 
riation of  velocity  is  independent  of  r,  or  is  tbe  same  at  whatever  distance  from  S 
the  change  take*  place,  and  that  cateris  paribut  it  is  greater  for  a  given  change  of 
velocity  (or  for  a  given  tangential  force)  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  velocity  its**/. 


464  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

(674.)  From  the  momentary  changes  in  the  elements  of 
the  disturbed  orbit  corresponding  to  successive  situations  of 
P  and  M,  to  conclude  the  total  amount  of  change  produced 
in  any  given  time  is  the  business  of  the  integral  calculus,  and 
lies  far  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  work.  Without  its 
aid,  however,  and  by  general  considerations  of  the  periodical 
recurrence  of  configurations  of  the  same  character,  we  have 
been  able  to  demonstrate  many  of  the  most  interesting  con- 
clusions to  which  geometers  have  been  conducted,  examples 
of  which  have  already  been  given  in  the  reasoning  by  which 
the  permanence  of  the  axes,  the  periodicity  of  the  inclina- 
tions, and  the  revolutions  of  the  nodes  of  the  planetary  orbits 
have  been  demonstrated.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  apply 
similar  considerations  to  the  motion  of  the  apsides,  and  the 
variations  of  the  excentricities.  To  this  end  we  must  first 
trace  the  changes  induced  on  the  disturbing  forces  themselves, 
with  the  varying  positions  of  the  bodies,  and  here  as  in  treating 
of  the  inclinations  we  shall  suppose,  unless  the  contrary  is  ex- 
pressly indicated,  both  orbits  to  be  very  nearly  circular, 
without  which  limitation  the  complication  of  the  subject  would 
become  too  embarrassing  for  the  reader  to  follow,  and  defeat 
the  end  of  explanation. 

(675.)  On  this  supposition  the  directions  of  S  P  and  S  Y, 
the  perpendicular  on  the  tangent  at  P,  may  be  regarded  as 
coincident,  and  the  normal  and  radial  disturbing  forces  become 
nearly  identical  in  quantity,  also  the  tangential  and  transversal, 
by  the  near  coincidence  of  the  points  T  and  L  (fig.  art.  657.). 


DISTURBING    FORCES    IN    CIRCULAR    ORBITS.  465 

So  far  then  as  the  intensity  of  the  forces  is  concerned,  it  will 
make  very  little  difference  in  which  way  the  forces  are  re- 
solved, nor  will  it  at  all  materially  affect  our  conclusions  as  to 
the  effects  of  the  normal  and  tangential  forces,  if  in  estimating 
their  quantitative  values,  we  take  advantage  of  the  simplifica- 
tion introduced  into  their  numerical  expression  by  the  neglect 
of  the  angle  PSY,  i.  e.  by  the  substitution  for  them  of  the 
radial  and  transversal  components.  The  character  of  these 
effects  depends  (art.  670,  671.)  on  the  direction  in  which  the 
forces  act,  which  we  shall  suppose  normal  and  tangential  as 
before,  and  it  is  only  on  the  estimation  of  their  quantitative 
effects  that  the  error  induced  by  the  neglect  of  this  angle  can 
fall.  In  the  lunar  orbit  this  angle  never  exceeds  3°  10',  and 
its  influence  on  the  quantitative  estimation  of  the  acting  forces 
may  therefore  be  safely  neglected  in  a  first  approximation. 
Now  M  N  being  found  by  the  proportion  M  Pa  :  M  S- : : 
MS:  M  N,  N  P  (=  M  N  —  M  P)  is  also  known,  and  there- 
fore N  L  =  N  P.  sin  N  P  S  =  N  P.  sin  (A  S  P  +  S  M  P)  and 
LS=PL-PS  =  NP.cosNPS-PS  =  NP.cos(ASP 
+  S  M  P)  —  S  P  become  known,  which  express  respectively 
the  tangential  and  normal  forces  on  the  same  scale  that  S  M 
represents  M's  attraction  on  S.*  Suppose  P  to  revolve  in  the 
direction  E  A  D  B.  Then,  by  drawing  the  figure  in  various 
situations  of  P  throughout  the  whole  circle,  the  reader  will 
easily  satisfy  himself  — 1st.  That  the  tangential  force  acce- 
lerates P,  as  it  moves  from  E  towards  A,  and  from  D  towards 
B,  but  retards  it  as  it  passes  from  A  to  D,  and  from  B  to  E. 
2nd.  That  the  tangential  force  vanishes  at  the  four  points 
A,  D,  E,  B,  and  attains  a  maximum  at  some  intermediate  points. 
3rdly.  That  the  normal  force  is  directed  outwards  at    the 

•  MS=»R;  SP  =  r;  MP-/;  ASP-»;  AMP-M;MN--^.5    N  P 
»*!z£-(R-/)(l   +  -  +  £)  ;  whence  wc  have  N  L  =  (R-/).  siu  (0+  M/ 

(  1  +  y+~)  I   L  S  =  (R-/).   cos  (0+M).  (l   +  j  +  jt)  -r.      When  R 

and  /,  owing  to  the  great  distance  of  M,  are   nearly  equal,  ve  have  R—  f-m 
PV,  —  _.=  l   nearly,    and  the  angle   M    may   be   neglected;    so    that    wc    have 

N  P  P  9  P  V. 

11    11 


460 


OUTLINES   OF    ARTROXOMV. 


syzvgios  A.  B,  and  inwards  at  the  points  D,  E,  at  which  points 
respectively  its  outward  and  inward  intensities  attain  their 
maxima.  Lastly,  that  this  force  vanishes  at  points  interme- 
diate between  A  D,  D  B,  BE,  and  E  A,  which  points,  when 
M  is  considerably  remote,  are  situated  nearer  to  the  quadra- 
ture than  the  syzygies. 

(676.)  In  the  lunar  theory,  to  which  we  shall  now  proceed 
to  apply  these  principles,  both  the  geometrical  representation 
and  the  algebraic  expression  of  the  disturbing  forces  admit  of 
great  simplification.  Owing  to  the  great  distance  of  the  sun 
M,  at  whose  center  the  radius  of  the  moon's  orbit  never 
subtends  an  angle  of  more  than  about  8',  N  P  may  be  re- 
garded as  parallel  to  A  B.  And  D  S  E  becomes  a  straight  line 
coincident  with  the  line  of  quadratures,  so  that  V  P  becomes 
the  cosine  of  ASP  to  radius  S  P,  and  NL  =  NP  .  sin 
ASP;  L  P  =  N  P  .  cos  A  S  P.  Moreover,  in  this  case 
(see  the  note  on  the  last  article)  NP  =  3P  V=3  S  P  .  cos 
ASP;  and  consequently  N  L  =  3  S  P  .  cos  A  SP  .  sin  A  SP 
=  |  S  P  .  sin  2  A  S  P,  and  L  S  =S  P  (3  .  cos  A  S  P2  —  1) 
=  ^SP(l+3.  cos  2  ASP)  which  vanishes  when  cos 
ASP2  =  j,  or  at  64°  14'  from  the  syzygy.  Suppose  through 
every  point  of  P's  orbit  there  be  drawn  S  Q=3  SP  .  cos 
A  S  P2,  then  will  Q  trace  out  a  certain  looped  oval,  as  in  the 
figure,  cutting  the  orbit  in  four  points  64°  14'  from  A  and  B 
respectively,  and  P  Q  will  always  represent  in  quantity  and 
direction  the  normal  force  acting  at  P. 


(677.)  It  is  important  to  remark  here,  because  upon  this 
the  whole  lunar  theory  and  especially  that  of  the  motion  of 


MOTION    OF    THE    LUNAK    APSIDES.  467 

the  apsides  hinges,  that  all  the  acting  disturbing  forces,  at 
equal  angles  of  elongation  A  S  P  of  the  moon  from  the  sun, 
are  ceteris  paribus  proportional  to  S  P,  the  moon's  distance 
from  the  earth,  and  are  therefore  greater  when  the  moon  is 
near  its  apogee  than  when  near  its  perigee ;  the  extreme 
proportion  being  that  of  about  28  :  25.  This  premised,  let 
us  first  consider  the  effect  of  the  normal  force  in  displacing 
the  lunar  apsides.  This  we  shall  best  be  enabled  to  do  by 
examining  separately  those  cases  in  which  the  effects  are  most 
strongly  contrasted  ;  viz.  when  the  major  axis  of  the  moon's 
orbit  is  directed  towards  the  sun,  and  when  at  right  angles 
lo  that  direction.     First,   then,   let  the   line  of  apsides  be 


—  —       • 


directed  to  the  sun  as  in  the  annexed  figure,  where  A  is  the 
perigee,  and  take  the  arcs  A  a,  A  b,  B  c,  B  d  each=64°  14'. 
Then  while  P  is  between  a  and  b  the  normal  force  acting  out- 
wards, and  the  moon  being  near  its  perigee,  by  art.  671.  the 
apsides  will  recede,  but  when  between  c  and  d,  the  force  there 
acting  outwards,  but  the  moon  being  near  its  apogee,  they 
will  advance.  The  rapidity  of  these  movements  will  be  re- 
spectively at  its  maxima  at  A  and  B,  not  only  because  the 
disturbing  forces  are  then  most  intense,  but  also  because 
(see  art.  671.)  they  act  most  advantageously  at  those  points 
t-o  displace  the  axis.  Proceeding  from  A  and  B  towards  the 
neutral  points  abed  the  rapidity  of  their  recess  and  advance 
diminishes,  and  is  nothing  (or  the  apsides  are  stationary) 
when  P  is  at  either  of  these  points.  From  b  to  D,  or  rather 
to  a  point  some  little  beyond  D  (art.  671.)  the  force  acts 
inwards,  and  the  moon  is  still  near  perigee,  so  that  in  this  aro 

hh  v 


468  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

of  the  orbit  the  apsides  advance.  But  the  rate  of  advance 
is  feeble,  because  in  the  early  part  of  that  arc  the  normal 
force  is  small,  and  as  P  approaches  D  and  the  force  gains 
power,  it  acts  disadvantageously  to  move  the  axis,  its  effect 
vanishing  altogether  when  it  arrives  beyond  D  at  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  perpendicular  to  the  upper  focus  of  the  lunar 
ellipse.  Thence  up  to  c  this  feeble  advance  is  reversed  and 
converted  into  a  recess,  the  force  still  acting  inwards,  but 
the  moon  now  being  near  its  apogee.  And  so  also  for 
the  arcs  d  E,  E  a.     In  the  figure  these  changes  are  indicated 

by  -f-  +  for  rapid    advance, for  rapid  recess,  +  and  — 

for  feeble  advance  and  recess,  and  0  for  the  stationary  points 
Now  if  the  forces  were  equal  on  the  sides  of  +  and  —  it  is 
evident  that  there  would  be  an  exact  counterbalance  of 
advance  and  recess  on  the  average  of  a  whole  revolution 
But  this  is  not  the  case.  The  force  in  apogee  is  greater  than 
that  in  perigee  in  the  proportion  of  28  :  25,  while  in  the 
quadratures  about  D  and  E  they  are  equal.  Therefore, 
while  the  feeble  movements  -f  and  —  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
these  points  destroy  each  other  almost  exactly,  there  will 
necessarily  remain  a  considerable  balance  in  favour  of  advance, 
in  this  situation  of  the  line  of  apsides. 

(678.)  Next,  suppose  the  apogee  to  lie  at  A,  and  the  peri- 
gee at  B.  In  this  case  it  is  evident  that,  so  far  as  the  di- 
rection of  the  motions  of  the  apsides  is  concerned,  all  the 
conclusions  of  the  foregoing  reasoning  will  be  reversed  by  the 
substitution  of  the  word  perigee  for  apogee,  and  vice  versa ; 
and  all  the  signs  in  the  figure  referred  to  will  be  changed. 
But  now  the  most  powerful  forces  act  on  the  side  of  A,  that 
is  to  say,  still  on  the  side  of  advance,  this  condition  also  being 
reversed.  In  either  situation  of  the  orbit,  then,  the  apsides 
advance. 

(679.)  (Case  3.)  Suppose,  now,  the  major  axis  to  have  the 
situation  D  E,  and  the  perigee  to  be  on  the  side  of  D.  Here, 
in  the  arc  b  c  of  P's  motion  the  normal  force  acts  inwards, 
and  the  moon  is  near  perigee,  consequently  the  apsides 
advance,  but  with  a  moderate  rapidity,  the  maximum  of  the 
inward  normal   force   beinjj  onlv  half  that  of  the  outward. 


MOTION    Or   THE   LUNAR   APSIDES.  469 

In  the  arcs  A  b  and  c  B  the  moon  is  still  near  perigee,  and 
the  force  acts  outwards,  but  though  powerfully  towards  A 
and  B,  yet  at  a  constantly  increasing  disadvantage  (art.  671.) 
Therefore  in  these  arcs  the  apsides  recede,  but  moderately. 
In  a  A  and  B  d (being  towards  apogee)  they  again  advance, 
still  with  a  moderate  velocity.  Lastly,  throughout  the  arc 
d  a,  being  about  apogee  with  an  inward  force,  they  recede. 
Here  as  before,  if  the  perigee  and  apogee  forces  were  equal, 
the  advance  and  recess  would  counterbalance;  but  as  in  fact 
the  apogee  forces  preponderate,  there  will  be  a  balance  on 
the  entire  revolution  in  favour  of  recess.  The  same  reasoning 
of  course  holds  good  if  the  perigee  be  towards  E.  But  now, 
between  these  cases  and  those  in  the  foregoing  articles,  there 
is  this  difference,  viz.  that  in  this  the  dominant  effect  results 
from  the  inward  action  of  the  normal  force  in  quadratures, 
while  in  the  others  it  results  from  its  outward,  and  doubly 
powerful  action  in  syzygies.  The  recess  of  the  apsides  in 
their  quadratures  arising  from  the  action  of  the  normal  force 
will  therefore  be  less  than  their  advance  in  their  syzygies ; 
and  not  only  on  this  account,  but  also  because  of  the  much 
less  extent  of  the  arcs  b  c  and  d  a  on  which  the  balance  is 
mainly  struck  in  this  case,  than  of  a  b  and  c  d,  the  correspond- 
ing most  influential  arcs  in  the  other. 

(680.)  In  intermediate  situations  of  the  line  of  apsides,  the 
effect  will  be  intermediate,  and  there  will  of  course  be  a  situa- 
tion of  them  in  which  on  an  average  of  a  whole  revolution, 
they  are  stationary.  This  situation  it  is  easy  to  see  will  be 
nearer  to  the  line  of  quadratures  than  of  syzygies,  and  the 
preponderance  of  advance  will  be  maintained  over  a  much 
more  considerable  arc  than  that  of  recess,  among  the  possible 
situations  which  they  can  hold.  On  every  account,  therefore 
the  action  of  the  normal  force  causes  the  lunar  apsides  to 
progress  in  a  complete  revolution  of  M  or  in  a  synodical  year, 
during  which  the  motion  of  the  sun  round  the  earth  (as  we 
consider  the  earth  at  rest)  brings  the  line  of  syzygies  into  all 
situations  with  respect  to  that  of  apsides. 

(681.)  Let  us  next  consider  the  action  of  the  tangential 
force.     And  as  before  ^Case  1.),  supposing  the  perigee  of  the 


470  OUTLINES    OF    ASTUONOMl'. 

moon  at  A,  and  the  direction  of  her  revolution  to  be  A  D  B  K, 
the  tangential  force  retards  her  motion  through  the  quadrant 
A  D,  in  which  she  recedes  from  S,  therefore  by  art.  670.  the 
apsides  recede.  Through  D  B  the  force  accelerates,  while 
the  moon  still  recedes,  therefore  they  advance.  Through  B  E 
the  force  retards,  and  the  moon  approaches,  therefore  they 
continue  to  advance,  and  finally  throughout  the  quadrant  E  A 
the  force  accelerates  and  the  moon  approaches,  therefore  they 
recede.  In  virtue  therefore  of  this  force,  the  apsides  recede, 
during  the  description  of  the  arc  P2  A  D,  and  advance  during 
D  B  E,  but  the  force  being  in  this  case  as  in  that  of  the 
normal  force  more  powerful  at  apogee,  the  latter  will  pre- 
ponderate, and  the  apsides  will  advance  on  an  average  of  a 
whole  revolution. 

(682.)  (Case  2.)  The  perigee  being  towards  B,  we  have 
to  substitute  in  the  foregoing  reasoning  approach  to  S,  for 
recess  from  it,  and  vice  versa,  the  accelerations  and  retarda- 
tions remaining  as  before.  Therefore  the  results,  as  far  as 
direction  is  concerned,  will  be  reversed  in  each  quadrant,  the 
apsides  advance  during  E  A  D  and  recede  during  D  B  E. 
But  the  situation  of  the  apogee  being  also  reversed,  the  pre- 
dominance remains  on  the  side  of  E  A  D,  that  is,  of  advance. 

(683.)  (Case  3.)  Apsides  in  quadratures,  perigee  near  D. — 
Over  quadrant  A  D,  approach  and  retardation,  therefore 
advance  of  apsides.  Over  D  B  recess  and  acceleration,  there- 
fore again  advance ;  over  B  E  recess  and  retardation  with 
recess  of  apsides,  and  lastly  over  E  A  approach  and  accelera- 
tion, producing  their  continued  recess.  Total  result:  advance 
during  the  half  revolution  A  D  B,  and  recess  during  B  E  A, 
the  acting  forces  being  more  powerful  in  the  latter,  whence 
of  course  a  preponderant  recess.  The  same  result  when  the 
perigee  is  at  E. 

(684.)  So  far  the  analogy  of  reasoning  between  the  action 
of  the  tangential  and  normal  forces  is  perfect.  But  from  this 
point  they  diverge.  It  is  not  here  as  before.  The  recess  of 
t tie  apsides  in  quadratures  does  not  now  arise  from  the  pre- 
dominance of  feeble  over  feebler  forces,  while  that  in  syzygics 
i  cults  from  that  of  powerful  over  powerful  ones.     The  maxi- 


MOTION   OF    THE   LUNAR    APSIDES.  471 

mum  accelerating  action  of  the  tangential  force  is  equal  to 
its  maximum  retarding,  while  the  inward  action  of  the  normal 
at  its  maximum  is  only  half  the  maximum  of  its  outward. 
Neither  is  there  that  difference  in  the  extent  of  the  arcs  over 
which  the  balance  is  struck  in  this,  as  in  the  other  case,  the 
action  of  the  tangential  force  being  inward  and  outward 
alternately  over  equal  ares,  each  a  complete  quadrant. 
Whereas,  therefore,  in  tracing  the  action  of  the  normal  force, 
we  found  reason  to  conclude  it  much  more  effective  to  produee 
progress  of  the  apsides  in  their  syzygy,  than  in  their  quadrature 
situations,  we  can  draw  no  such  conclusion  in  that  of  the 
tangential  forces :  there  being,  as  regards  that  force,  a  complete 
symmetry  in  the  four  quadrants,  while  in  regard  of  the  normal 
force  the  symmetry  is  only  a  half-symmetry  having  relation 
to  two  semicircles. 

(685.)  Taking  the  average  of  many  revolutions  of  the  sun 
about  the  earth,  in  which  it  shall  present  itself  in  every  pos- 
sible variety  of  situations  to  the  line  of  apsides,  we  see  that  the 
effect  of  the  normal  force  is  to  produce  a  rapid  advance  in  the 
syzygy  of  the  apsides,  and  a  less  rapid  recess  in  their  quadra- 
ture, and  on  the  whole,  therefore,  a  moderately  rapid  general 
advanee,  while  that  of  the  tangential  is  to  produce  an  equally 
rapid  advance  in  syzygy,  and  recess  in  quadrature.  Directly, 
therefore,  the  tangential  force  would  appear  to  have  no  ulti- 
mate influence  in  causing  either  increase  or  diminution  in  the 
mean  motion  of  the  apsides  resulting  from  the  action  of  the 
normal  force.  It  does  so,  however,  indirectly,  conspiring  in 
that  respect  with,  and  greatly  increasing,  an  indirect  action 
of"  the  normal  force  in  a  manner  which  we  shall  now  proceed 
to  explain. 

(686.)  The  sun  moving  uniformly,  or  nearly  so,  in  the 
eame  direction  as  P,  the  line  of  apsides  when  in  or  near  the 
syzygy,  in  advancing  follows  the  sun,  and  therefore  remains 
materially  longer  in  the  neighbourhood  of  syzygy  than  if  it 
rested.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  apsides  are  in  quadrature 
they  recede,  and  moving  therefore  contrary  to  the  sun's  motion, 
remain  a  shorter  time  in  that  neighbourhood,  than  if  they 
rested.     Thus  the  advance,  already  preponderant,  is  made  to 


472  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY 

preponderate  more  by  its  longer  continuance,  and  the  recess, 
already  deficient,  is  rendered  still  more  so  by  the  shortening 
of  its  duration.*  Whatever  cause,  then,  increases  directly 
the  rapidity  of  both  advance  and  recess,  though  it  may  do  both 
equally,  aids  in  this  indirect  process,  and  it  is  thus  that  the 
tangential  force  becomes  effective  through  the  medium  of 
the  progress  already  produced,  in  doing  and  aiding  the  normal 
force  to  do  that  which  alone  it  would  be  unable  to  effect. 
Thus  we  have  perturbation  exaggerating  perturbation,  and 
thus  we  see  what  is  meant  by  geometers,  when  they  declare 
that  a  considerable  part  of  the  motion  of  the  lunar  apsides  is 
due  to  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force,  or,  in  other  words, 
arises  out  of  a  second  approximation  in  which  the  influence 
of  the  first  in  altering  the  data  of  the  problem  is  taken  into 
account. 

(687.)  The  curious  and  complicated  effect  of  perturbation, 
described  in  the  last  article,  has  given  more  trouble  to  geo- 
meters than  any  other  part  of  the  lunar  theory.  Newton 
himself  had  succeeded  in  tracing  that  part  of  the  motion  of 
the  apogee  which  is  due  to  the  direct  action  of  the  radial 
force  ;  but  finding  the  amount  only  half  what  observation 
assigns,  he  appears  to  have  abandoned  the  subject  in  despair. 
Nor,  when  resumed  by  his  successors,  did  the  inquiry,  for  a 
very  long  period,  assume  a  more  promising  aspect.  On  the 
contrary,  Newton's  result  appeared  to  be  even  minutely 
verified,  and  the  elaborate  investigations  which  were  lavished 
upon  the  subject  without  success  began  to  excite  strong  doubts 
whether  this  feature  of  the  lunar  motions  could  be  explained 
at  all  by  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation.  The  doubt  was 
removed,  however,  almost  in  the  instant  of  its  origin,  by  the 
same  geometer,  Clairaut,  who  first  gave  it  currency,  and  who 
gloriously  repaired  the  error  of  his  momentary  hesitation,  by 
demonstrating  the  exact  coincidence  between  theory  and  ob- 
servation, when  the  effect  of  the  tangential  force  is  properly 
taken  into  the  account.  The  lunar  apogee  circulates,  in 
3232d -575343,  or  about  9,}  years. 

•    S{wt  >n,  l'rinc.  i.  6l>    l.'or.  8 


VARIATION    OF    THE   MOON'S   EXCENTKIC1TY.  473 

(688.)  Let  us  now  proceed  to  investigate  the  influence  of 
the  disturbing  forces  so  resolved  on  the  excentricity  of  the 
lunar  orbit,  and  the  foregoing  articles  having  sufficiently 
familiarized  the  reader  with  our  mode  of  following  out  the 
changes  in  different  situations  of  the  orbit,  we  shall  take  at 
once  a  more  general  situation,  and  suppose  the  line  of  apsides 
in  any  position  with  respect  to  the  sun,  such  as  Z  Y,  the 
perigee  being  at  Z,  a  point  between  the  lower  syzygy  and 
the  quadrature  next  following  it,  the  direction  of  P's  motion 
as  all  along  supposed  being  A  D  B  E.  Then  (commencing 
with  the  normal  force)  the  momentary  change  of  excentricity 

will  vanish  at  a,  b,  c,  d>  by  the 
vanishing  of  that  force,  and  at 
Z  and  Y  by  the  effect  of  situa- 
M  tion  in  the  orbit  annulling  its 

action  (art.  671.).  In  the 
arcs  Z  b  and  Y  d  therefore  the 
change  of  excentricity  will  be 
small,  the  acting  force  nowhere 
attaining  either  a  great  magni- 
tude or  an  advantageous  situation  within  their  limits.  And 
the  force  Avithin  these  two  arcs  having  the  same  character  as 
to  inward  and  outward,  but  being  oppositely  influential  by 
reason  of  the  approach  of  P  to  S  in  one  of  them  and  its  recess 
in  the  other,  it  is  evident  that,  so  far  as  these  arcs  are  con- 
cerned, a  very  near  compensation  of  effects  will  take  place, 
and  though  the  apogeal  arc  Y  d  will  be  somewhat  more  in- 
fluential, this  will  tell  for  little  upon  the  average  of  a  revo- 
lution. 

(689.)  The  arcs  bT>c  and  rfEa  are  each  much  less  than  a 
quadrant  in  extent,  and  the  force  acting  inwards  throughout 
them  (which  at  its  maximum  in  D  and  E  is  only  half  the 
outward  force  at  A,  B)  degrades  very  rapidly  in  intensity 
towards  either  syzygy  (see  art.  676.).  Hence  whether  Z  be 
between  be  or  b  A,  the  effects  of  the  force  in  these  circa 
will  not  produce  very  extensive  changes  on  the  excentricity, 
and  the  changes  which  it  does  produce  will  (for  the  reason 
already  given)  be  opposed  to  each  other.     Although,  then, 


474  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

the  arc  a  d  be  farther  from  perigee  than  b  c,  and  therefore  tiu> 
force  in  it  is  greater,  yet  the  predominance  of  effect  here 
will  not  be  very  marked,  and  will  moreover  be  partially 
neutralized  by  the  small  predominance  of  an  opposite  character 
in  Y  d  over  Z  b.  On  the  other  hand,  the  arcs  a  Z,  cY  are 
both  larger  in  extent  than  either  of  the  others,  and  the 
seats  of  action  of  forces  doubly  powerful.  Their  influence, 
therefore,  will  be  of  most  importance,  and  their  preponderance 
one  over  the  other,  (being  opposite  in  their  tendencies,)  will 
decide  the  question  whether  on  an  average  of  the  revolution, 
the  excentricity  shall  increase  or  diminish.  It  is  clear 
that  the  decision  must  be  in  favour  of  c  Y,  the  apogeal  arc, 
and,  since  in  this  the  force  is  outwards  and  the  moon  receding 
from  the  earth,  an  increase  of  the  excentricity  will  arise  from 
its  influence.  A  similar  reasoning  will,  evidently,  lead  to  the 
same  conclusion  were  the  apogee  and  perigee  to  change 
places,  for  the  directions  of  P's  motion  as  to  approach  and 
recess  to  S  will  be  indeed  reversed,  but  at  the  same  time 
the  dominant  forces  will  have  changed  sides,  and  the  arc  a  A  Z 
will  now  give  the  character  to  the  result.  But  when  Z  lies 
between  A  and  E,  as  the  reader  may  easily  satisfy  himself, 
the  case  will  be  altogether  different,  and  the  reverse  conclusion 
will  obtain.  Hence  the  changes  of  excentricity  emergent  on 
the  average  of  single  revolutions  from  the  action  of  the  normal 
force  will  be  as  represented  by  the  signs  +  and  —  in  the 
figure  above  annexed. 

(690.)  Let  us  next  consider  the  effect  of  the  tangential 
force.     This  retards    P    in  the    quadrants   AD,    BE,  and 

accelerates  it  in  the  alternate 
ones.  In  the  whole  quadrant 
A  D,  therefore,  the  effect  is  of 
one  character,  the  perigee 
*  being  less  than  90°  from  every 

point  in  it,  and  in  the  whole 
quadrant  B  E  it  is  of  the  oppo- 
site, the  apogee  being  so  si- 
tuated (art.670.)  Moreover, 
in  the  middle  of  each  quadrant,  the  tangential  force  is  at  its 


VARIATION    Oi    THE    MOON'S   EXCENTUHJITY.  475 

maximum.  Now,  in  the  other  quadrants,  K  A  and  D  B,  the 
change  from  perigeal  to  apogeal  vicinity  takes  place,  and  the 
tangential  force,  however  powerful,  has  its  effect  annulled 
hy  situation  (art.  670.),  and  this  happens  more  or  less  nearly 
about  the  points  where  the  force  is  a  maximum.  These 
quadrants,  then,  are  far  less  influential  on  the  total  result, 
so  that  the  character  of  that  result  will  be  decided  by  the 
predominance  of  one  or  other  of  the  former  quadrants,  and 
will  lean  to  that  which  has  the  apogee  in  it.  Now  in  the 
quadrant  B  E  the  force  retards  the  moon  and  the  moon  is  in 
apogee.  Therefore  the  excentricity  increases.  In  this 
situation  therefore  of  the  apogee,  such  is  the  average  result 
of  a  complete  revolution  of  the  moon.  Here  again  also  if  the 
perigee  and  apogee  change  places,  so  will  also  the  character  of 
all  the  partial  influences,  arc  for  arc.  But  the  quadrant  AD 
will  now  preponderate  instead  of  D  E,  so  that  under  this  double 
reversal  of  conditions  the  result  will  be  identical.  Lastly, 
if  the  line  of  apsides  be  in  A  E,  B  D,  it  may  be  shown  in 
like  manner  that  the  excentricity  will  diminish  on  the  average 
of  a  revolution. 

(691.)  Thus  it  appears,  that  in  varying  the  excentricity, 
precisely  as  in  moving  the  line  of  apsides,  the  direct  effect 
of  the  tangential  force  conspires  with  that  of  the  normal,  and 
tends  to  increase  the  extent  of  the  deviations  to  and  fro  on 
either  side  of  a  mean  value  which  the  varying  situation  of 
the  sun  with  respect  to  the  line  of  apsides  gives  rise  to, 
having  for  their  period  of  restoration  a  synodical  revolution 
of  the  sun  and  apse.  Supposing  the  sun  and  apsis  to  start 
together,  the  sun  of  course  will  outrun  the  apsis  (whose 
]>eriod  is  nine  years),  and  in  the  lapse  of  about  (£  +  7^)  part 
of  a  year  will  have  gained  on  it  90°,  during  all  which  interval 
the  apse  will  have  been  in  the  quadrant  A  E  of  our  figure, 
and  the  excentricity  continually  decreasing.  The  decrease 
will  then  cease,  but  the  excentricity  itself  will  be  a  minimum, 
the  sun  being  now  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  apsides. 
Thence  it  will  increase  to  a  maximum  when  the  sun  has 
gained  another  90°,  and  again  attained  the  line  of  apsides,  and 
so  on  alternately.     The  actual  effect  on  the  numerical  value 


*76  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

of  the  lunar  excentricity  is  very  considerable,  the  greatest 
and  least  excentricities  being  in  the  ratio  of  3  to  2.* 

(692.)  The  motion  of  the  apsides  of  the  lunar  orbit  may 
be  illustrated  by  a  very  pretty  mechanical  experiment,  which 
is  otherwise  instructive  in  giving  an  idea  of  the  mode  in 
which  orbitual  motion  is  carried  on  under  the  action  of  cen- 
tral forces  variable  according  to  the  situation  of  the  revolving 
body.  Let  a  leaden  weight  be  suspended  by  a  brass  or  iron 
wire  to  a  hook  in  the  under  side  of  a  firm  beam,  so  as  to 
allow  of  its  free  motion  on  all  sides  of  the  vertical,  and  so 
that  when  in  a  state  of  rest  it  shall  just  clear  the  floor  of  the 
room,  or  a  table  placed  ten  or  twelve  feet  beneath  the  hook. 
The  point  of  support  should  be  well  secured  from  wagging 
to  and  fro  by  the  oscillation  of  the  weight,  which  should  be 
sufficient  to  keep  the  wire  as  tightly  stretched  as  it  will  bear, 
with  the  certainty  of  not  breaking.  Now,  let  a  very  small 
motion  be  communicated  to  the  weight,  not  by  merely  with- 
drawing it  from  the  vertical  and  letting  it  fall,  but  by  giving 
it  a  slight  impulse  sideways.  It  will  be  seen  to  describe  a 
regular  ellipse  about  the  point  of  rest  as  its  center.  If  the 
weight  be  heavy,  and  carry  attached  to  it  a  pencil,  whose 
point  lies  exactly  in  the  direction  of  the  string,  the  ellipse 
may  be  transferred  to  paper  lightly  stretched  and  gently 
pressed  against  it.  In  these  circumstances,  the  situation  of 
the  major  and  minor  axes  of  the  ellipse  will  remain  for  a  long 
time  very  nearly  the  same,  though  the  resistance  of  the  air 
and  the  stiffness  of  the  wire  will  gradually  diminish  its 
dimensions  and  excentricity.  But  if  the  impulse  com- 
municated to  the  weight  be  considerable,  so  as  to  carry  it 
out  to  a  great  angle  (15°  or  20°  from  the  vertical),  this  per- 
manence of  situation  of  the  ellipse  will  no  longer  subsist. 
Its  axis  will  be  seen  to  shift  its  position  at  every  revolution 
of  the  weight,  advancing  in  the  same  direction  with  the 
weight's  motion,  by  an  uniform  and  regular  progression, 
which  at  length  will  entirely  reverse  its  situation,  bringing 
the  direction  of  the  longest  excursions  to  coincide  with  that 

•   Airy,  Gravitation,  j>.  106. 


EXPERIMENTAL   ILLUSTRATION.  477 

in  which  the  shortest  were  previously  made ;  and  so  on, 
round  the  whole  circle ;  and,  in  a  word,  imitating  to  the 
eye,  very  completely,  the  motion  of  the  apsides  of  the  moon's 
orbit. 

(693.)  Now,  if  we  inquire  into  the  cause  of  this  pro- 
gression of  the  apsides,  it  will  not  be  difficult  of  detection. 
When  a  weight  is  suspended  by  a  wire,  and  drawn  aside  from 
the  vertical,  it  is  urged  to  the  lowest  point  (or  rather  in  a 
direction  at  every  instant  perpendicular  to  the  wire)  by  a 
force  which  varies  as  the  sine  of  the  deviation  of  the  wire 
from  the  perpendicular.  Now,  the  sines  of  very  small  arcs 
are  nearly  in  the  proportion  of  the  arcs  themselves ;  and  the 
more  nearly,  as  the  arcs  are  smaller.  If,  therefore,  the 
deviations  from  the  vertical  be  so  small  that  we  may  neglect 
the  cunature  of  the  spherical  surface  in  which  the  weight 
moves,  and  regard  the  curve  described  as  coincident  with  its 
projection  on  a  horizontal  plane,  it  will  be  then  moving 
under  the  same  circumstances  as  if  it  were  a  revolving  body 
attracted  to  a  center  by  a  force  varying  directly  as  the 
distance  ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  curve  described  would  be  an 
ellipse,  having  its  centre  of  attraction  not  in  lhe  focus,  but 
in  the  center  *,  and  the  apsides  of  this  ellipse  would  remain 
fixed.  But  if  the  excursions  of  the  weight  from  the  vertical 
be  considerable,  the  force  urging  it  towards  the  center  will 
deviate  in  its  law  from  the  simple  ratio  of  the  distances  ; 
being  as  the  sine,  while  the  distances  are  as  the  arc.  Now 
the  sine,  though  it  continues  to  increase  as  the  arc  increases, 
yet  does  not  increase  so  fast.  So  soon  as  the  arc  has  any 
sensible  extent,  the  sine  begins  to  fall  somewhat  short  of  the 
magnitude  which  an  exact  numerical  proportionality  would 
require ;  and  therefore  the  force  urging  the  weight  towards 
its  center  or  point  of  rest  at  great  distances  falls,  in  like 
proportion,  somewhat  short  of  that  which  would  keep  the 
body  in  its  precise  elliptic  orbit.  It  will  no  longer,  therefore, 
have,  at  those  greater  distances,  the  same  command  over  the 
weight,  in  proportion  to  its  speed,  which  would   enable  it   to 

•   Newton,  Princip.  i.  47. 


478  OUTMXES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

deflect  it  from  its  rectilinear  tangential  course  into  an  ellipse. 
The  true  path  which  it  describes  will  be  less  curved  in  thi 
remoter  parts  than  is  consistent  with  the  elliptic  figure,  as  in 
the  annexed  cut;  and,  therefore,  it  will  not  so  soon  have  its 
motion  brought  to  be  again  at  right  angles  to  the  radius. 
It  will  require  a  longer  continued  action  of  the  central  force 
to  do  this;  and  before  it  is  accomplished,  more  than  a  quadrant 
of  its  revolution  must  be  passed  over  in 

- 1— =    angular  motion  round  the  center.     But 

,.'7*?^^  this  is  only  stating  at  length,  and  in  a 

:(  more  circuitous  manner,  that  fact  which 

:\T ""  "  c     is  more  briefly  and  summarily  expressed 

by  saying  that  the  apsides  of  its  orbit 
are  progressive.  Nothing  beyond  a  fami- 
liar illustration  is  of  course  intended  in 
what  is  above  said.  The  case  is  not  an  exact  parallel  with 
that,  of  the  lunar  orbit,  the  disturbing  force  being  simply 
radial,  whereas  in  the  lunar  orbit  a  transversal  force  is  also  con- 
cerned, and  even  were  it  otherwise,  only  a  confused  and  in- 
distinct view  of  apsidal  motion  can  be  obtained  from  this  kind 
of  consideration  of  the  curvature  of  the  disturbed  path.  If  we 
would  obtain  a  clear  one,  the  two  foci  of  the  instantaneous 
ellipse  must  be  found  from  the  laws  of  elliptic  motion  per- 
formed under  the  influence  of  a  force  directly  as  the  distance, 
and  the  radial  disturbing  force  being  decomposed  into  its 
tangential  and  normal  components,  the  momentary  influence 
of  either  in  altering  their  positions  and  consequently  the 
directions  and  lengths  of  the  axis  of  the  ellipse  must  be 
ascertained.  The  student  will  find  it  neither  a  difficult  n<>r 
an  uninstructive  exercise  to  work  out  the  case  from  these 
principles,  which  we  cannot  afford  the  space  to  do. 

(694.)  The  theory  of  the  motion  of  the  planetary  apsides 
and  the  variation  of  their  excentricities  is  in  one  point  of 
view  much  more  simple,  but  in  another  much  more  complicated 
than  that  of  the  lunar.  It  is  simpler,  because  owing  to  the 
exceeding  minuteness  of  the  changes  operated  in  the  course 
of  a  single  revolution,  the  angular  position  of  the  bodies  with 
respect   to  the   line  of  apsides  is  very  little  altered   by  the 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  PLANETARY  THEORY.    479 

motion  of  the  apsides  themselves.  The  line  of  apsides  neither 
follows  up  the  motion  of  the  disturbing  body  in  its  state  of 
advance,  nor  vice  versa,  in  any  degree  capable  of  pro- 
longing materially  their  advancing  or  shortening  materially 
their  receding  phase.  Hence  no  second  approximation  of  the 
kind  explained  in  (art.  686.),  by  which  the  motion  of  the 
lunar  apsides  is  so  powerfully  modified  as  to  be  actually 
doubled  in  amount,  is  at  all  required  in  the  planetary  theory. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  latter  theory  is  rendered  more  com- 
plicated than  the  former,  at  least  in  the  cases  of  planets  who^e 
periodic  times  are  to  each  other  in  a  ratio  much  less  than  13 
to  1,  by  the  consideration  that  the  disturbing  body  shifts  its 
position  with  respect  to  the  line  of  apsides  by  a  much  greater 
angular  quantity  in  a  revolution  of  the  disturbed  body  than 
in  the  case  of  the  moon.  In  that  case  Ave  were  at  liberty  to 
suppose  (for  the  sake  of  explanation),  without  any  very 
egregious  error,  that  the  sun  held  nearly  a  fixed  position 
during  a  single  lunation.  But  in  the  case  of  planets  whose 
times  of  revolution  are  in  a  much  lower  ratio  this  cannot  be 
permitted.  In  the  case  of  Jupiter  disturbed  by  Saturn  for 
example,  in  one  sidereal  revolution  of  Jupiter,  Saturn  has 
advanced  in  its  orbit  with  respect  to  the  line  of  apsides  of 
Jupiter  by  more  than  140°,  a  change  of  direction  which 
entirely  alters  the  conditions  under  which  the  disturbing 
forces  act.  And  in  the  case  of  an  exterior  disturbed  by  an 
interior  planet,  the  situation  of  the  latter  with  respect  to  the 
line  of  the  apsides  varies  even  more  rapidly  than  the  situation 
r>f  the  exterior  or  disturbed  planet  with  respect  to  the  central 
body.  To  such  cases  then  the  reasoning  which  we  have 
applied  to  the  lunar  perturbations  becomes  totally  inappli- 
cable ;  and  when  we  take  into  consideration  also  the  excen- 
tricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  disturbing  body,  which  in  the  most 
important  cases  is  exceedingly  influential,  the  subject  becomes 
far  too  complicated  for  verbal  explanation,  and  can  only  be 
successfully  followed  out  with  the  help  of  algebraic  expression 
anl  the  application  of  the  integral  calculus.  To  Mercurv, 
Venus,  and  the  earth  indeed,  as  disturbed  by  Jupiter,  and 
planets  superior  to  Jupiter,  this  objection  to  the  reasoning' iu 


480  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

question  does  not  apply;  and  in  each  of  these  cases  thercfoie 
we  are  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  apsides  are  kept  in  a  state 
of  progression  by  the  action  of  all  the  larger  planets  of  our 
system.  Under  certain  conditions  of  distance,  excentricity, 
and  relative  situation  of  the  axes  of  the  orbits  of  the  disturbed 
and  disturbing  planets,  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  the  reverse 
may  happen,  an  instance  of  which  is  afforded  by  Venus, 
whose  apsides  recede  under  the  combined  action  of  the  earth 
and  Mercury  more  rapidly  than  they  advance  under  the  joint 
actions  of  all  the  other  planets.  Nay,  it  is  even  possible 
under  certain  conditions  that  the  line  of  apsides  of  the  dis- 
turbed planet,  instead  of  revolving  always  in  one  direction, 
may  librate  to  and  fro  within  assignable  limits,  and  in  a 
definite  and  regularly  recurring  period  of  time. 

695.)  Under  any  conditions,  however,  as  to  these  par- 
ticulars, the  view  we  have  above  taken  of  the  subject 
enables  us  to  assign  at  every  instant,  and  in  every  con- 
figuration of  the  two  planets,  the  momentary  effect  of  each 
upon  the  perihelion  and  excentricity  of  the  other.  In  the 
simplest  case,  that  in  which  the  two  orbits  are  so  nearly  circular, 
that  the  relative  situation  of  their  perihelia  shall  produce  no 
appreciable  difference  in  the  intensities  of  the  disturbing 
forces,  it  is  very  easy  to  show  that  whatever  temporary 
oscillations  to  and  fro  in  the  positions  of  the  line  of  apsides, 
and  whatever  temporary  increase  and  diminution  in  the 
excentricity  of  either  planet  may  take  place,  the  final  effect 
on  the  average  of  a  great  multitude  of  revolutions,  presenting 
them  to  each  other  in  all  possible  configurations,  must  be 
nil,  for  both  elements. 

(696.)  To  show  this,  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  cast  out 
eyes  on  the  synoptic  table  in  art.  673.  If  M,  the  disturbing 
body,  be  supposed  to  be  successively  placed  in  two  diametri- 
cally opposite  situations  in  its  orbit,  the  aphelion  of  P  will 
stand  related  to  M  in  one  of  these  situations  precisely  as  its 
perihelion  in  the  other.  Now  the  orbits  being  so  nearly 
circles  as  supposed,  the  distribution  of  the  disturbing  forces, 
whether  normal  or  tangential,  is  symmetrical  relative  to  their 
common    diameter  passing   through    M,  or   to   the  line   of 


EFFECTS   OF    ELLIPTICITY.  4S 1 

syzygies.  Hence  it  follows  that  tlie  half  of  P's  orbit  "  about 
perihelion "  (art.  673.)  will  stand  related  to  all  the  acting 
forces  in  the  one  situation  of  M,  precisely  as  the  half  "  about 
aphelion  "  does  in  the  other :  and  also,  that  the  half  of  the 
orbit  in  which  P  "  approaches  S,"  stands  related  to  them  in 
the  one  situation  precisely  as  the  half  in  which  it  "  recedes 
from  S  "  in  the  other.  Whether  as  regards,  therefore,  the 
normal  or  tangential  force,  the  conditions  of  advance  or 
recess  of  apsides,  and  of  increase  or  diminution  of  excen- 
tricities,  are  reversed  in  the  two  supposed  cases.  Hence  it 
appeal's  that  whatever  situation  be  assigned  to  M,  and  what- 
ever influence  it  may  exert  on  P  in  that  situation,  that 
influence  will  be  annihilated  in  situations  of  M  and  P, 
diametrically  opposite  to  those  supposed,  and  thus,  on  a  general 
average,  the  eifect  on  both  apsides  and  excentricities  is 
reduced  to  nothing. 

(697. J  If  the  orbits,  however,  be  excentric,  the  symmetry 
above  insisted  on  in  the  distribution  of  the  forces  does  not 
exist.  But,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  evident  that  if  the  excentri- 
cities be  moderate,  (as  in  the  planetary  orbits,)  by  far  the 
larger  part  of  the  effects  of  the  disturbing  forces  destroys 
itself  in  the  manner  described  in  the  last  article,  and  that  it 
is  only  a  residual  portion,  viz.  that  which  arises  from  the 
greater  proximity  of  the  orbits  at  one  place  than  at  another 
which  can  tend  to  produce  permanent  or  secular  effects.  The 
precise  estimation  of  these  effects  is  too  complicated  an  affair 
for  us  to  enter  upon  ;  but  we  may  at  least  give  some  idea  of 
the  process  by  which  they  are  produced,  and  the  order  in  which 
they  arise.  In  so  doing,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between 
the  effects  of  the  normal  and  tangential  forces.  The  effects 
of  the  former  are  greatest  at  the  point  of  conjunction  of  the 
planets,  because  the  normal  force  itself  is  there  always  at  its 
maximum ;  and  although,  where  the  conjunction  takes  place 
at  90°  from  the  line  of  apsides,  its  effect  to  move  the  apsides 
is  nullified  by  situation,  and  when  in  that  line  its  effect  on 
the  excentricities  is  similarly  nullified,  yet,  in  the  situations 
rectangular  to  these,  it  acts  to  its  greatest  advantage.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  tangential  force  vanishes  at  conjunction. 

l  i 


482  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

whatever  be  the  place  of  conjunction  with  respect  to  the  line 
of  apsides,  and  where  it  is  at  its  maximum  its  effect  is  still 
liable  to  be  annulled  by  situation.  Thus  it  appears  that 
the  normal  force  is  most  influential,  and  mainly  determines 
the  character  of  the  general  effect.  It  is,  therefore,  at  con- 
junction that  the  most  influential  effect  is  produced,  and 
therefore,  on  the  long  average,  those  conjunctions  which 
happen  about  the  place  where  the  orbits  are  nearest  will 
determine  the  general  character  of  the  effect.  Now,  the 
nearest  points  of  approach  of  two  ellipses  which  have  a 
common  focus  may  be  very  variously  situated  with  respect 
to  the  perihelion  of  either.  It  may  be  at  the  perihelion  01 
the  aphelion  of  the  disturbed  orbit,  or  in  any  intermediate 
position.  Suppose  it  to  be  at  the  perihelion.  Then,  if  the 
disturbed  orbit  be  interior  to  the  disturbing,  the  force  acts 
outwards,  and  therefore  the  apsides  recede  :  if  exterior,  the 
force  acts  inwards,  and  they  advance.  In  neither  case  does 
the  excentricity  change.  If  the  conjunction  take  place  at 
the  aphelion  of  the  disturbed  orbit,  the  effects  will  be  re- 
versed :  if  intermediate,  the  apsides  will  be  less,  and  the 
excentricity  more  affected. 

(698.)  Supposing  only  two  planets,  this  process  would  go 
on  till  the  apsides  and  excentricities  had  so  far  changed  as  to 
alter  the  point  of  nearest  approach  of  the  orbits  so  as  either 
to  accelerate  or  retard  and  perhaps  reverse  the  motion  of  the 
apsides,  and  give  to  the  variation  of  the  excentricity  a  corre- 
sponding periodical  character.  But  there  are  many  planets 
all  disturbing  one  another.  And  this  gives  rise  to  variations 
in  the  points  of  nearest  approach  of  all  the  orbits  taken  two 
and  two  together,  of  a  very  complex  nature. 

(699.)  It  cannot  fail  to  have  been  remarked,  by  any  one 
who  has  followed  attentively  the  above  reasonings,  that 
a  close  analogy  subsists  between  two  sets  of  relations ;  viz. 
that  between  the  inclinations  and  nodes  on  the  one  hand,  and 
between  the  excentricity  and  apsides  on  the  other.  In  fact, 
the  strict  geometrical  theories  of  the  two  cases  present  a 
close  analogy,  and  load  to  final  results  of  the  very  same 
nature.     What  the  variation  of  excentricity  is  to  the  motion 


COMPOUND    CYCLES   OF    EXOENTRICI  TIES,    ETC.         483 

of  the  perihelion,  the  change  of  inclination  is  to  the  motion 
of  the  node.  In  either  case,  the  period  of  the  one  is  also  the 
period  of  the  other ;  and  while  the  perihelia  describe  consi- 
derable angles  by  an  oscillatory  motion  to  and  fro,  or  cir- 
culate in  immense  periods  of  time  round  the  entire  circle, 
the  excentricities  increase  and  decrease  by  comparatively 
small  changes,  and  are  at  length  restored  to  their  original 
magnitudes.  In  the  lunar  orbit,  as  the  rapid  rotation  of  the 
nodes  prevents  the  change  of  inclination  from  accumulating 
to  any  material  amount,  so  the  still  more  rapid  revolution  of 
its  apogee  effects  a  speedy  compensation  in  the  fluctuations 
of  its  excentricity,  and  never  suffers  them  to  go  to  any 
material  extent ;  while  the  same  causes,  by  presenting  in 
auick  succession  the  lunar  orbit  in  every  possible  situation  to 
all  the  disturbing  forces,  whether  of  the  sun,  the  planets,  or 
the  protuberant  matter  at  the  earth's  equator,  prevent  any 
secular  accumulation  of  small  changes,  by  which,  in  the  lapse 
of  ages,  its  ellipticity  might  be  materially  increased  or  dimi- 
nished. Accordingly,  observation  shows  the  mean  excentri- 
city of  the  moon's  orbit  to  be  the  same  now  as  in  the  earliest 
ages  of  astronomv. 

(700.)  The  movements  of  the  perihelia,  and  variations  of 
excentricity  of  the  planetary  orbits,  are  interlaced  and  com- 
plicated together  in  the  same  manner  and  nearly  by  the  same 
laws  as  the  variations  of  their  nodes  and  inclinations.  Each 
acts  upon  every  other,  and  every  such  mutual  action  gene- 
rates its  own  peculiar  period  of  circulation  or  compensation , 
and  every  such  period,  in  pursuance  of  the  principle  of  art. 
650.,  is  thence  propagated  throughout  the  system.  Thus  arise 
cycles  upon  cycles,  of  whose  compound  duration  some  notion 
may  be  formed,  when  we  consider  what  is  the  length  of  one 
such  period  in  the  case  of  the  two  principal  planets  —  Jupiter 
and  Saturn.  Neglecting  the  action  of  the  reat,  the  effect  of 
their  mutual  attraction  would  be  to  produce  a  secular  varia- 
tion in  the  excentricity  of  Saturn's  orbit,  from  0*084('9,  its 
maximum,  to  0*01345,  its  minimum  value :  while  that  of 
Jupiter  would  vary  between  the  narrow  limits,  0*06036  anil 

002606:  the  greatest  excentricity  of  Jupiter  corrcsjiondmj!; 

1 1  * 


484  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

to  the  least  of  Saturn,  and  vice  versa.  The  period  in  which 
these  changes  are  gone  through,  would  be  70414  years. 
After  this  example,  it  will  be  easily  conceived  that  many 
millions  of  years  will  require  to  elapse  before  a  complete 
fulfilment  of  the  joint  cycle  which  shall  restore  the  whole 
system  to  its  original  state  as  far  as  the  excentricities  of  its 
orbits  are  concerned. 

(701.)  The  place  of  the  perihelion  of  a  planet's  orbit  is  of 
little  consequence  to  its  well-being;  but  its  excentricity  is 
most  important,  as  upon  this  (the  axes  of  the  orbits  being 
permanent)  depends  the  mean  temperature  of  its  surface,  and 
the  extreme  variations  to  which  its  seasons  may  be  liable. 
For  it  may  be  easily  shown  that  the  mean  annual  amount  of 
light  and  heat  received  by  a  planet  from  the  sun  is,  cateru 
paribus,  as  the  minor  axis  of  the  ellipse  described  by  it.  An) 
variation,  therefore,  in  the  excentricity,  by  changing  the  minor 
axis  will  alter  the  mean  temperature  of  the  surface.  How 
such  a  change  will  also  influence  the  extremes  of  tempera- 
ture appears  from  art.  368.  et  seq.  Now  it  may  naturally  be 
inquired  whether  (in  the  vast  cycle  above  spoken  of,  in  which, 
at  some  period  or  other,  conspiring  changes  may  accumulate 
on  the  orbit  of  one  planet  from  several  quarters,)  it  may  not 
happen  that  the  excentricity  of  any  one  planet  —  as  the  earth 
—  may  become  exorbitantly  great,  so  as  to  subvert  those 
relations  which  render  it  habitable  to  man,  or  to  give  rise 
to  great  changes,  at  least,  in  the  physical  comfort  of  his  state. 
To  this  the  researches  of  geometers  have  enabled  us  to  answer 
in  the  negative.  A  relation  has  been  demonstrated  by 
Lagrange  between  the  masses,  axes  of  the  orbits,  and  excen- 
tricities of  each  planet,  similar  to  what  we  have  already 
stated  with  respect  to  their  inclinations,  viz.  that  if  the  mass 
of  each  planet  be  multiplied  by  the  square  root  of  the  axis  of  its 
orbit,  and  the  product  by  the  square  of  its  excentricity,  the  sum 
of  all  such  products  throughout  the  system  is  invariable;  and 
as,  in  point  of  fact,  this  sum  is  extremely  small,  so  it  will 
always  remain.  Now,  since  the  axes  of  the  orbits  are  liable 
to  no  secular  changes,  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  no 
one  orbit  shall  increase  its  excentricity,  unless  at  ihe  expense 


STABILITY    OF    THE    EXCENTRICITIES.  485 

of  a  common  fund,  the  whole  amount  of  which  is,  and  must 
for  ever  remain,  extremely  minute.* 

(701.  a.)  (1865.)  The  actual  numerical  computation  of 
the  limiting  excentricities  of  the  plants,  taking  into  ac- 
count all  their  mutual  reactions,  was  attempted  by  La- 
grange in  1782;  but  owing  to  an  erroneous  assumption  of 
the  mass  of  Venus,  his  results  were  rendered  uncertain.  M. 
Leverrier,  in  a  remarkable  memoir  published  in  1843,  has 
resumed  the  subject  with  the  advantage  of  perfectly  reliable 
data,  and  has  obtained  the  following,  as  the  superior  limits  of 
excentricities  of  the  seven  principal  then  knoicn  planets — viz., 
for  that  of  Mercury,  0-225646;  Venus,  0-086716  ;  the  Earth, 
0-077747;  Mars,  0-142243;  Jupiter,  0*061548;  Saturn, 
0-084919;  and  Uranus,  0-064646.  And  it  is  remarkable 
that  although  the  erroneous  assumption  in  question  has 
vitiated  Lagrange's  conclusions  as  to  the  secular  progression 
jo.  the  magnitudes  of  the  excentricities,  the  superior  limits 
arrived  at  by  him  agree  very  nearly  indeed  with  these.  For 
the  inferior  limit  of  that  of  the  Earth's  orbit,  M.  Leverrier 
assigns  0*003314,  being  the  nearest  approach  it  will  make  to 
the  circular  form.  This  will  be  attained  in  23980  years  from 
the  epoch  a.d.  1800,  for  which  the  calculations  are  instituted ; 
i.e.  in  a.d.  25780.  The  triple  period  of  the  excentricities  of 
Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  Uranus,  taken  as  a  group,  is  900,000 
years  (uncertain  to  4000  +  ).  The  maxima  and  the  minima 
of  that  of  Saturn  are  separated  by  an  interval  of  34647 
years  (uncertain  to  117  +  ),  and  its  next  minimum  will 
happen  in  a.d.  17914  at  which  epoch  its  value  will  be 
0.0136.  In  the  Appendix  the  reader  will  find  the  elements 
of  the  earth's  orbit,  calculated  for  intervals  of  10,000  years 
from  100,000  years  before  a.d.  1800  to  100,000  after  that 
date  by  M.  Leverrier,  and  the  excentricities  by  Mr.  Croll 
for  1,000,000  years  before  and  after  the  same  epoch. 

•  There  is  nothing  in  this  relation,  however,  taken  per  te,  to  secure  the  smaller 
planets — Mercury,  Mars,  Juno,  Ceres,  &c. — from  a  catastrophe,  could  they 
accumulate  on  themselves,  or  any  one  of  them,  the  whole  amount  of  this 
excentrictty  fund.  But  that  can  never  be:  Jupiter  and  Saturn  will  always  retain 
the  lion's  share  of  it.  A  similar  remark  applies  to  the  inclination  fund  of  art 
639.  These  funds,  be  it  observed,  can  never  get  into  debt.  Every  term  of 
them  is  essentially  positive 


4H6  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

OF  THE  INEQUALITIES  INDEPENDENT  OF  THK  KXCK.N THU 'ITIES. — ! 
THE  MOON'S  VARIATION  AND  PARALLACTIC  INEQUALITY.  — ANA- 
LOGOUS PLANETARY  INEQUALITIES. —  THREE  CASES  OF  PLANETARY 

PERTURBATION    DISTINGUISHED. OF    INEQUALITIES    DEPKNDENT 

ON     THE    EXCENTRICITIES. LONG  INEQUALITY   OF    JUPITER    AND 

SATURN. LAW  OP  RECIPROCITY  BETWEEN  THE  PERIODICAL  VA- 
RIATIONS OF  THE  ELEMENTS  OF  BOTH  PLANETS.  —  LONG  INE- 
QUALITY OF  THE  EARTH  AND  VENUS.  —  VARIATION  OF  THK   EPOCH. 

INEQUALITIES    INCIDENT   ON    THE   EPOCH  AFFECTING  THK.  MEAN 

MOTION. INTERPRETATION    OF    THE    CONSTANT    PART    OF   THESE 

INEQUALITIES.  —  ANNUAL  EQUATION  OF  THE  MOON. HER  SE- 
CULAR ACCELERATION.  —  LUNAR  INEQUALITIES  DUE  TO  THE  AC- 
TION OF  VENUS. EFFECT    OF   THE    SPHEROIDAL    FIGURE  OF    THE 

EARTH  AND  OTHER  PLANETS  ON  THE  MOTIONS  OF  THEIR  SATEL- 
LITES. —  OF  THE  TIDES.  —  MASSES  OF  DISTURBING  BODIES  IN- 
DUCIBLE  FROM    THE    PERTURBATIONS  THEY  PRODUCE. MASS  OF 

THE  MOON,  AND  OF  JUPITER'S    SATELLITES,  HOW  ASCERTAINED. 

PERTURBATIONS    OF    URANUS    RESULTING    IN    THE   DISCOVERY    OF 

NKPTUNE.  DETERMINATION     OF      THE      ABSOLUTE      MASS      AND 

DENSITY   OF    THE    EARTH. 

(702.)  To  calculate  the  actual  place  of  a  planet  or  the 
moon,  in  longitude  and  latitude  at  any  assigned  time,  it  is 
not  enough  to  know  the  changes  produced  by  perturbation 
in  the  elements  of  its  orbit,  still  less  to  know  the  secular 
changes  so  produced,  which  are  only  the  outstanding  or 
uncompensated  portions  of  much  greater  changes  induced  in 
short  periods  of  configuration.  We  must  be  enabled  to 
estimate  the  actual  effect  on  its  longitude  of  those  periodical 
accelerations  and  retardations  in  the  rate  of  its  mean  angular 
motion,  and  on  its  latitude  of  those  deviations  above  and  below 
the  mean  plane  of  its  orbit,  which  result  from  the  continued 
action  of  the  perturbative  forces,  not  as  compensated  in  long 
period*,  but  as  in  the  act  of  their  generation  and  destruction 


COMPOUND    MOTION   OF    THE    UPPER    FOCUS.  487 

in  short  ones.  In  this  chapter  we  purpose  to  give  an  account 
of  some  of  the  most  prominent  of  the  equations  or  inequalities 
thence  arising,  several  of  which  are  of  high  historical  interest, 
as  having  become  known  by  observation  previous  to  the 
discovery  of  their  theoretical  causes,  and  as  having,  by  their 
successive  explanations  from  the  theory  of  gravitation,  re- 
moved what  were  in  some  instances  regarded  as  formidable 
objections  against  that  theory,  and  afforded  in  all  most 
satisfactory  and  triumphant  verifications  of  it. 

(703.)  We  shall  begin  with  those  which  compensate  them- 
selves in  a  synodic  revolution  of  the  disturbed  and  disturbing 
body,  and  which  are  independent  of  any  permanent  ex- 
centricity  of  either  orbit,  going  through  their  changes  and 
effecting  their  compensations  in  orbits  slightly  elliptic,  almost 
precisely  as  if  they  were  circular.  These  inequalities  result, 
in  fact,  from  a  circulation  of  the  true  upper  focus  of  the 
disturbed  ellipse  about  its  mean  place  in  a  curve  whose 
form  and  magnitude  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  last 
chapter  enable  us  to  assign  in  any  proposed  case.  If  the 
disturbed  orbit  be  circular,  this  mean  place  coincides  with  its 
centre :  if  elliptic,  with  the  situation  of  its  upper  focus,  as 
determined  from  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  last  chapter. 

(704.)  To  understand  the  nature  of  this  circulation,  we 
must  consider  the  joint  action  of  the  two  elements  of  the 
disturbing  force.     Suppose  H  to  be  the  place  of  the  upper 


focus,  corresponding  to  any  situation  P  of  the  disturbed  body. 


4«8  OUTLINES    OF    AS/'KONOMV. 

and  let  P  P'  be  an  infinitesimal  element  of  its  orbit,  de- 
scribed in  an  instant  of  time.  Then  supposing  no  disturbing 
tbrco  to  act,  P  P'  will  be  a  portion  of  an  ellipse,  having  II  for 
its  focus,  equally  whether  the  point  P  or  P'  be  regarded. 
Hut  now  let  the  disturbing  forces  act  during  the  instant  of 
describing  P  P'.  Then  the  focus  H  will  shift  its  position  to 
IP  to  find  which  point  we  must  recollect,  1st.  What  is  demon- 
strated in  art.  (671.),  viz.  that  the  effect  of  the  normal 
force  is  to  vary  the  position  of  the  line  P'  H  eo  as  to  make 
the  angle  H  P  H'  equal  to  double  the  variation  of  the  angle 
of  tangency  due  to  the  action  of  that  force,  without  altering 
the  distance  P  H  :  so  that  in  virtue  of  the  normal  force  alone, 
II  would  move  to  a  point  It,  along  the  line  H  Q,  drawn  from 
II  to  a  point  Q,  90°  in  advance  of  P,  (because  S  H  being 
exceedingly  small,  the  angle  PHQ  may  be  taken  as  a  right 
angle  when  P  S  Q  is  so. )  II  approaching  Q  if  the  normal 
force  act  outwards,  but  receding  from  Q  if  inwards.  And 
similarly  the  effect  of  the  tangential  force  (art.  670.)  is  to 
vary  the  position  of  H  in  the  direction  H  P  or  P  H,  according 
as  the  force  retards  or  accelerates  P's  motion.  To  find  IP 
then  from  H  draw  H  P,  II  Q,  to  P  and  to  a  point  of  P'a 
orbit  90°  in  advance  of  P.  On  H  Q  take  H  h,  the  motion 
of  the  focus  due  to  the  normal  force,  and  on  H  P  take  H  k  the 
motion  due  to  the  tangential  force;  complete  the  parallelogram 
H  H',  and  its  diagonal  H  H'  will  be  the  element  of  the  true 
path  of  H  in  virtue  of  the  joint  action  of  both  forces. 

(705.)  The  most  conspicuous  case  in  the  planetary  system 
to  which  the  above  reasoning  is  applicable,  is  that  of  the 
moon  disturbed  by  the  sun.  The  inequality  thus  arising 
is  known  by  the  name  of  the  moon's  variation,  and  was  dis- 
covered so  early  as  about  the  year  975  by  the  Arabian 
astronomer  Aboul  Wefa.*  Its  magnitude  (or  the  extent  of 
fluctuation  to  and  fro  in  the  moon's  longitude  which  it  pro- 
duces) is  considerable,  being  no  less  than  1°  4',  and  it  is 
otherwise  interesting  as  being  the  first  inequality  produced 
by  perturbation,  which  Newton  succeeded  in  explaining  by 

*  Sedillot,  Nouvclles  Rcchcrchvs poui  servir  »  l'Histoirc  de  1'  Astroiiomiuchea 
!t-s  Ar.ibes. 


'*  variation"  of  the  moon  explained.         481/ 

the   theory  of  gravity.     A  good  general  idea  of  its  nature 
may   be    formed  by    considering   the    direct    action    of  the 
disturbing  forces  on  the  moon,  supposed  to  move  in  a  circular 
orbit.     In  such  an  orbit  undisturbed,  the  velocity  would  be 
uniform  ;    but  the  tangential  force  acting  to  accelerate  her 
motion  through  the  qviadrants  preceding  her  conjunction  and 
opposition,  and  to  retard  it  through  the  alternate  quadrants, 
it  is  evident  that  the  velocity  will  have  two  maxima  and  two 
minima,  the  former  at  the  syzygies,  the  latter  at  the  quadra- 
tures.    Hence  at  the  syzygies  the  velocity  will  exceed  that 
which  corresponds  to  a  circular  orbit,  and  at  quadratures  will 
fall  short  of  it.     The  true  orbit  will  therefore  be  less  curved 
or  more  flattened  than  a  circle  in  syzygies,  and  more  curved 
(i.  e.  protuberant  beyond  a  circle)  in  quadratures.     This  would 
be  the  case  even  were  the  normal  force  not  to  act.     But  the 
action  of  that  force  increases  the  effect  in  question,  for  at  the 
syzygies,  and  as  far  as  64°  14'  on  either  side  of  them,  it  acts 
outwards,  or  in  counteraction  of  the  earth's  attraction,  and 
thereby  prevents  the  orbit  from  being  so  much  curved  as  it 
otherwise  would  be ;  while  at  quadratures,  and  for  2o°  46'  on 
either  side  of  them,  it  acts  inwards,  aiding  the  earth's  attraction, 
and  rendering  that  portion  of  the  orbit  more  curved  than  it 
otherwise  would  be.     Thus  the  joint  action  of  both  forces 
distorts  the  orbit  from  a  circle  into  a  flattened  or  elliptic 
form,  having  the  longer  axis  in  quadratures,  and  the  shorter 
in  syzygies ;   and  in  this  orbit  the  moon  moves  faster  than 
with  her  mean  velocity  at  syzygy  (i.  e.  where  she  is  nearest  the 
earth)  and   slower  at  quadratures  where  farthest.     Her  an- 
gular motion  about  the  earth  is  therefore   for  both  reasons 
greater  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  situation.     Hence  at 
syzygy  her  true  longitude  seen  from  the  earth  will  be  in  the 
act  of  gaining  on  her  mean,  —  in  quadratures  of  losing,  and 
at   some   intermediate   points   (not   very   remote   from   the 
octants)  will  neither  be  gaining  nor  losing.     But  at  these 
points,  having  been  gaining  or  losing  through  the  whole  pre- 
vious 90°,  the  amount  of  gain  or  loss  will  have  attained  its 
maximum.     Consequently  at  the  octants  the  true  longitude 
will  deviate  most  from  the  mean  in  excess  and  defect,  and  the 


4 90  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

inequality  in  question  is  therefore  nil  at  syzygies  and  qua- 
dratures, and  attains  its  maxima  in  advance  or  retardation  at 
the  octants,  which  is  agreeable  to  observation. 

(706.)  Let  us,  however,  now  see  what  account  can  be 
rendered  of  this  inequality  by  the  simultaneous  variations  of 
the  axis  and  excentricity  as  above  explained.  The  tangen- 
tial force,  as  will  be  recollected,  is  nil  at  syzygies  and  quadra- 
tures, and  a  maximum  at  the  octants,  accelerative  in  the 
quadrants  E  A  and  D  B,  and  retarding  in  AD  and  BE.  In 
the  two  former  then  the  axis  is  in  process  of  lengthening  ;  in 
the  two  latter,  shortening.  On  the  other  hand  the  normal 
f  >rce  vanishes  at  {a,  b,  d,  e)  64°  14'  from  the  syzygies.  It 
acts  outwards  over  e  A  a,  ABf/,  and  inwards  over  a  D  b  and 
dEe.  In  virtue  of  the  tangential  force,  then,  the  point  II 
moves  towards  P  when  P  is  in  AD,  BE,  and  from  it 
when  in  D  B,  E  A,  the  motion  being  nil  when  at  A,  B,  D,  E, 
and  most  rapid  when  at  the  octant  D,  at  which  points, 
therefore,  (so  far  as  this  force  is  concerned,)  the  focus  II 
would  have  its  mean  situation.  And  in  virtue  of  the  normal 
focus,  the  motion  of  H  in  the  direction  II Q  will  be  at  its 
maximum  of  rapidity  towards  Q  at  A,  or  B,  from  Q  at  D  or 


E,  and  nil  at  a,  b.  d,  e.     It  will  assist  us  in  following  out 
these  indications  to  obtain  a  notion  of  the  form  of  the  curve 


"variation"  of  the  moon  explained. 


491 


really  described  by  H,  if  we  trace  separately  the  paths  which 
II  would  pursue  in  virtue  of  either  motion  separately,  since 
its  true  motion  will  necessarily  result  from  the  superposition 
of  these  partial  motions,  because  at  every  instant  they  are 
at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  therefore  cannot  interfere. 
First,  then,  it  is  evident,  from  what  we  have  said  of  the 
tangential  force,  that  when  P  is  at  A,  H  is  for  an  instant  at 
rest,  but  that  as  P  removes  from  A  towards  D,  H  continually 
approaches  P  along  their  line  of  junction  II  P,  which  is, 
therefore,  at  each  instant  a  tangent  to  the  path  of  H.  When 
P  is  in  the  octant,  H  is  at  its  mean  distance  from  P  (equal  to 
P  S),  and  is  then  in  the  act  of  approaching  P  most  rapidly. 
From  thence  to  the  quadrature  D  the  movement  of  H  to- 
wards P  decreases  in  rapidity  till  the  quadrature  is  attained, 
when  H  rests  for  an  instant,  and  then  begins  to  reverse  its 
motion,  and  travel  from  P  at  the  same  rate  of  progress  as 
before  towards  it.  Thus  it  is  clear  that,  in  virtue  of  the 
tangential  force  alone,  H  would  describe  a  four-cusped 
curve  a,  d,  b,  e,  its  direction  of  motion  round  S  in  this  curve 
being  opposite  to  that  of  P,  so  that  A  and  a,  D  and  d,  B  and 
I,  E  and  e,  shall  be  corresponding  points. 
(707.)   Next   as  regards  the   normal  force.      AVhen  the 


moon  is  at  A  the  motion  of  II  is  towards  1),  and  is  at  its 


492 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


maximum  of  rapidity,  but  slackens  as  P  proceeds  towards  D 
and  as  Q  proceeds  towards  13.  To  the  curve  described,  II Q 
will  be  always  a  tangent,  and  since  at  the  neutral  point  of 
the  normal  force  (or  when  P  is  64°  14'  from  A,  and  Q  64° 
14'  from  D),  the  motion  of  II  is  for  an  instant  nil  and  is  then 
reversed,  the  curve  will  have  a  cusp  at  I  corresponding,  and 
II  will  then  begin  to  travel  along  the  arc  I  m,  while  P  de- 
scribes the  corresponding  arc  from  neutral  point  to  neutral 
point  through  D.  Arrived  at  the  neutral  point  between  D 
and  B,  the  motion  of  H  along  QH  will  be  again  arrested 
and  reversed,  giving  rise  to  another  cusp  at  m,  and  so  on. 
Thus,  in  virtue  of  the  normal  force  acting  alone,  the  path  of 
H  would  be  the  four-cusped,  elongated  curve  Imno,  de- 
scribed with  a  motion  round  S  the  reverse  of  P's,  and  having 
a,  d,  b,  e  for  points  corresponding  to  A,  B,  D,  E,  places 
of  P. 

(708.)  Nothing  is  now  easier  than  to  superpose  these  mo- 
tions. Supposing  H  „  H  2  to  be  the  points  in  either  curve  cor- 
responding toP,  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  set  from  off  S,  SA 
equal  and  parallel  to  S  H  {  in  the  one  curve  and  from  h,  h  II 
equal  and  parallel  to  SH2  in  the  other.  Let  this  be  done 
for  every  corresponding  point  in  the  two  curves,  and  there 
results  an  oval  curve  ad  b  e,  having  for  its  semiaxes  Sa=  Sa, 
4-  Sa2  ?  and  Sd=  Se?i  +  Sd2.  And  this  will  be  the  true  path 
of  the  upper  focus,  the  points  a,  d,  b,  e,  corresponding  to 
A,  D,  B,  E,  places  of  P.  And  from  this  it  follows,  1st, 
that  at  A,  B,  the  syzygies,  the  moon  is  in  perigee  in  her  mo- 
mentary ellipse,  the  lower  focus  being  nearer  than  the  upper. 
2dly,  That  in  quadratures  D,  E,  the  moon  is  in  apogee  in  her 
then  momentary  ellipse,  the  upper  focus  being  then  nearer 


»•  VARIATION      OF    TIIE    MOON    EXPLAINED.  493 

than  the  lower.  3clly,  That  H  revolves  in  the  oval  adbe 
the  contrary  way  to  P  in  its  orbit,  making  a  complete  revo- 
lution from  syzygy  to  syzygy  in  one  synodic  revolution  of 
the  moon. 

(709.)  Taking  1  for  the  moon's  mean  distance  from  the 
earth,  suppose  we  represent  Sat  or  So1,  (for  they  are  equal) 
by  2a,  Sa2  by  2b,  and  So^  by  2c,  then  will  the  semiaxes 
of  the  oval  ad  be,  Sa  and  So*  be  respectively  2a  +  2b  and 
2a  +  2c,  so  that  the  excentricities  of  the  momentary  ellipses 
at  A  and  D  will  be  respectively  a  4-  b  and  a  +  e.  The  total 
amount  of  the  effect  of  the  tangential  force  on  the  axis,  in 
passing  from  syzygy  to  quadrature,  will  evidently  be  equal 
to  the  length  of  the  curvilinear  arc  al  dx  {Jig.  art.  708.), 
which  is  necessarily  less  than  Sax  -+-  Sdx  or  4a.  Therefore  the 
total  effect  on  the  semiaxis  or  distance  of  the  moon  is  less  than 
2a,  and  the  excess  and  defect  of  the  greatest  and  least  values 
of  this  distance  thus  varied  above  and  below  the  mean  value 
S  A  =  l  (which  call  a)  will  be  less  than  a.  The  moon  then 
is  moving  at  A  in  the  perigee  of  an  ellipse  whose  semiaxis  is 
\+a  and  excentricity  a  +  b,  so  that  its  actual  distance  from 
the  earth  there  is  l  +  a  —  a  —  b,  which  (because  a  is  less  than 
a)  is  less  than  1  —  b.  Again,  at  D  it  is  moving  in  apogee  ot 
an  ellipse  whose  semiaxis  is  1  —  a  and  excentricity  a  +  c,  so 
that  its  distance  then  from  the  earth  is  1—  a-\-a  +  c,  which 
(a  being  greater  than  a)  is  greater  than  l  +  c,  the  latter 
distance  exceeding  the  former  by  2a—2a  +  b  +  c. 

(710.)  Let  us  next  consider  the  corresponding  changes  in- 
duced upon  the  angular  velocity.  Now  it  is  a  law  of  elliptic 
motion  that  at  different  points  of  difFerentellipses,  each  differ- 
ing very  little  from  a  circle,  the  angular  velocities  are  to  each 
other  as  the  square  roots  of  the  semiaxes  directly,  and  as  the 
squares  of  the  distances  inversely.  In  this  case  the  semiaxes 
at  A  and  D  are  to  each  other  as  1  +  a  to  1  —  a,  or  as  1  :  1 
—  2a,  so  that  their  square  roots  are  to  each  other  as  1  :  1  —  a. 
Again,  the  distances  being  to  each  other  as  1  -fa —a  —  b  :  1  — 
a  +  a  -+-  c,  the  inverse  ratio  of  their  squares  (since  a,  a,  b,  c> 
are  all  very  small  quantities)  is  that  of  1  —  2«  +  2a  4-  2e  :  1  + 
2a— 2a  —  2b,  or  as   1  :  1—  4a—  4a  —  2b—  2c.       The  angular 


494  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

velocities  then  are  to  each  other  in  a  ratio  compounded  of 
these  two  proportions,  that  is  in  the  ratio  of 

1  :  l  +  3«— 4a  —  2b—  2c, 
which  is  evidently  that  of  a  greater  to  a  less  quantity.     It  i? 
obvious  also,  from  the  constitution  of  the  second  term  cf  this 
ratio,  that  the  normal  force  is  far  more  influential  in  pro- 
ducing this  result  than  the  tangential. 

(711.)  In  the  foregoing  reasoning  the  sun  has  been  re- 
garded as  fixed.  Let  us  now  suppose  it  in  motion  (in  a 
circular  orbit),  then  it  is  evident  that  at  equal  angles  of 
elongation  (of  P  from  M  seen  from  S),  equal  disturbing 
forces,  both  tangential  and  normal,  will  act :  only  the  syzygics 
and  quadratures,  as  well  as  the  neutral  points  of  the  norma] 
force,  instead  of  being  points  fixed  in  longitude  on  the  orbit 
of  the  moon,  will  advance  on  that  orbit  with  a  uniform  angular 
motion  equal  to  the  angular  motion  of  the  sun.  The  cus- 
pidated curves  aidlbiel  and  aid2b2ei,  Jig.  art.  708.,  will, 
therefore,  no  longer  be  re  entering  curves ;  but  each  will 
have  its  cusps  screwed  round  as  it  were  in  the  direction  of 
the  sun's  motion,  so  as  to  increase  the  angles  between  them 
in  the  ratio  of  the  synodical  to  the  sidereal  revolution  of  the 
moon  (art.  418.).  And  if,  in  like  manner,  the  motions  in 
these  two  curves,  thus  separately  described  by  II,  be  com 
pounded,  the  resulting  curve,  though  still  (loosely  speaking)  a 
species  of  oval,  will  not  return  into  itself,  but  will  make 
successive,  spiroidal  convolutions  about  S,  its  farthest  and 
nearest  points  being  in  the  same  ratio  more  than  90°  asunder. 
And  to  this  movement  that  of  the  moon  herself  will  conform, 
describing  a  species  of  elliptic  spiroid,  having  its  least  dis- 
tances always  in  the  line  of  syzygies  and  its  greatest  in  that 
of  quadratures.  It  is  evident  also,  that,  owing  to  the  longer 
continued  action  of  both  forces,  i.e.  owing  to  the  greater 
arc  over  which  their  intensities  increase  and  decrease  by 
equal  steps,  the  branches  of  each  curve  between  the  cusps 
will  be  longer,  and  the  cusps  themselves  will  be  more  remote 
from  S,  and  in  the  same  degree  will  the  dimensions  of  the 
resulting  oval  be  enlarged,  and  with  them  the  amount  of  the. 
inequality  in  the  moon's  motion  whicl    they  represent. 


*'  VARIATION "   OF    THE    MOON    EXPLAINED.  495 

(712.)  In  the  above  reasoning  the  sun's  distance  is  sup- 
posed so  great,  that  the  disturbing  forces  in  the  semi-orbit 
nearer  to  it  shall  not  sensibly  differ  from  those  in  the  more 
remote.  The  sun,  however,  is  actually  nearer  to  the  moon 
in  conjunction  than  in  opposition  by  about  one  two-hundredth 
part  of  its  whole  distance,  and  this  suffices  to  give  rise  to  a 
very  sensible  inequality  (called  the  parallactic  inequality) 
in  the  lunar  motions,  amounting  to  about  2'  in  its  effect  on 
the  moon's  longitude,  and  having  for  its  period  one  synodical 
revolution  or  one  lunation.  As  this  inequality,  though 
subordinate  in  the  case  of  the  moon  to  the  great  inequality 
of  the  variation  with  which  it  stands  in  connexion,  becomes 
a  prominent  feature  in  the  system  of  inequalities  correspond- 
ing to  it  in  the  planetary  perturbations  (by  reason  of  the 
very  great  variations  of  their  distances  from  conjunction  to 
opposition),  it  will  be  necessary  to  indicate  what  modifica- 
tions this  consideration  will  introduce  into  the  forms  of  our 
focus  curves,  and  of  their  superposed  oval.  Recurring  then 
to  our  figures  in  art.  706, 707.,  and  supposing  the  moon  to  set 
out  from  E,  and  the  upper  focus,  in  each  curve  from  e,  it  is 
evident  that  the  intercuspidal  arcs  e  a,  a  d,  in  the  one,  and 
e  o,  o  a  I,  I  d,  in  the  other,  being  described  under  the  influence 
of  more  powerful  forces,  will  be  greater  than  the  arcs  d  b, 
b e,  and  dm,  m  b  n,  ne  corresponding  in  the  other  half  revo- 


h 


J. 


'       .1 


Intion.     The  two  extremities  of  these  curves  then,  the  initial 
and  terminal  places  of  e  in  each)  will  not  meet,  and  the  same 


496  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

conclusion  will  hold  respecting  those  of  the  compound  oval 
in  which  the  focus  really  revolves,  which  will,  therefore,  be 
as  in  the  annexed  figure.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  a  complete 
lunation,  the  focus  will  have  shifted  its  place  from  e  to  f  in  a 
line  parallel  to  the  line  of  quadratures.  The  next  revolution, 
and  the  next,  the  same  thing  would  happen.  Meanwhile, 
however,  the  sun  has  advanced  in  its  orbit,  and  the  line  of 
quadratures  has  changed  its  situation  by  an  equal  angular 
motion.  In  consequence,  the  next  terminal  situation  (g)  of 
the  forces  will  not  lie  in  the  line  ef  prolonged,  but  in  a  line 
parallel  to  the  new  situation  of  the  line  of  quadratures,  and 
this  process  continuing,  will  evidently  give  rise  to  a  move- 
ment of  circulation  of  the  point  e,  round  a  mean  situation  in 
an  annual  period;  and  this,  it  is  evident,  is  equivalent  to 
an  annual  circulation  of  the  central  point  of  the  compound 
oval  itself,  in  a  small  orbit  about  its  mean  position  S.  Thus 
we  see  that  no  permanent  and  indefinite  increase  of  excen- 
tricity  can  arise  from  this  cause ;  which  would  be  the  case, 
however,  but  for  the  annual  motion  of  the  sun. 

(713.)  Inequalities  precisely  similar  in  principle  to  the 
variation  and  parallactic  inequality  of  the  moon,  though 
greatly  modified  by  the  different  relations  of  the  dimensions 
of  the  orbits,  prevail  in  all  cases  where  planet  disturbs  planet. 
To  what  extent  this  modification  is  carried  will  be  evident, 
if  we  cast  our  eyes  on  the  examples  given  in  art.  612.,  where 
»t  will  be  seen  that  the  disturbing  force  in  conjunction  often 
exceeds  that  in  opposition  in  a  very  high  ratio,  (being  in  the 
case  of  Neptune  disturbing  Uranus  more  than  ten  times  ;is 
great).  The  effect  will  be,  that  the  orbit  described  by  the 
center  of  the  compound  oval  about  S,  will  be  much  greater 
relatively  to  the  dimensions  of  that  oval  itself,  than  in  the 
case  of  the  moon.  Bearing  in  mind  the  nature  and  import 
of  this  modification,  we  may  proceed  to  enquire,  apart  from 
it,  into  the  number  and  distribution  of  the  undulations  in  the 
contour  of  the  oval  itself  arising  from  the  alternations  of  di- 
rection plus  and  minus  of  the  disturbing  forces  in  the  course  of 
a  synodic  revolution.  But  first  it  should  be  mentioned  that, 
in  the  case  of  an  exterior  disturbed  by  an  interior  pianet, 


ANALOGOUS    PLANETARY    DISTURBANCES.  497 

the  disturbing  body's  angular  motion  exceeds  that  of  the  dis- 
turbed. Hence  P,  though  advancing  in  its  orbit,  recede)* 
relatively  to  the  line  of  syzygies,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same 
thing,  the  neutral  points  of  either  force  overtake  it  in  suc- 
cession, and  each,  as  it  comes  up  to  it,  gives  rise  to  a  cusp  in 
the  corresponding  focus  curve.  The  angles  between  the  suc- 
cessive cusps  will  therefore  be  to  the  angles  between  the  cor- 
responding neutral  points  for  a  fixed  position  of  M,  in  the 
same  constant  ratio  of  the  synodic  to  the  sidereal  period  of  I', 
which  however  is  now  a  ratio  of  less  inequality.  These 
angles  then  will  be  contracted  in  amplitude,  and,  for  the  same 
reason  as  before,  the  excursions  of  the  focus  will  be  dimi- 
nished, and  the  more  so  the  shorter  the  synodic  revolution. 

(714.)  Since  the  cusps  of  either  curve  recur,  in  successive 
synodic  revolutions  in  the  same  order,  and  at  the  same 
angular  distances  from  each  other,  and  from  the  line  of  con- 
junction, the  same  will  be  true  of  all  the  corresponding  points 
in  the  curve  resulting  from  their  superposition.  In  that 
curve,  every  cusp,  of  either  constituent,  will  give  rise  to 
a  convexity,  and  every  intercuspidal  arc  to  a  relative  con- 
cavity. It  is  evident  then  that  the  compound  curve  or 
true  path  of  the  focus  so  resulting,  but  for  the  cause  above 
mentioned,  would  return  into  itself,  whenever  the  periodic 
times  of  the  disturbing  and  disturbed  bodies  are  com- 
mensurate, because  in  that  case  the  synodic  period  will  also 
be    commensurate    with    either,    and    the    arc   of   longitude 


intercepted  between* the  sidereal  place  of  any  one  conjunction, 
and  that  next  following  it,  will  be  an  aliquot  part  of  360°. 

K  K 


498  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

In  all  other  cases  it  would  be  a  non-reentering,  more  or  lesa 
undulating  and  more  or  less  regular,  spiroid,  according  to  the 
number  of  cusps  in  each  of  the  constituent  curves  (that  is  to 
say,  according  to  the  number  of  neutral  points  or  changes  of 
direction  from  inwards  to  outwards,  or  from  accelerating  to 
retarding,  and  vice  versa,  of  the  normal  and  tangential  forces,) 
in  a  complete  synodic  revolution,  and  their  distribution  over 
the  circumference. 

(715.)  With  regard  to  these  changes,  it  is  necessary  to 
distinguish  three  cases,  in  which  the  perturbations  of  planet 
by  planet  are  very  distinct  in  character.  1st.  When  the 
disturbing  planet  is  exterior.  In  this  case  there  are  four 
neutral  points  of  either  force.  Those  of  the  tangential  force 
occur  at  the  syzygies,  and  at  the  points  of  the  disturbed  orbit 
(which  we  shall  call  points  of  equidistance),  equidistant  from 
the  sun  and  the  disturbing  planet  (at  which  points,  as  we 
have  shown  (art.  614.),  the  total  disturbing  force  is  always 
directed  inwards  towards  the  sun).  Those  of  the  normal 
force  occur  at  points  intermediate  between  these  last  men- 
tioned points,  and  the  syzygies,  which,  if  the  disturbing  planet 
be  very  distant,  hold  nearly  the  situation  they  do  in  the  lunar 
theory,  i.  e.  considerably  nearer  the  quadratures  than  the 
syzygies.  In  proportion  as  the  distance  of  the  disturbing 
planet  diminishes,  two  of  these  points,  viz.  those  nearest  the 
syzygy,  approach  to  each  other,  and  to  the  syzygy,  and  in 
the  extreme  case,  when  the  dimensions  of  the  orbits  are  equal, 
coincide  with  it. 

(716.)  The  second  case  is  that  in  which  the  disturbing 
planet  is  interior  to  the  disturbed,  but  at  a  distance  from  the 
sun  greater  than  half  that  of  the  latter.  In  this  case  there 
are  four  neutral  points  of  the  tangential  force,  and  only  two 
of  the  normal.  Those  of  the  tangential  force  occur  at  the 
syzygies,  and  at  the  points  of  equidistance.  The  force  retards 
the  disturbed  body  from  conjunction  to  the  first  such  points 
after  conjunction,  accelerates  it  thence  to  the  opposition, 
thence  again  retards  it  to  the  next  point  of  equidistance, 
and  finally  again  accelerates  it  up  to  the  conjunction.  As 
the  disturbing  orbit  contracts  in  dimension  the  points  of  equi- 


THREE    CASES    DISTINGUISHED. 


499 


distance  approach  ;  their  distance  from  syzygy  from  60°  (the 
extreme  case)  diminishing  to  nothing,  when  they  coincide  with 
each  other,  and  with  the  conjunction.  In  the  ctse  of  Saturn 
disturbed  by  Jupiter,  that  distance  is  only  23°  33'.  Tho 
neutral  points  of  the  normal  force  lie  somewhat  beyond  the 
quadratures,  on  the  side  of  the  opposition,  and  do  not  undergo 
any  very  material  change  of  situation  with  the  contraction 
of  the  disturbing  orbit. 

(717.)  The  tliird  case  is  that  in  which  the  diameter  of  the 
disturbing  interior  orbit  is  less  than  half  that  of  the  disturbed. 
In  this  case  there  are  only  two  points  of  evanescence  for 
either  force.  Those  of  the  tangential  force  are  the  syzygies. 
The  disturbed  planet  is  accelerated  throughout  the  whole 
semi-revolution  from  conjunction  to  opposition,  and  retarded 
from  opposition  to  conjunction,  the  maxima  of  acceleration 
and  retardation  occurring  not  far  from  quadrature.  The 
neutral  points  of  the  normal  force  are  situated  nearly  as  in 
the  last  case  ;  that  is  to  say,  beyond  the  quadratures  towards 
the  opposition.  All  these  varieties  the  student  will  easily 
trace  out  by  simply  drawing  the  figures,  and  resolving  the 
forces  in  a  series  of  cases,  beginning  with  a  very  large  and 
ending  with  a  very  small  diameter  of  the  disturbing  orbit. 
It  will  greatly  aid  him  in  impressing  on  his  imagination  the 
general  relations  of  the  subject,  if  he  construct,  as  he  proceeds, 


for  each  case,  the  elegant  and  symmetrical  ovals  in  which  the 
point*  N  and  L  {Jig.  art.  675.)  always  lie,  for  a  fixed  position 


K  K    -2 


500 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


of  M,  and  of  which  the  annexed  figure  expresses  the  forma 
they  respectively  assume  in  the  third  case  now  under  consi- 
deration. The  second  only  differs  from  this,  in  having  the 
common  vertex  m  of  both  ovals  outside  of  the  disturbed  orbit 
A  P,  while  in  the  case  of  an  exterior  disturbing  planet  the 
oval  m  L  assumes  a  four-lobed  form ;  its  lobes  respectively 
touching  the  oval  m  N  in  its  vertices,  and  cutting  the  orbit 
A  P  in  the  points  of  equidistance  and  of  tangency,  (i  e.  where 
M  P  S  is  a  right  angle)  as  in  this  figure. 


(718.)  It  would  be  easy  now,  bearing  these  features  in  mind, 
to  trace  in  any  proposed  case  the  form  of  the  spiroid  curve, 
described,  as  above  explained,  by  the  upper  focus.  It  will 
suffice,  however,  for  our  present  purpose  to  remark,  1st,  That 
between  every  two  successive  conjunctions  of  P  and  M  the 
same  general  form,  the  same  subordinate  undulations,  and  the 
same  terminal  displacement  of  the  upper  focus  are  continually 
repeated.  2dly,  That  the  motion  of  the  focus  in  this  curve 
is  retrograde  whenever  the  disturbing  planet  is  exterior,  and 
that  in  consequence  the  apsides  of  the  momentary  ellipse  also 
recede,  with  a  mean  velocity  such  as,  but  for  that  dis- 
placement, would  bring  them  round  at  each  conjunction  to 
the  same  relative  situation  with  respect  to  the  line  of  syzygies. 
3dly,  That  in  consequence  of  this  retrograde  movement  of  the 
apse,  the  disturbed  planet,  apart  from  that  consideration, 
would  be  twice  in  perihelio  and  twice  in  aphelio  in  its 
momentary  ellipse  in  each  synodic  revolution,  just  as  in  the 
case  of  the  moon  disturbed  by  the  sun  —  and  that  in 
consequence  of  this  and  of  the  undulating  movement  of 
the    focus   H   itself,   an    inequality   will    arise,    analogous. 


LONG    EQUATION   OF   JUPITER   AND   SATURN.  501 

mutatis  mutandis  in  each  case,  to  the  moon's  variation,  under 
which  term  we  comprehend  (not  exactly  in  conformity  to  its 
strict  technical  meaning  in  the  lunar  theory)  not  only  the 
principal  inequality  thus  arising,  but  all  its  subordinate  fluc- 
tuations. And  on  this  the  parallactic  inequality  thus  violently 
exaggerated  is  superposed. 

(719.)  We  come  now  to  the  class  of  inequalities  which 
depend  for  their  existence  on  an  appretiable  amount  of  per- 
manent excentricity  in  the  orbit  of  one  or  of  both  the  dis- 
turbing and  disturbed  planets,  in  consequence  of  which  all 
their  conjunctions  do  not  take  place  at  equal  distances  either 
from  the  central  body  or  from  each  other,  and  therefore  that 
symmetry  in  every  synodic  revolution  on  which  depends  the 
exact  restoration  of  both  the  axis  and  excentricity  to  their 
original  values  at  the  completion  of  each  such  revolution  no 
longer  subsists.  In  passing  from  conjunction  to  conjunction, 
then,  there  will  no  longer  be  effected  either  a  complete  re- 
storation of  the  upper  focus  to  the  same  relative  situation,  or 
of  the  axis  to  the  same  length  which  they  respectively  had  at 
the  outset.  At  the  same  time  it  is  not  less  evident  that  the 
differences  in  both  respects  are  only  what  remain  outstanding 
after  the  compensation  of  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  de- 
viations to  and  fro  from  a  mean  state  which  occur  in  the  course 
of  the  revolution  •,  and  that  they  amount  to  but  small  fractions 
of  the  total  excursions  of  the  focus  from  its  first  position,  or 
of  the  increase  and  decrease  in  the  length  of  the  axis  effected 
by  the  direct  action  of  the  tangential  force,  —  so  small,  indeed, 
that,  unless  owing  to  peculiar  adjustments  they  be  enabled 
to  accumulate  again  and  again  at  successive  conjunctions  in 
the  same  direction,  they  would  be  altogether  undeserving  of 
any  especial  notice  in  a  work  of  this  nature.  Such  adjust- 
ments, however,  would  evidently  exist  if  the  periodic  times 
of  the  planets  were  exactly  commensurable ;  since  in  that  case 
all  the  possible  conjunctions  which  could  ever  happen  (the 
elements  not  being  materially  changed)  would  take  place  at 
fixed  points  in  longitude,  the  intermediate  points  being  never 
visited  by  a  conjunction.  Now,  of  the  conjunctions  thus 
distributed,  their  relations  to  the  lines  of  symmetry  in  the 


.502  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

orbits  being  all  dissimilar,  some  one  must  be  more  influential 
than  the  rest  on  each  of  the  elements  (not  necessarily  the 
same  upon  all).  Consequently,  in  a  complete  cycle  of  con- 
junctions, wherein  each  has  been  visited  in  its  turn,  the 
influence  of  that  one  on  the  element  to  which  it  stands  so 
especially  related  will  preponderate  over  the  counteracting 
and  compensating  influence  of  the  rest,  and  thus,  although 
in  such  a  cycle  as  above  specified,  a  further  and  much  more 
exact  compensation  will  have  been  effected  in  its  value  than 
in  a  single  revolution ;  still  that  compensation  will  not  be 
complete,  but  a  portion  of  the  effect  (be  it  to  increase  or  to 
diminish  the  excentricity  or  the  axis,  or  to  cause  the  apse 
to  advance  or  to  recede,)  will  remain  outstanding.  In  the 
next  cycle  of  the  same  kind  this  will  be  repeated,  and  the 
result  will  be  of  the  same  character,  and  so  on,  till  at  length 
a  sensible  and  ultimately  a  large  amount  of  change  shall  have 
taken  place,  and  in  fact  until  the  axis  (and  with  it  the  mean 
motion)  shall  have  so  altered  as  to  destroy  the  commensura- 
bility  of  periods,  and  the  apsides  have  so  shifted  as  to  alter 
the  place  of  the  most  influential  conjunction. 

(720.)  Now,  although  it  is  true  that  the  mean  motions  of 
no  two  planets  are  exactly  commensurate,  yet  cases  are  not 
wanting  in  which  there  exists  an  approach  to  this  adjustment. 
For  instance,  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  a  cycle 
composed  of  five  periods  of  Jupiter  and  two  of  Saturn, 
although  it  does  not  exactly  bring  about  the  same  configuration, 
does  so  pretty  nearly.  Five  periods  of  Jupiter  are  21663 
days,  and  two  periods  of  Saturn,  21519  days.  The  difference 
is  only  146  days,  in  which  Jupiter  describes,  on  an  average, 
12°,  and  Saturn  about  5°;  so  that  after  the  lapse  of  the 
former  interval  they  will  only  be  7°  from  a  conjunction  in 
the  same  parts  of  their  orbits  as  before.  If  we  calculate  the 
time  which  will  exactly  bring  about,  on  the  average,  three 
conjunctions  of  the  two  planets,  we  shall  find  it  to  be  21760 
days,  their  synodical  period  being  7253*4  days.  In  this 
interval  Saturn  will  have  described  8°  6'  in  excess  of  two 
eidereal  revolutions,  and  Jupiter  the  same  angle  in  excess  of 
hve.     Every  third  conjunction,  then,  will  take  place  8°  6'  in 


LONG    EQUATION    OF   JUPITER    AND    SATURN.  503 

advance  of  the  preceding,  which  is  near  enough  to  establish, 
not,  it  is  true,  an  identity  with,  but  still  a  great  approach  to 
the  case  in  question.  The  excess  of  action,  for  several  such 
triple  conjunctions  (7  or  8)  in  succession,  will  lie  the  same 
way,  and  at  each  of  them  the  elements  of  P's  orbit  and  its 
angular  motion  will  be  similarly  influenced,  so  as  to  accumu- 
late the  effect  upon  its  longitude  ;  thus  giving  rise  to  aE 
irregularity  of  considerable  magnitude  and  very  long  period, 
which  is  well  known  to  astronomers  by  the  name  of  the  great 
inequality  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn. 

(721.)  The  arc  8°  6'  is  contained  44|  times  in  the  whole 
circumference  of  360°;  and  accordingly,  if  we  trace  round 
this  particular  conjunction,  we  shall  find  it  will  return  to  the 
same  point  of  the  orbit  in  so  many  times  21760  days,  or  in 
2648  years.  But  the  conjunction  we  are  now  considering  is 
only  one  out  of  three.  The  other  two  will  happen  at  points 
of  the  orbit  about  1 23°  and  246°  distant,  and  these  points  also 
will  advance  by  the  same  arc  of  8°  6'  in  21760  days.  Con- 
sequently the  period  of  2648  years  will  bring  them  all  round, 
and  in  that  interval  each  of  them  will  pass  through  that  point 
of  the  two  orbits  from  which  we  commenced :  hence  a  con- 
Junction  (one  or  other  of  the  three)  will  happen  at  that  point 
once  in  one  third  of  this  period,  or  in  883  years ;  and  this  is, 
therefore,  the  cycle  in  which  the  "  great  inequality  "  would 
undergo  its  full  compensation,  did  the  elements  of  the  orbitd 
continue  all  that  time  invariable.  Their  variation,  however, 
is  considerable  in  so  long  an  interval ;  and,  owing  to  this 
cause,  the  period  itself  is  prolonged  to  about  918  years. 

(722.)  AVe  have  selected  this  inequality  as  the  most  remark- 
able instance  of  this  kind  of  action  on  account  of  its  magnitude, 
the  length  of  its  period,  and  its  high  historical  interest.  It 
had  long  been  remarked  by  astronomers,  that  on  comparing 
together  modern  with  ancient  observations  of  Jupiter  and 
Saturn,  the  mean  motions  of  these  planets  did  not  appear  to 
be  uniform.  The  period  of  Saturn,  for  instance,  appeared  to 
have  been  lengthening  throughout  the  whole  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  and  that  of  Jupiter  shortening  —  that  is  to 
eay,  the  one  planet  was  constantly  lagging  behind,  and  the 


SiM  OUTLINES   OF   A81UOWJMY. 

other  getting  in  advance  of  its  calculated  place.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  a  process  precisely  the  reverse 
seemed  to  be  going  on.  It  is  true  the  whole  retardations 
and  accelerations  observed  were  not  very  great ;  but,  as  their 
influence  went  on  accumulating,  they  produced,  at  length, 
material  differences  between  the  observed  and  calculated 
places  of  both  these  planets,  which  as  they  could  not  then  be 
accounted  for  by  any  theory,  excited  a  high  degree  of  attention, 
and  were  even,  at  one  time,  too  hastily  regarded  as  almost 
subversive  of  the  Newtonian  doctrine  of  gravity.  For  a  long 
while  this  difference  baffled  every  endeavour  to  account  for 
it ;  till  at  length  Lap' ace  pointed  out  its  cause  in  the  near 
commensurability  of  the  mean  motions,  as  above  shown,  and 
succeeded  in  calculating  its  period  and  amount.  . 

(723.)  '1  he  inequality  in  question  amounts,  at  its  maximum, 
to  an  alternate  gain  and  loss  of  about  0°  49'  in  the  longitude 
of  Saturn,  and  a  corresponding  loss  and  gain  of  about  0°  21' 
in  that  of  Jupiter.  That  an  acceleration  in  the  one  planet 
must  necessarily  be  accompanied  by  a  retardation  in  the  other, 
might  appear  at  first  sight  self-evident,  if  we  consider,  that 
action  and  reaction  being  equal,  and  in  contrary  directions, 
whatever  momentum  Jupiter  communicates  to  Saturn  in  the 
direction  P  M,  the  same  momentum  must  Saturn  communicate 
to  Jupiter  in  the  direction  M  P.  The  one,  therefore,  it  might 
seem  to  be  plausibly  argued,  will  be  dragged  forward, 
whenever  the  other  is  pulled  back  in  its  orbit.  The  inference 
is  correct,  so  far  as  the  general  and  final  result  goes  ;  but  the 
reasoning  by  which  it  would,  on  the  first  glance,  appear  to  be 
thus  summarily  established  is  fallacious,  or  at  least  incomplete. 
It  is  perfectly  true  that  whatever  momentum  Jupiter  com- 
municates directly  to  Saturn,  Saturn  communicates  an  equal 
momentum  to  Jupiter  in  an  opposite  linear  direction.  But  it 
is  not  with  the  absolute  motions  of  the  two  planets  in  space 
that  we  are  now  concerned,  but  with  the  relative  motion  of 
each  separately,  with  respect  to  the  sun  regarded  as  at  rest. 
The  perturbatwe  forces  (the  forces  which  disturb  thr&e  relative 
motions)  do  not  act  along  the  line  of  junction  of  the  planets 
(art.  614.).     In  the  reasoning  thus  objected  to,  the  attraction 


LAW    OF    UECirKOCITY.  505 

of  each  on  the  sun  lias  been  left  out  of  the  account  *,  and  it 
remains  to  be  shown  that  these  attractions  neutralize  and 
destroy  each  other's  effects  in  considerable  periods  of  time, 
as  bearing  upon  the  result  in  question.  Suppose  then  that 
we  for  a  moment  abandon  the  point  of  view,  in  which  we 
have  hitherto  all  along  considered  the  subject,  and  regard  the 
sun  as  free  to  move,  and  liable  to  be  displaced  by  the  attrac- 
tions of  the  two  planets.  Then  will  the  movements  of  all  be 
performed  about  the  common  center  of  gravity,  just  as  they 
would  have  been  about  the  sun's  center  regarded  as  immo- 
veable, the  sun  all  the  while  circulating  in  a  small  orbit  (with 
a  motion  compounded  of  the  two  elliptic  motions  it  would 
have  in  virtue  of  their  separate  attractions)  about  the  same 
center.  Now  in  this  case  M  still  disturbs  P,  and  P,  M,  but 
the  whole  disturbing  force  now  acts  along  their  line  of  junction, 

and  since  it  remains  true  that  whatever  momentum  M  gene- 
ts 

rates  in  P,  P  will  generate  the  same  in  M  in  a  contrary 
direction ;  it  will  also  be  strictly  true  that,  so  far  as  a  disturb- 
ance of  their  elliptic  motions  about  the  common  center  of 
gravity  of  the  system  is  alone  regarded,  whatever  disturbance 
of  velocity  is  generated  in  the  one,  a  contrary  disturbance  of 
velocity  (only  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  masses  and  modified, 
though  never  contradicted,  by  the  directions  in  which  they 
are  respectively  moving),  will  be  generated  in  the  other. 
Now  when  we  are  considering  only  inequalities  of  long  period 
comprehending  many  complete  revolutions  of  both  planets, 
and  which  arise  from  changes  in  the  axes  of  the  orbits, 
affecting  their  mean  motions,  it  matters  not  whether  we 
suppose  these  motions  performed  about  the  common  center 
of  gravity,  or  about  the  sun,  which  never  departs  from 
that  center  to  any  material  extent  (the  mass  of  the  sun 
being  such  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  planets,  that 
that  center  always  lies  within  his  surface).     The  mean  motion 


*  We  are  here  reading  a  sort  of  recantation.  In  the  edition  of  1833  the 
remarkable  result  in  question  is  sought  to  be  established  by  this  vicious  reason- 
ing. 'Die  mistake  is  a  very  natural  one,  and  is  so  apt  to  haunt  the  ideas  of 
beginners  in  this  department  of  physics,  that  it  is  worth  while  expressly  to  warn 
t liein  against  it 


506 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


therefore,  tegarded  as  the  average  angular  velocity  during  a 
revolution,  is  the  same  whether  estimated  by  reference  to  the 
sun's  center,  or  to  the  center  of  gravity,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  relative  mean  motion  referred  to  the  sun  is  identical  with 
the  absolute  mean  motion  referred  to  the  center  of  gravity. 

(724.)  This  reasoning  applies  equally  to  every  case  of 
mutual  disturbance  resulting  in  a  long  inequality  such  as  may 
arise  from  a  slow  and  long-continued  periodical  increase  and 
diminution  of  the  axes,  and  geometers  have  accordingly 
demonstrated  as  a  consequence  from  it,  that  the  proportion 
in  which  such  inequalities  affect  the  longitudes  of  the  two 
planets  concerned,  or  the  maxima  of  the  excesses  and  defects 
of  their  longitudes  above  and  below  their  elliptic  values, 
thence  arising,  in  each,  are  to  each  other  in  the  inverse  ratio 
of  their  masses  multiplied  by  the  square  roots  of  the  major 
axes  of  their  orbits,  and  this  result  is  confirmed  by  observ- 
ation, and  will  be  found  verified  in  the  instance  immediately 
in  question  as  nearly  as  the  uncertainty  still  subsisting  as  to 
the  masses  of  the  two  planets  will  permit. 

(725.)  The  inequality  in  question,  as  has  been  observed  in 
general,  (art.  718.)  would  be  much  greater,  were  it  not  for  the 
partial  compensation  which  is  operated  in  it  in  every  triple 
conjunction  of  the  planets.  Suppose 
PQE  to  be  Saturn's  orbit,  and 
pqr  Jupiter's;  and  suppose  a  con- 
junction to  take  place  at  P/>,  on  the 
line  S  A  ;  a  second  at  123°  distance. 
on  the  line  SB;  a  third  at  246°  dis- 
tance, on  S  C  ;  and  the  next  at  368°, 
on  S  D.  This  last-mentioned  con- 
junction, taking  place  nearly  in  the 
situation  of  the  first,   will    produce 

nearly  a  repetition  of  the  first  effect  in  retarding  or  accelerating 
the  planets;  but  the  other  two,  being  in  the  most  remote 
situations  possible  from  the  first,  will  happen  under  entirely 
different  circumstances  as  to  the  position  of  the  perihelia  of 
the  orbits.  Now,  wc  have  seen  that  a  presentation  of  the  one 
planet  to  the  other  in  conjunction,  in  a  variety  of  situations, 


LONG  INEQUALITY  OF  VENUS.  507 

tends  to  produce  compensation  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  greatest 
possible  amount  of  compensation  which  can  be  produced  by 
only  three  conjunctions  is  when  they  are  thus  equally  dis- 
tributed round  the  center.  Hence  we  see  that  it  is  not  the 
whole  amount  of  perturbation  which  is  thus  accumulated  in 
each  triple  conjunction,  but  only  that  small  part  which  is  left 
uncompensated  by  the  intermediate  ones.  The  reader,  who 
possesses  already  some  acquaintance  with  the  subject,  will 
not  be  at  a  loss  to  perceive  how  this  consideration  is,  in  fact, 
equivalent  to  that  part  of  the  geometrical  investigation  of  this 
inequality  which  leads  us  to  seek  its  expression  in  terms  of 
the  third  order,  or  involving  the  cubes  and  products  of  three 
dimensions  of  the  excentricities  and  inclinations ;  and  how 
the  continual  accumulation  of  small  quantities,  during  long 
periods,  corresponds  to  what  geometers  intend  when  they 
speak  of  small  terms  receiving  great  accessions  of  magnitude 
by  the  introduction  of  large  coefficients  in  the  process  of 
integration. 

(726.)  Similar  considerations  apply  to  every  case  of  ap- 
proximate commensurability  which  can  take  place  among  the 
mean  motions  of  any  two  planets.  Such,  for  instance,  is  that 
which  obtains  between  the  mean  motion  of  the  earth  and 
Venus,  — 13  times  the  period  of  Venus  being  very  nearly 
equal  to  8  times  that  of  the  earth.  This  gives  rise  to  an  ex- 
tremely near  coincidence  of  every  fifth  conjunction,  in  the 
same  parts  of  each  orbit  (within  ^^th  part  of  a  circum- 
ference), and  therefore  to  a  correspondingly  extensive  accu- 
mulation of  the  resulting  uncompensated  perturbation.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  part  of  the  perturbation  thus  accu- 
mulated is  only  that  which  remains  outstanding  after  passing 
the  equalizing  ordeal  of  five  conjunctions  equally  distributed 
round  the  circle ;  or,  in  the  language  of  geometers,  is  de- 
pendent on  powers  and  products  of  the  excentricities  and 
inclinations  of  the  fifth  order.  It  is,  therefore,  extremely 
minute,  and  the  whole  resulting  inequality,  according  to  the 
elaborate  calculations  of  Mr.  Airy,  to  whom  it  owes  its  de- 
tection, amounts  to  no  more  than  a  few  seconds  at  its  maximum, 
wliile  its  period  is  no  less  than  240  years.     This  example  will 


508  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

serve  to  show  to  what  minuteness  these  enquiries  have  been 
carried  in  the  planetary  theory. 

(727.)  That  variations  of  long  period  arising  in  the  way 
above  described  are  necessarily  accompanied  by  similarly 
periodical  displacements  of  the  upper  focus,  equivalent  in  their 
effect  to  periodical  fluctuations  in  the  magnitude  of  the 
excentricity,  and  in  the  position  of  the  line  of  apsides,  is 
evident  from  what  has  been  already  said  respecting  the  motion 
of  the  upper  focus  under  the  influence  of  the  disturbing  forces. 
In  the  case  of  circular  orbits  the  mean  place  of  H  coincides 
with  S  the  center  of  the  sun,  but  if  the  orbits  have  any  inde- 
pendent ellipticity,  this  coincidence  will  no  longer  exist  —  and 
the  mean  place  of  the  upper  focus  will  come  to  be  inferred 
from  the  average  of  all  the  situations  which  it  actually  holds 
during  an  entire  revolution.  Now  the  fixity  of  this  point 
depends  on  the  equality  of  each  of  the  branches  of  the  cus- 
pidated curves,  and  consequent  equality  of  excursion  of 
the  focus  in  each  particular  direction,  in  every  successive 
situation  of  the  line  of  conjunction.  But  if  there  be  some 
one  line  of  conjunction  in  which  these  excursions  are  greater 
in  any  one  particular  direction  than  in  another,  the  mean 
place  of  the  focus  will  be  displaced,  and  if  this  process  be  re- 
peated, that  mean  place  will  continue  to  deviate  more  and 
more  from  its  original  position,  and  thus  will  arise  a  circu- 
lation of  the  mean  place  of  the  focus  for  a  revolution  about 
another  mean  situation,  the  average  of  all  the  former  mean 
places  during  a  complete  cycle  of  conjunctions.  Supposing 
S  to  be  the  sun,  O  the  situation  the  upper  focus  would  have, 
had  these  inequalities  no  existence,  and  H  K  the  path  of  the 
upper  focus,  which  it  pursues  about  O  by  reason  of  them, 
then  it  is  evident  that  in  the  course  of  a  complete  cycle  of 
the  inequality  in  question,  the  excentricity  will  have  fluc- 
tuated between  the  extreme  limits  S  J  and  S  I  and  the  di- 
rection of  the  longer  axis  between  the  extreme  position  S  H 
and  S  K,  and  that  if  we  suppose  ijhk  to  be  the  corresponding 
mean  places  of  the  focus,  i  j  will  be  the  extent  of  the  fluctu- 
ation of  the  mean  excentricity,  and  the  angle  h  s  k,  that  of  t  he 
longitude  of  the  perigee. 


LONG   INEQUALITIES  OF    ELEMENTS.  -309 


(728.)  The  periods  then  in  which  these  fluctuations  go 
through  their  phases  are  necessarily  equal  in  duration  with 
that  of  the  inequality  in  longitude,  with  which  they  stand  in 
connection.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  their  maxima 
all  coincide.  The  variation  of  the  axis  to  which  that  of  the 
mean  motion  corresponds,  depends  on  the  tangential  force  only 
whose  maximum  is  not  at  conjunction  or  opposition,  but  at 
points  remote  from  either,  while  the  excentricity  depends 
both  on  the  normal  and  tangential  forces,  the  maximum  of  the 
former  of  which  is  at  the  conjunction.  That  particular  con- 
junction therefore,  which  is  most  influential  on  the  axis,  is 
not  so  on  the  excentricity,  so  that  it  can  by  no  means  be 
concluded  that  either  the  maximum  value  of  the  axis  coincides 
with  the  maximum,  or  the  minimum  of  the  excentricity,  or 
with  the  greatest  excursion  to  or  fro  of  the  line  of  apsides 
from  its  mean  situation,  all  that  can  be  safely  asserted  is,  that 
as  either  the  axis  or  the  excentricity  of  the  one  orbit  varies, 
that  of  the  other  will  vary  in  the  opposite  direction. 

(729.)  The  primary  elements  of  the  lunar  and  planetary 
orbits,  which  may  be  regarded  as  variable,  are  the  longitude 
of  the  node,  the  inclination,  the  axis,  excentricity,  longitude 
of  the  perihelion,  and  epoch  (art.  496.).  In  the  foregoing 
articles  we  have  shown  in  what  manner  each  of  the  first  five 
of  these  elements  is  made  to  vary,  by  the  direct  action  of 
the  perturbing  forces.  It  remains  to  explain  in  what  manner 
the  last  comes  to  be  affected  by  them.  And  here  it  is  neces- 
sary, in  the  first  instance,  to  remove  some  degree  of  obscurity 


510  OUTLINES  OP  ASTRONOMY. 

which  may  be  thought  to  hang  about  the  sense  in  which  the 
terra  itself  is  to  be  understood  in  speaking  of  an  orbit,  every 
other  element  of  which  is  regarded  as  in  a  continual  state  of 
variation.  Supposing,  then,  that  we  were  to  reverse  the  pro- 
cess of  calculation  described  in  arts.  499.  and  500.  by  which  a 
planet's  heliocentric  longitude  in  an  elliptic  orbit  is  computed 
for  a  given  time ;  and  setting  out  with  a  heliocentric  longitude 
ascertained  by  observation,  all  the  other  elements  being  known, 
we  were  to  calculate  either  what  mean  longitude  the  planet 
had  at  a  given  epochal  time,  or,  which  would  come  to  the  same 
thing,  at  what  moment  of  time  (thenceforward  to  be  assumed 
as  an  epoch)  it  had  a  given  mean  longitude.  It  is  evident 
that  by  this  means  the  epoch,  if  not  otherwise  known,  would 
become  known,  whether  we  consider  it  as  the  moment  of  time 
corresponding  to  a  convenient  mean  longitude,  or  as  the  mean 
longitude  corresponding  to  a  convenient  time.  The  latter  way 
of  considering  it  has  some  advantages  in  respect  of  general 
convenience,  and  astronomers  are  in  agreement  in  employing, 
as  an  element  under  the  title  "  Epoch  of  the  mean  longitude,'' 
the  mean  longitude  of  the  planet  so  computed  for  a  fixed  date  ; 
as,  for  instance,  the  commencement  of  the  year  1800,  mean 
time  at  a  given  place.  Supposing  now  all  the  elements  of  the 
orbit  invariable,  if  we  were  to  go  through  this  reverse  process, 
and  thus  ascertain  the  epoch  (so  defined)  from  any  number  of 
different  perfectly  correct  heliocentric  longitudes,  it  is  clear 
we  should  always  come  to  the  same  result.  One  and  the 
same  "  epoch  "  would  come  out  from  all  the  calculations. 

(730.)  Considering  then  the  "epoch"  in  this  light,  as 
merely  a  result  of  this  reversed  process  of  calculation,  and  not 
as  the  direct  result  of  an  observation  instituted  for  the  pur- 
pose at  the  precise  epochal  moment  of  time,  (which  would  be, 
generally  speaking,  impracticable,)  it  might  be  conceived 
subject  to  variation  in  two  distinct  ways,  viz.  dependently 
and  independently.  Dependently  it  must  vary,  as  a  necessary 
consequence  of  the  variation  of  the  other  elements ;  because, 
if  setting  out  from  one  and  the  same  observed  heliocentric 
longitude  of  the  planet,  we  calculate  back  to  the  epoch  with 
two  different  sets  of  intermediate  elements,  the  one  set  con- 


VARIATION    OF    THE    EPOCH.  511 

mating  of  those  which  it  had  immediately  before  its  arrival  nt 
that  longitude,  the  other  that  which  it  takes  up  immediately 
after  (C  e.  with  an  unvaried  and  a  varied  system),  we  cannot 
(unless  by  singular  accident  of  mutual  counteraction)  arrive 
at  the  same  result ;  and  the  difference  of  the  results  is  evi- 
dently the  variation  of  the  epoch.  On  the  other  hand,  how- 
ever, it  cannot  vary  independently  ;  for  since  this  is  the  only 
mode  in  which  the  unvaried  and  varied  epochs  can  become 
known,  and  as  both  result  from  direct  processes  of  calculation 
involving  only  given  data,  the  results  can  only  differ  by 
reason  of  the  difference  of  those  data.  Or  we  may  argue 
thus.  The  change  in  the  path  of  the  planet,  and  its  place  in 
that  path  so  changed,  at  any  future  time  (supposing  it  to 
undergo  no  further  variation),  are  entirely  owing  to  the  change 
in  its  velocity  and  direction,  produced  by  the  disturbing 
forces  at  the  point  of  disturbance ;  now  these  latter  changes 
(as  we  have  above  seen)  are  completely  represented  by  the 
momentary  change  in  the  situation  of  the  upper  focus,  taken 
in  combination  with  the  momentary  variation  in  the  plane  of 
the  orbit ;  and  these  therefore  express  the  total  effect  of  the 
disturbing  forces  There  is,  therefore,  no  direct  and  specific 
action  on  the  epoch  as  an  independent  variable.  It  is  simply 
left  to  accommodate  itself  to  the  altered  state  of  things  in  tho 
mode  already  indicated. 

(731.)  Nevertheless,  should  the  effects  of  perturbation  by 
inducing  changes  on  these  other  elements  affect  the  mean  lon- 
gitude of  the  planet  in  any  other  way  than  can  be  considered 
as  properly  taken  account  of,  by  the  varied  periodic  time  due 
to  a  change  of  axis,  such  effects  must  be  regarded  as  incident 
on  the  epoch.  This  is  the  case  with  a  very  curious  class  of 
perturbations  which  we  are  now  to  consider,  and  which  have 
their  origin  in  an  alteration  of  the  average  distance  at  which 
the  disturbed  body  is  found  at  every  instant  of  a  complete 
revolution,  distinct  from,  and  not  brought  about  by  the 
variation  of  the  major  semi-axis,  or  momentary  "  mean  dis- 
tance" which  is  an  imaginary  magnitude,  to  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished from  the  average  of  the  actual  distances  now 
contemplated.     Perturbations  of  this  class  (like  the  moon's 


612  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

variation,  with  which  they  are  intimately  connected)  are  in- 
dependent on  the  excentricity  of  the  disturbed  orbit ;  for  which 
reason  we  shall  simplify  our  treatment  of  this  part  of  the  sub- 
ject, by  supposing  that  orbit  to  have  no  permanent  excen- 
tricity, the  upper  focus  in  its  successive  displacements  merely 
revolving  about  a  mean  position  coincident  with  the  lower. 
We  shall  also  suppose  M  very  distant,  as  in  the  lunar  theory. 

(732.)  Referring  to  what  is  said  in  arts.  706.  and  707.,  and 
to  the  figures  accompanying  those  articles,  and  considering 
first  the  effect  of  the  tangential  force,  we  see  that  besides  the 
effect  of  that  force  in  changing  the  length  of  the  axis,  and 
consequently  the  periodic  time,  it  causes  the  upper  focus  H  to 
describe,  in  each  revolution  of  P,  a  four-cusped  curve,  a,  d,  b,  r, 
about  S,  all  whose  intercuspidal  arcs  are  similar  and  equal. 
This  supposes  M  fixed,  and  at  an  invariable  distance, —  suppo- 
sitions which  simplify  the  relations  of  the  subject,  and  (as  we 
shall  afterwards  show)  do  not  affect  the  general  nature  of  the 
conclusions  to  be  drawn.  In  virtue,  then,  of  the  excentricity 
thus  given  rise  to,  P  will  be  at  the  perigee  of  its  momentary 
ellipse  at  syzygies  and  in  its  apogee  at  quadratures.  Apart, 
therefore,  from  the  change  arising  from  the  variation  of  axis, 
the  distance  of  P  from  S  will  be  less  at  syzygies,  and  greater 
at  quadratures,  than  in  the  original  circle.  But  the  average 
of  all  the  distances  during  a  whole  revolution  will  be  un- 
altered ;  because  the  distances  of  a,  d,  b,  e  from  S  being 
equal,  and  the  arcs  symmetrical,  the  approach  in  and  about 
perigee  will  be  equal  to  the  recess  in  and  about  apogee.  And, 
in  like  manner,  the  effect  of  the  changes  going  on  in  the 
length  of  the  axis  itself,  on  the  average  in  question,  is  nil, 
because  the  alternate  increases  and  decreases  of  that  length 
balance  each  other  in  a  complete  revolution.  Thus  we  see 
that  the  tangential  force  is  excluded  from  all  influence  in  pro- 
ducing the  class  of  perturbations  now  under  consideration. 

(733.)  It  is  otherwise  with  respect  to  the  normal  force.  In 
virtue  of  the  action  of  that  force  the  upper  focus  describes,  in 
each  revolution  of  P,  the  four-cusped  curve  (Jig.  art.  707. ), 
whose  intercuspidal  arcs  are  alternately  of  very  unequal 
extent,  arising,  as  we  have  seen,  from  the  longer  duration  and 


INEQUALITIES    INCIDENT    ON   THE    EPOCH.  513 

fmiater  energy  of  the  outward  than  of  the  inward  action  of  the 
disturbing  force.  Although,  therefore,  in  perigee  at  syzygies 
and  in  apogee  at  quadratures,  the  apogeal  recess  is  much 
greater  than  the  perigeal  approach,  inasmuch  as  S  d  greatly 
exceeds  S  a.  On  the  average  of  a  whole  revolution,  then,  the 
recesses  will  preponderate,  and  the  average  distance  will  there- 
fore be  greater  in  the  disturbed  than  in  the  undisturbed  orbit. 
And  it  is  manifest  that  this  conclusion  is  quite  independent 
of  any  change  in  the  length  of  the  axis,  which  the  normal  force 
lias  no  power  to  produce. 

(734.)  But  neither  does  the  normal  force  operate  any 
change  of  linear  velocity  in  the  disturbed  body.  When 
carried  out,  therefore,  by  the  effect  of  that  force  to  a  greater 
distance  from  S,  the  angular  velocity  of  its  motion  round  S 
will  be  diminished :  and  contrariwise  when  brought  nearer. 
The  average  of  all  the  momentary  angular  motions,  therefore, 
will  decrease  with  the  increase  in  that  of  the  momentary 
distances ;  and  in  a  higher  ratio,  since  the  angular  velocity, 
under  an  equable  description  of  areas,  is  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance,  and  the  disturbing  force,  being  (in  the 
case  supposed)  directed  to  or  from  the  center,  does  not  disturb 
that  equable  description  (art.  616.).  Consequently,  on  the 
average  of  a  whole  revolution,  the  angular  motion  is  slower, 
and  therefore  the  time  of  completing  a  revolution,  and  returning 
to  the  same  longitude,  longer  than  in  the  undisturbed  orbit, 
and  that  independent  of  and  without  any  reference  to  the  length 
of  the  momentary  axis,  and  the  "periodic  time"  or  "mean 
motion"  dependent  thereon.  We  leave  to  the  reader  to  follow 
out  (as  is  easy  to  do)  the  same  train  of  reasoning  in  the  cases 
of  planetary  perturbation,  when  M  is  not  very  remote,  and 
when  it  is  interior  to  the  disturbed  orbit.  In  the  latter  case 
the  preponderant  effect  changes  from  a  retardation  of  angular 
velocity  to  an  acceleration,  and  the  dilatation  of  the  average 
dimensions  of  P's  orbit  to  a  contraction. 

^735.)  The  above  is  an  accurate  analysis,  according  to 
strict  dynamical  principles,  of  an  effect  which,  speaking  roughly, 
may  be  assimilated  to  an  alteration  of  M*8  gravitation  towards 
S   by  the  mean  preponderant  amount  of  the  outward  and 


514  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

inward  action  of  the  normal  forces  constantly  exerted  — nearly 
as  would  be  the  case  if  the  mass  of  the  disturbing  body  were 
formed  into  a  ring  of  uniform  thickness,  concentric  with  S 
and  of  such  diameter  as  to  exert  an  action  on  P  everywhere 
equal  to  such  mean  preponderant  force,  and  in  the  same 
direction  as  to  inwards  or  outwards.  For  it  is  clear  that  the 
action  of  such  a  ring  on  P,  will  be  the  difference  of  its  attrac- 
tions on  the  two  points  P  and  S,  of  which  the  latter  occupies 
its  center,  the  former  is  excentric.  Now  the  attraction  of  a 
ring  on  its  center  is  manifestly  equal  in  all  directions,  and 
therefore,  estimated  in  any  one  direction,  is  zero.  On  the 
other  hand,  on  a  point  P  out  of  its  center,  if  within  the  ring, 
the  resulting  attraction  will  always  be  outwards,  towards  the 
nearest  point  of  the  ring,  or  directly  from  the  center.*  But 
if  P  lie  without  the  ring,  the  resulting  force  will  act  always 
inwards,  urging  P  towards  its  center.  Hence  it  appears  that 
the  mean  effect  of  the  radial  force  of  the  ring  will  be  different 
in  its  direction,  according  as  the  orbit  of  the  disturbing  body 
is  exterior  or  interior  to  that  of  the  disturbed.     In  the  former 


*  As  this  is  a  proposition  which  the  equilibrium  of  Saturn's  ring  renders  not 
merely  speculative  or  illustrative,  it  will  be  well  to  demonstrate  it;  which  may 
be  done  very  simply,  and  without  the  aid  of  any  calculus.  Conceive  a  spherical 
shell,  and  a  point  within  it:  every  line  passing  through  the  point,  and  termi- 
nating both  ways  in  the  shell,  will,  of  course,  he  equally  inclined  to  its  surface 
at  either  end,  being  a  chord  of  a  spherical  surface,  and,  therefore  symmetrically 
related  to  all  its  parts.  Now,  conceive  a  small  double  cone,  or  pyramid,  having 
its  apex  at  the  point,  and  formed  by  the  conical  motion  of  such  a  line  round  the 
point.  Then  will  the  two  portions  of  the  spherical  shell,  which  form  the  bases 
of  both  the  cones,  or  pyramids,  be  similar  and  equally  inclined  to  their  axes. 
Therefore  their  areas  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  their  distances  from 
the  common  apex.  Therefore  their  attractions  on  it  will  be  equal,  because  the 
attraction  is  as  the  attracting  matter  directly,  and  the  square  of  its  distance  in- 
versely. Now,  these  attractions  act  in  opposite  directions,  and  therefore  counter- 
act each  other.  Therefore  the  point  is  in  equilibrium  between  them  ;  and  as 
the  same  is  true  of  every  such  pair  of  areas  into  which  the  spherical  shell  can  be 
broken  up,  therefore  the  point  will  be  in  equilibrium  however  situated  within 
Mich  a  spherical  shell  Now  take  a  ring,  and  treat  it  similarly,  breaking  its  cir- 
cumference up  into  pairs  of  elements,  the  bases  of  triangles  formed  by  lines 
passing  through  the  attracted  point.  Here  the  attracting  elements  being  lines, 
not  surfaces,  arc  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  distances,  not  the  duplicate,  as  they 
should  be  to  maintain  the  equilibrium.  Therefore  it  will  not  be  maintained, 
but  the  nearest  elements  will  have  the  superiority,  and  the  point  will,  on  the 
•'hole,  be  urged  towards  the  nearest  part  of  the  ring.  The  same  is  true  of 
every  linear  ring,  and  is  therefore  true  of  any  assemblage  of  concentric  OU4M 
forming  a  flat  annulus,  like  the  ring  of  Saturn. 


INEQUALITIES    INCIDENT   ON    THE    EPOCH.  515 

case  it  will  act  in  diminution,  in  the  latter  in  augmentation 
of  tlie  central  gravity. 

(736.)  Regarding,  still,  only  the  mean  effect,  as  produced 
in  a  great  number  of  revolutions  of  both  bodies,  it  is  evident 
tliat  such  an  increase  of  central  force  will  be  accompanied 
with  a  diminution  of  periodic  time  and  distance  of  a  body 
revolving  with  a  stated  velocity,  and  vice  versa.  This,  as  we 
have  shown,  is  the  first  and  most  obvious  effect  of  the  radial 
part  of  the  disturbing  force,  when  exactly  analyzed.  It  alters 
permanently,  and  by  a  certain  mean  amount,  the  distances 
and  times  of  revolution  of  all  the  bodies  composing  the 
planetary  system,  from  what  they  would  be,  did  each  planet 
circulate  about  the  sun  uninfluenced  by  the  attraction  of  the 
rest ;  the  angular  motion  of  the  interior  bodies  of  the  system 
being  thus  rendered  less,  and  those  of  the  exterior  greater, 
than  on  that  supposition.  The  latter  effect,  indeed,  might  be 
at  once  concluded  from  this  obvious  consideration,  —  that  all 
the  planets  revolving  interiorly  to  any  orbit  may  be  considered 
as  adding  to  the  general  aggregate  of  the  attracting  matter 
within,  which  is  not  the  less  efficient  for  being  distributed 
over  space,  and  maintained  in  a  state  of  circulation. 

(737.)  This  effect,  however,  is  one  which  we  have  no  means 
of  measuring,  or  even  of  detecting,  otherwise  than  by  calcu- 
lation. For  our  knowledge  of  the  periods  of  the  planets  is 
drawn  from  observations  made  on  them  in  their  actual  state, 
and  therefore  under  the  influence  of  this,  which  may  be 
regarded  as  a  sort  of  constant  part  of  the  perturbative  action. 
Their  observed  mean  motions  are  therefore  affected  by  the 
whole  amount  of  its  influence  ;  and  we  have  no  means  of  dis- 
tinguishing this  by  observation  from  the  direct  effect  of  the 
sun's  attraction,  with  which  it  is  blended.  Our  knowledge, 
however,  of  the  masses  of  the  planets  assures  us  that  it  is 
extremely  small ;  and  this,  in  fact,  is  all  which  it  is  at  all 
important  to  us  to  know,  in  the  theory  of  their  motions. 

(738.)  The  action  of  the  sun  upon  the  moon,  in  like 
manner,  tends,  by  its  mean  influence  during  many  successive 
revolutions  of  both  bodies,  to  increase  permanently  the 
moon  s  distance  and  periodic  time.     But  this  general  average 

1.   L   fi 


.516  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

is  not  established,  either  in  the  case  of  the  moon  or  planets, 
without  a  series  of  surbordinate  fluctuations,  which  we  have 
purposely  neglected  to  take  account  of  in  the  above  reasoning, 
and  which  obviously  tend,  in  the  average  of  a  great  multitude 
of  revolutions,  to  neutralize  each  other.  In  the  lunar  theory, 
however,  some  of  these  subordinate  fluctuations  are  very 
sensible  to  observation.  The  most  conspicuous  of  these  is 
the  moon's  annual  equation ;  so  called  because  it  consists  in 
an  alternate  increase  and  decrease  in  her  longitude,  corre- 
sponding with  the  earth's  situation  in  its  annual  orbit ;  i.  e. 
to  its  angular  distance  from  the  perihelion,  and  therefore 
having  a  year  instead  of  a  month,  or  aliquot  part  of  a  month, 
for  its  period.  To  understand  the  mode  of  its  production, 
let  us  suppose  the  sun,  still  holding  a  fixed  position  in  lon- 
gitude, to  approach  gradually  nearer  to  the  earth.  Then 
will  all  its  disturbing  forces  be  gradually  increased  in  a  very 
high  ratio  compared  with  the  diminution  of  the  distance 
(being  inversely  as  its  cube  ;  so  that  its  effects  of  every 
kind  are  three  times  greater  in  respect  of  any  change  ol 
distance,  than  they  would  be  by  the  simple  law  of  pro- 
portionality). Hence,  it  is  obvious  that  the  focus  H  (art. 
707.)  in  the  act  of  describing  each  intercuspidal  arc  of  the 
curve  a,  d,  b,  e,  will  be  continually  carried  out  farther  and 
farther  from  S ;  and  the  curve,  instead  of  returning  into 
itself  at  the  end  of  each  revolution,  will  open  out  into  a  sort 
of  cuspidated  spiral,  as  in  the  figure 
annexed.  Retracing  now  the  reason- 
ing of  art.  733.  as  adapted  to  this  state 
of  things,  it  will  be  seen  that  so  long 
as  this  dilatation  goes  on,  so  long  will 
the  difference  between  M's  recess  from 
S  in  aphelio  and  its  approach  in  perihelio  (which  is  equal  to 
the  difference  of  consecutive  long  and  short  semidiameters  of 
this  curve)  also  continue  to  increase,  and  with  it  the  average 
of  the  distances  of  M  from  S  in  a  whole  revolution,  and 
consequently  also  the  time  of  performing  such  a  revolution. 
The  reverse  process  will  go  on  as  the  sun  again  recedes. 
Thus  it  appears  that,  as  the  sun  approaches  the  earth,  the 


ANNUAL    INEQUALITY   OF    THE    MOON.  517 

mean  angular  motion  of  the  moon  on  the  average  of  a  whole 
revolution  will  diminish,  and  the  duration  of  each  lunation 
Will  therefore  exceed  that  of  the  foregoing,  and  vice  versa. 

(739.)  The  moon's  orbit  being  supposed  circular,  the  sun's 
orbitual  motion  will  have  no  other  effect  than  to  keep  the 
moon  longer  under  the  influence  of  every  gradation  of  the 
disturbing  force,  than  would  have  been  the  case  had  his 
situation  in  longitude  remained  unaltered  (art.  711).  The 
same  effects,  therefore,  will  take  place,  only  on  an  increased 
scale  in  the  proportion  of  the  increased  time ;  i.  e.  in  the 
proportion  of  the  synodic  to  the  sidereal  revolution  of  the 
moon.  Observation  confirms  these  results,  and  assigns  to  the 
inequality  in  question  a  maximum  value  of  between  10'  and 
11',  by  which  the  moon  is  at  one  time  in  advance  of,  and  at 
another  behind,  its  mean  place,  in  consequence  of  this  per- 
turbation. 

(740.)  To  this  class  of  inequalities  we  must  refer  one  of 
great  importance,  and  extending  over  an  immense  period  of 
time,  known  by  the  name  of  the  secular  acceleration  of  tht 
moon's  mean  motion.  It  had  been  observed  by  Dr.  Halley, 
on  comparing  together  the  records  of  the  most  ancient  lunai 
eclipses  of  the  Chaldean  astronomers  with  those  of  modern 
times,  that  the  period  of  the  moon's  revolution  at  present  is 
6ensibly  shorter  than  at  that  remote  epoch ;  and  this  result 
was  confirmed  by  a  further  comparison  of  both  sets  of 
observations  with  those  of  the  Arabian  astronomers  of  the 
eighth  and  ninth  centuries.  It  appeared,  from  these  com- 
parisons, that  the  rate  at  which  the  moon's  mean  motion 
increases  is  about  1 1  seconds  per  century,  —  a  quantity  small 
in  itself,  but  becoming  considerable  by  its  accumulation 
during  a  succession  of  ages.  This  remarkable  fact,  like  the 
great  equation  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  had  been  long  the 
subject  of  toilsome  investigation  to  geometers.  Indeed,  so 
difficult  did  it  appear  to  render  any  exact  account  of,  that 
while  some  were  on  the  point  of  again  declaring  the  theory 
of  gravity  inadequate  to  its  explanation,  others  were  for 
rejecting  altogether  the  evidence  on  which  it  rested,  although 
quite  as  satisfactory  as  that  on  which  most  historical  event* 


518  OU  I  LINKS    OK    ASTKONO.MV. 

are  credited.  It  was  in  this  dilemma  that  Laplace  once 
more  stepped  in  to  rescue  physical  astronomy  from  it- 
reproach,  by  pointing  out  the  real  cause  of  the  phenomenon 
in  question,  which,  when  so  explained,  is  one  of  the  most 
curious  and  instructive  in  the  whole  range  of  our  subject, — 
one  which  leads  our  speculations  farther  into  the  past  and 
future,  and  points  to  longer  vistas  in  the  dim  perspective  of 
changes  which  our  system  has  undergone  and  is  yet  to 
undergo,  than  any  other  which  observation  assisted  by  theory 
has  developed. 

(741.)  The  year  is  not  an  exact  number  of  lunations.  It 
consists  of  twelve  and  a  fraction.  Supposing  then  the  sun 
and  moon  to  set  out  from  conjunction  together;  at  the 
twelfth  conjunction  subsequent  the  sun  will  not  have  re- 
turned precisely  to  the  same  point  of  its  annual  orbit,  but 
will  fall  somewhat  short  of  it,  and  at  the  thirteenth  will  have 
overpassed  it.  Hence  in  twelve  lunations  the  gain  of 
longitude  during  the  first  half  year  will  be  somewhat  under 
and  in  thirteen  somewhat  over-compensated.  In  twenty- 
six  it  will  be  nearly  twice  as  much  over-compensated,  in 
thirty-nine  not  quite  so  nearly  three  times  as  much,  and  so 
on,  until,  after  a  certain  number  of  such  multiples  of  a  lunation 
have  elapsed,  the  sun  will  be  found  half  a  revolution  in 
advance,  and  in  place  of  receding  farther  at  the  expiration  of 
the  next,  it  will  have  begun  to  approach.  From  this  time 
every  succeeding  cycle  will  destroy  some  portion  of  that  over- 
compensation, until  a  complete  revolution  of  the  sun  in  excess 
shall  be  accomplished.  Thus  arises  a  subordinate  or  rather 
supplementary  inequality,  having  for  its  period  as  many  years 
as  is  necessary  to  multiply  the  deficient  arc  into  a  whole 
revolution,  at  the  end  of  which  time  a  much  more  exact 
compensation  will  have  been  operated,  and  so  on.  Thus 
after  a  moderate  number  of  years  an  almost  perfect  com- 
pensation will  be  effected,  and  if  we  extend  our  views  to 
centuries  we  may  consider  it  as  quite  so.  Such  at  least 
would  be  the  case  if  the  solar  ellipse  were  invariable. 
But  that  ellipse  is  kept  in  a  continual  but  excessively  slow 
state  of  change  by  the  action  of  the  planets  on  the  earth. 


SECULAR    ACCELERATION    OF    THE    MOON.  519 

Its  axis,  it  is  true,  remains  unaltered  ;  but  its  excentricity 
is,  and  has  been  since  the  earliest  ages,  diminishing ;  and  this 
diminution  will  continue,  as  is  explained  in  Art  (701.  a.),  till 
the  excentricity  has  attained  its  minimum  value,  0*003314  ; 
after  which  it  will  again  open  out  into  an  ellipse,  increasing  in 
excentricity  up  to  0-077747,  and  then  again  decrease.  The 
time  required  for  these  evolutions,  though  calculable,  has  not 
been  calculated,  further  than  to  satisfy  us  that  it  is  not  to 
be  reckoned  by  hundreds  or  by  thousands  of  years.  It 
is  a  period,  in  short,  in  which  the  whole  history  of  astro- 
nomy and  of  the  human  race  occupies  but  as  it  were 
a  point,  during  which  all  its  changes  are  to  be  regarded  as 
uniform.  Now,  it  is  by  this  variation  in  the  excentricity  of 
the  earth's  orbit  that  the  secular  acceleration  of  he  moon  is 
caused.  The  compensation  above  spoken  of  (even  after  the 
lapse  of  centuries)  will  now,  we  see,  be  only  imperfectly 
effected,  owing  to  this  slow  shifting  of  one  of  the  essential 
data.  The  steps  of  restoration  are  no  longer  identical  with, 
nor  equal  to,  those  of  change.  The  struggle  up  hill  is  not 
maintained  on  equal  terms  with  the  downward  tendency. 
The  ground  is  all  the  while  slowly  sliding  beneath  the  feet 
of  the  antagonists.  During  the  whole  time  that  the  earth's 
excentricity  is  diminishing,  a  preponderance  is  given  to  the 
re-action  over  the  action ;  and  it  is  not  till  that  diminution 
shall  cease,  that  the  tables  will  be  turned,  and  the  process  of 
ultimate  restoration  will  commence.  Meanwhile,  a  minute, 
outstanding,  and  uncompensated  effect  in  favour  of  accele- 
ration is  left  at  each  recurrence,  or  near  recurrence,  of  the 
same  configurations  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  solar 
perigee.  These  accumulate,  and  at  length  affect  the  moon's 
longitude  to  an  extent  not  to  be  overlooked. 

(742.)  The  phenomenon,  of  which  we  have  now  given  an 
account,  is  another  and  very  striking  example  of  the  pro- 
pagation of  a  periodic  change  from  one  part  of  a  system  to 
another.  The  planets,  with  one  exception,  have  no  direct 
appretiable  action  on  the  lunar  motions  as  referred  to  the 
earth.     Their  masses  are  too  small,  and  their  distances  too 


^<>  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ereat,  for  their  difference  of  action  on  the  moon  and  earth 
ever  to  become  sensible.  Yet  their  effect  on  the.  earth's 
orbit  is  thus,  we  see,  propagated  through  the  sun  to  that  of 
the  moon  ;  and,  what  is  very  remarkable,  the  transmitted 
effect  thus  indirectly  produced  on  the  angle  described  by  the 
moon  round  the  earth  is  more  sensible  to  observation  than 
that  directly  produced  by  them  on  the  angle  deseribed  by  the 
earth  round  the  sun. 

(743.)  Referring  to  the  reasoning  of  art.  738.,  we  shall 
perceive  that  if,  owing  to  any  other  cause  than  its  elliptic 
motion,  the  sun's  distance  from  the  earth  be  subject  to  a 
periodical  increase  and  decrease,  that  variation  will  give  rise 
to  a  lunar  inequality  of  equal  period  analogous  to  the  annual 
equation.  It  thus  happens  that  very  minute  changes  im- 
pressed on  the  orbit  of  the  earth,  by  the  direct  action  of  the 
planets,  (]  rovided  their  periods,  though  not  properly  speaking 
secular,  be  of  considerable  length,)  may  make  themselves 
sensible  in  the  lunar  motions.  The  longitude  of  that  satellite, 
as  observed  from  the  earth,  is,  in  fact,  singularly  sensible  to 
this  kind  of  reflected  action,  which  illustrates  in  a  striking 
manner  the  principle  of  forced  vibrations  laid  down  in  art. 
(650.).  The  reason  of  this  will  be  readily  apprehended,  if 
we  consider  that  however  trifling  the  increase  of  her  longitude 
which  would  arise  in  a  single  revolution,  from  a  minute  and 
almost  infinitesimal  increase  of  her  mean  angular  velocity, 
that  increase  is  not  only  repeated  in  each  subsequent  revo- 
lution, but  is  reinforced  during  each  by  a  similar  fresh  ac- 
cession of  angular  motion  generated  in  its  lapse.  This  pro- 
cess goes  on  so  long  as  the  angular  motion  continues  to 
increase,  and  only  begins  to  be  reversed  when  lapse  of  time, 
bringing  round  a  contrary  action  on  the  angular  motion, 
shall  have  destroyed  the  excess  of  velocity  previously  gained, 
and  begun  to  operate  a  retardation.  In  this  respect,  the 
advance  gained  by  the  moon  on  her  undisturbed  place  may 
be  assimilated,  during  its  increase,  to  the  space  described 
from  rest  under  the  action  of  a  continually  accelerating  force. 
The  velocity  gained  in  each  instant  is  not  only  effective  in 
carrying  the   body  forward  during  each  subsequent  instant, 


INDIRECT    ACTION    UF    VENUS   ON    THE    MOON.         521 

but  new  velocities  are  every  instant  generated,  and  go  on 
adding  their  cumulative  effects  to  those  before  produced. 

(744.)  The  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  like  that  of 
the  moon  from  the  earth,  may  be  affected  in  its  average  value 
estimated  over  long  periods  embracing  many  revolutions,  in 
two  modes,  conformably  to  the  theory  above  delivered.  1st, 
it  may  vary  by  a  variation  in  the  length  of  the  axis  major  of 
its  orbit,  arising  from  the  direct  action  of  some  tangential 
disturbing  force  on  its  velocity,  and  thereby  producing  a 
change  of  mean  motion  and  periodic  time  in  virtue  of  the 
Keplerian  law  of  periods,  which  declares  that  the  periodic 
times  are  in  the  sesquiplicate  ratio  of  the  mean  distances. 
Or,  2dly,  it  may  vary  by  reason  of  that  peculiar  action  on  the 
average  of  actual  distances  during  a  revolution,  which  arises 
from  variations  of  excentricity  and  perihelion  only,  and  which 
produces  that  sort  of  change  in  the  mean  motion  which  we 
have  characterized  as  incident  on  the  epoch.  The  change  of 
mean  motion  thus  arising,  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with 
any  variation  of  the  major  axis.  It  does  not  depend  on  the 
change  of  distance  by  the  Keplerian  law  of  periods,  but  by 
that  of  areas.  The  altered  mean  motion  is  not  sub-sesqui» 
plicate  to  the  altered  axis  of  the  ellipse,  which  in  fact  does 
not  alter  at  all,  but  is  sub-duplicate  to  the  altered  average  of 
distances  in  a  revolution ;  a  distinction  which  must  be  care- 
fully borne  in  mind  by  every  one  who  will  clearly  under- 
stand either  the  subject  itself,  or  the  force  of  Newton's  ex- 
planation of  it  in  the  6th  Corollary  of  his  celebrated  66th 
Proposition.  In  whichever  mode,  however,  an  alteration  in 
the  mean  motion  is  effected,  if  we  accommodate  the  general 
sense  of  our  language  to  the  specialties  of  the  case,  it  remains 
true  that  every  change  in  the  mean  motion  is  accompanied 
with  a  corresponding  change  in  the  mean  distance. 

(745.)  Now  we  have  seen,  art.  (726.),  that  Venus  produces 
in  the  earth  a  perturbation  in  longitude,  of  so  long  a  period 
(240  years),  that  it  cannot  well  be  regarded  without  violence  to 
ordinary  language,  otherwise  than  as  an  equation  of  the  mean 
motion.  Of  course,  therefore,  it  follows  that  during  that  half 
of  this  long  period  of  time,  in  which  the  earth's  motion  is 


522  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

retarded,  the  distance  between  the  sun  and  earth  is  on  the 
increase,  and  vice  versa.  Minute  as  is  the  equation  in  question, 
and  consequent  alteration  of  solar  distance,  and  almost  in- 
conceivably minute  as  is  the  effect  produced  on  the  moon's 
mean  angular  velocity  in  a  single  lunation,  yet  the  great 
number  of  lunations  (1484),  during  which  the  effect  goes  on 
accumulating  in  one  direction,  causes  the  moon  at  the  moment 
when  that  accumulation  has  attained  its  maximum  to  be  very 
sensibly  in  advance  of  its  undisturbed  place  (viz.  by  23"  of 
longitude),  and  after  1484  more  lunations,  as  much  in  arrear. 
The  calculations  by  which  this  curious  result  has  been 
established,  formidable  from  their  length  and  intricacy,  are 
due  to  the  industry,  as  the  discovery  of  its  origin  is  to  the 
sagacity,  of  Professor  Hansen. 

(746.)  The  action  of  Venus,  just  explained,  is  indirect, 
being  as  it  were  a  sort  of  reflection  of  its  influence  on  the 
earth's  orbit.  But  a  very  remarkable  instance  of  its  influence, 
in  actually  perturbing  the  moon's  motions  by  its  direct  at- 
tracticn,  has  been  pointed  out,  and  the  inequality  due  to  it 
computed  by  the  same  eminent  geometer.*  As  the  details 
of  his  processes  have  not  yet  appeared,  we  can  here  only 
explain,  in  general  terms,  the  principle  on  which  the  result 
in  question  depends,  and  the  nature  of  the  peculiar  adjustment 
of  the  mean  angular  velocities  of  the  earth  and  Venus  which 
render  it  effective.  The  disturbing  forces  of  Venus  on  the 
moon  are  capable  of  being  represented  or  expressed  (a^  is 
indeed  generally  the  case  with  all  the  forces  concerned  in 
producing  planetary  disturbance)  by  the  substitution  for  them 
of  a  series  of  other  forces,  each  having  a  period  or  cycle  within 
which  it  attains  a  maximum  in  one  direction,  decreases  to 
nothing,  reverses  its  action,  attains  a  maximum  in  the  oppo- 
site direction,  again  decreases  to  nothing,  again  reverses  its 
action  and  re-attains  its  former  magnitude,  and  so  on.  These 
cycles  differ  for  each  particular  constituent  or  term,  as  it  is 
called,  of  the  total  forces  considered  as  so  broken  up  into 
partiil  ones,  and  generally  speaking,  every  combination  which 

•   Asironoir.isclie  Naclniehten,  No.  597. 


DIRECT  ACTION  OF  VENUS  ON  THE  MOON.    523 

can  be  formed  by  subtracting  a  multiple  of  the  mean  motion 
of  one  of  the  bodies  concerned  from  a  multiple  of  that  of  the 
other,  and,  when  there  are  three  bodies  disturbing  one  another, 
every  such  triple  combination  becomes,  under  the  technical 
name  of  an  argument,  the  cyclical  representative  of  a  force 
acting  in  the  manner  and  according  to  the  law  described. 
Each  of  these  periodically  acting  forces  produces  its  pertur 
bative  effect,  according  to  the  law  of  the  superposition  of 
small  motions,  as  if  the  others  had  no  existence.  And  if  it 
happen,  as  in  an  immense  majority  of  cases  it  does,  that  the 
cycle  of  any  particular  one  of  these  partial  forces  has  no  re- 
lation to  the  periodic  time  of  the  disturbed  body,  so  as  to 
bring  it  to  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same  point  of  its 
orbit,  or  to  any  situation  favourable  to  any  particular  form 
of  disturbance,  over  and  over  again  when  the  force  is  at  its 
maximum ;  that  force  will,  in  a  few  revolutions,  neutralize 
its  own  effect,  and  nothing  but  fluctuations  of  brief  duration 
can  result  from  it3  action.  The  contrary  will  evidently  be 
the  case,  if  the  cycle  of  the  force  coincide  so  nearly  with  the 
cycle  of  the  moon's  anomalistic  revolution,  as  to  bring  round 
the  maximum  of  the  force  acting  in  one  and  the  same  direction 
(\vhe*her  tangential  or  normal)  either  accurately,  or  very 
nearly  indeed  to  some  definite  point,  as,  for  example,  the 
apogee  of  her  orbit.  Whatever  the  effect  produced  by  such 
a  force  on  the  angular  motion  of  the  moon,  if  it  be  not 
exactly  compensated  in  one  cycle  of  its  action,  it  will  go  on 
accumulating,  being  repeated  over  and  over  again  under 
circumstances  very  nearly  the  same,  for  many  successive 
revolutions,  until  at  length,  owing  to  the  want  of  precise 
accuracy  in  the  adjustment  of  that  cycle  to  the  anomalistic 
period,  the  maximum  of  the  force  (in  the  same  phase  of  its 
action)  is  brought  to  coincide  with  a  point  in  the  orbit  (as 
the  perigee),  determinative  of  an  opposite  effect,  and  thus,  at 
length,  a  compensation  will  be  worked  out;  in  a  time,  how- 
ever, so  much  the  longer  as  the  difference  between  tl  e  cycle 
of  the  force  and  the  moon's  anomalistic  period  is  less. 

(747.)  Now,  in  fact,  in  the  case  of  Venus  disturbing  the 
moon,  there  exists  a  cvclical  combination  of  this  kind.     Of 


524  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

course  the  disturbing  force  of  Venus  on  the  moon  varies  with 
her  distance  from  the  earth,  and  this  distance  again  depends 
on  her  configuration  with  resoect  to  the  earth  and  the  sun, 
taking  into  account  the  ellipticity  of  both  their  orbits.  Among 
the  combinations  which  take  their  rise  from  this  latter  con- 
sideration, and  which,  as  may  easily  be  supposed,  are  of  great 
complexity,  there  is  a  term  (an  exceedingly  minute  one), 
whose  argument  or  cycle  is  determined  by  subtracting  16 
times  the  mean  motion  of  the  earth  from  18  times  that  of 
Venus.  The  difference  is  so  very  nearly  the  mean  motion  of 
the  moon  in  her  anomalistic  revolution,  that  whereas  the 
latter  revolution  is  completed  in  27d  13h  18m  32-3",  the  cycle 
of  the  force  is  completed  in  27d  13h  7m  35  *68,  differing  from 
the  other  by  no  more  than  10m  56*78,  or  about  one  3625th 
part  of  a  complete  period  of  the  moon  from  apogee  to  apogee. 
During  half  of  this  very  long  interval  (that  is  to  say,  during 
about  136|  years),  the  perturbations  produced  by  a  force  of 
this  character,  go  on  increasing  and  accumulating,  and  are 
destroyed  in  another  equal  interval.  Although  therefore- 
excessively  minute  in  their  actual  effect  on  the  angular 
motion,  this  minuteness  is  compensated  by  the  number  of 
repeated  acts  of  accumulation,  and  by  the  length  of  time 
during  which  they  continue  to  act  on  the  longitude.  Ac- 
cordingly M.  Hansen  has  found  the  total  amount  of  fluctua- 
tion to  and  fro,  or  the  value  of  the  equation  of  the  moon's 
longitude,  so  arising  to  be  27  *4".  It  is  exceedingly  in- 
teresting to  observe  that  the  two  equations  considered  in 
these  latter  paragraphs,  account  satisfactorily  for  the  only 
remaining  material  differences  between  theory  and  observa- 
tion in  the  modern  history  of  this  hitherto  rebellious  satellite. 
We  have  not  thought  it  necessary  (indeed  it  would  have 
required  a  treatise  on  the  subject)  to  go  into  a  special  ac- 
count of  the  almost  innumerable  other  lunar  inequalities 
which  have  been  computed  and  tabulated,  and  which  are 
necessary  to  be  taken  into  account  in  every  computation  of 
her  place  from  the  tables.  Many  of  them  are  of  very  much 
larger  amount  than  these.  We  ought  not,  however,  to  pasa 
unnoticed,  that  the  parallactic  inequality,  already  explained 


EFFKCT   OF    THE    EARTH'S   SFIIEllOIDAL    FIGURE.     525 

art.  (712.),  is  interesting,  as  affording  a  measure  of  tlie  suns 
distance.  For  this  equation  originates,  as  there  shown,  in 
the  fact  that  the  disturbing  forces  are  not  precisely  alike  in 
the  two  halves  of  the  moon's  orbit  nearest  to  and  most  re- 
mote from  the  sun,  all  their  values  being  greater  in  the 
former  half.  As  a  knowledge  of  the  relative  dimensions  of 
the  solar  and  lunar  orbits  enables  us  to  calculate  a  priori, 
the  amount  of  this  inequality,  so  a  knowledge  of  that  amount 
deduced  by  the  comparison  of  a  great  number  of  observed 
places  of  the  moon  with  tables  in  which  every  inequality  but 
this  should  be  included,  would  enable  us  conversely  to  as- 
certain the  ratio  of  the  distances  in  question.  Owing  to  the 
Ftnallness  of  the  inequality,  this  is  not  a  very  accurate  mode 
of  obtaining  an  element  of  so  much  importance  in  astronomy 
as  the  sun's  distance,  but  were  it  larger  {i.e.  were  the  moon's 
orbit  considerably  larger  than  it  actually  is),  this  would  be, 
perhaps,  the  most  exact  method  of  any  by  which  it  could 
be  concluded. 

(748.)  The  greatest  of  all  the  lunar  inequalities,  produced 
by  perturbation,  is  that  called  the  evection.  It  arises  directly 
from  the  variation  of  the  excentricity  of  her  orbit,  and  from 
the  fluctuation  to  and  fro  in  the  general  progress  of  the  line 
of  apsides,  caused  by  the  different  situation  of  the  sun,  with 
respect  to  that  line  (arts.  685.  691.).  Owing  to  these  causes 
the  moon  is  alternately  in  advance,  and  in  arrear  of  her 
elliptic  place  by  about  1°  20'  30".  This  equation  was  known 
to  the  ancients,  having  been  discovered  by  Ptolemy,  by  the 
comparison  of  a  long  series  of  observations  handed  down  to 
him  from  the  earliest  ages  of  astronomy.  The  mode  in  which 
the  effects  of  these  several  sources  of  inequality  become 
grouped  together  under  one  principal  argument  common  to 
them  all,  belongs,  for  its  explanation,  rather  to  works 
specially  treating  of  the  lunar  theory  than  to  a  treatise  of 
this  kind. 

(749.)  Some  small  perturbations  are  produced  in  the 
lunar  orbit  by  the  protuberant  matter  of  the  earth's  equator. 
The  attraction  of  a  sphere  is  the  same  as  if  all  its  matter 
were  condensed  into  a  point  in  its  center ;  but  that  is  not  the 


526  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

case  with  a  spheroid.  The  attraetion  of  such  a  mass  is 
neither  exactly  directed  to  its  center,  nor  does  it  exactly 
follow  the  law  of  the  inverse  squares  of  the  distances.  Hence 
will  arise  a  series  of  perturbations,  extremely  small  in  amount, 
but  still  perceptible  in  the  lunar  motions  ;  by  which  the  node 
and  the  apogee  will  be  affected.  A  more  remarkable  conse- 
quence of  this  cause,  however,  is  a  small  nutation  of  the 
lunar  orbit,  exactly  analogous  to  that  which  the  moon  causes 
in  the  plane  of  the  earth's  equator,  by  its  action  on  the  same 
elliptic  protuberance.  And,  in  general,  it  may  be  observed, 
that  in  the  systems  of  planets  which  have  satellites,  the 
elliptic  figure  of  the  primary  has  a  tendency  to  bring  the 
orbits  of  the  satellites  to  coincide  with  its  equator,  —  a 
tendency  which,  though  small  in  the  case  of  the  earth,  yet  in 
that  of  Jupiter,  whose  ellipticity  is  very  considerable,  and  of 
Saturn  especially,  where  the  ellipticity  of  the  body  is  rein- 
forced by  the  attraction  of  the  rings,  becomes  predominant 
over  every  external  and  internal  cause  of  disturbance,  and 
produces  and  maintains  an  almost  exact  coincidence  of  the 
planes  in  question.  Such,  at  least,  is  the  case  with  the 
nearer  satellites.  The  more  distant  are  comparatively  less 
affected  by  this  cause,  the  difference  of  attractions  between 
a  sphere  and  spheroid  diminishing  with  great  rapidity  as  the 
distance  increases.  Thus,  while  the  orbits  of  all  the  in- 
terior satellites  of  Saturn  lie  almost  exactly  in  the  plane  of 
the  ring  and  equator  of  the  planet,  that  of  the  external 
satellite,  whose  distance  from  Saturn  is  between  sixty  and 
seventy  diameters  of  the  planet,  is  inclined  to  that  plane  con- 
siderably. On  the  other  hand,  this  considerable  distance, 
while  it  permits  the  satellite  to  retain  its  actual  inclination, 
prevents  (by  parity  of  reasoning)  the  ring  and  equator  of  the 
planet  from  being  perceptibly  disturbed  by  its  attraction,  or 
being  subjected  to  any  appretiable  movements  analogous  to 
our  nutation  and  precession.  If  such  exist,  they  must  be 
much  slower  than  those  of  the  earth ;  the  mass  of  this  satel- 
lite being,  as  far  as  can  be  judged  by  its  apparent  size,  a 
much  smaller  fraction  of  that  of  Saturn  than  the  moon  is  of 


OF    THE    TIDES.  527 

the  earth ;  while  the  solar  precession,  by  reason  of  the  im- 
mense distance  of  the  sun,  must  be  quite  imperceptible. 

(750.)  The  subject  of  the  tides,  though  rather  belonging  to 
terrestrial  physics  than  properly  to  astronomy,  is  yet  so 
directly  connected  with  the  theory  of  the  lunar  perturbations, 
that  we  cannot  omit  some  explanatory  notice  of  it,  especially 
since  many  persons  find  a  strange  difficulty  in  conceiving  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  produced.  That  the  sun,  or  moon, 
should  by  its  attraction  heap  up  the  waters  of  the  ocean 
under  it,  seems  to  them  very  natural.  That  it  should  at  the 
same  time  heap  them  up  on  the  opposite  side  seems,  on  the 
contrary,  palpably  absurd.  The  error  of  this  class  of  ob- 
jectors is  of  the  same  kind  with  that  noticed  in  art.  723.,  and 
consists  in  disregarding  the  attraction  of  the  disturbing  body 
on  the  mass  of  the  earth,  and  looking  on  it  as  wholly  effective 
on  the  superficial  water.  Were  the  earth  indeed  absolutely 
fixed,  held  in  its  place  by  an  external  force,  and  the  water 
left  free  to  move,  no  doubt  the  effect  of  the  disturbing  power 
would  be  to  produce  a  single  accumulation  vertically  under 
the  disturbing  body.  But  it  is  not  by  its  whole  attraction, 
but  by  the  difference  of  its  attractions  on  the  superficial  water 
at  both  sides,  and  on  the  central  mass,  that  the  waters  are 
raised :  just  as  in  the  theory  of  the  moon,  the  difference  of 
the  sun's  attractions  on  the  moon  and  on  the  earth  (regarded 
as  moveable  and  as  obeying  that  amount  of  attraction  which 
is  due  to  its  situation)  gives  rise  to  a  relative  tendency  in  the 
moon  to  recede  from  the  earth  in  conjunction  and  opposition, 
and  to  approach  it  in  quadratures.  Referring  to  the  figure 
of  ail.  675.,  instead  of  supposing  A  D  B  E  to  represent  the 
moon's  orbit,  let  it  be  supposed  to  represent  a  section  of  the 
(comparatively )  thin  film  of  water  reposing  on  the  globe  of 
the  earth,  in  a  great  circle,  the  plane  of  which  passes  through 
the  disturbing  body  M,  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  the 
moon.  The  disturbing  force  on  a  particle  at  P  will  then 
( exactly  as  in  the  lunar  theory)  be  represented  in  amount  and 
direction  by  NS,  on  the  same  scale  on  which  SM  represents 
the  moon's  whole  attraction  on  a  particle  situated  at  S.  Thia 
force,  applied  at  P,  will  urge  it  in  the  direction  P  X  parallel 


528 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


to  N  S ;  and  therefore,  when  compounded  with  the  direct  force 
of  gravity  which  (neglecting  as  of  no  account  in  this  theory 

the  spheroidal  form  of  the  earth) 
urges  P  towards  S,  will  be  equi- 
valent to  a  single  force  deviat- 
ing from  the  direction  P  S  to- 
wards X.  Suppose  PT  to  be 
the  direction  of  this  force,  which, 
it  is  easy  to  see,  will  be  directed 
towards  a  point  in  D  S  pro- 
duced, at  an  extremely  small 
distance  below  S,  because  of  the  excessive  minuteness  of  the 
disturbing  force  compared  to  gravity.*  Then  if  this  be  done 
at  every  point  of  the  quadrant  AD,  it  will  be  evident  that  the 
direction  P  T  of  the  resultant  force  will  be  always  that  of  a 
tangent  to  the  small  cuspidated  curve  a  d  at  T,  to  which  tan- 
gent the  surface  of  the  ocean  at  P  must  everywhere  be  per- 
pendicular, by  reason  of  that  law  of  hydrostatics  which  re- 
quires the  direction  of  gravity  to  be  everywhere  perpendicular 
to  the  surface  of  a  fluid  in  equilibria.  The  form  of  the  curve 
D  P  A,  to  which  the  surface  of  the  ocean  will  tend  to  conform 
itself,  so  as  to  place  itself  everywhere  in  equilibrio  under  two 
acting  forces,  will  be  that  which  always  has  P  T  for  its  radius 
of  curvature.  It  will  therefore  be  slightly  less  curved  at  D, 
and  more  so  at  A,  being  in  fact  no  other  than  an  ellipse, 
having  S  for  its  center,  d  a  for  its  evolute,  and  S  A,  S  D  for 
its  longer  and  shorter  semi-axes  respectively;  so  that  the 
whole  surface  (supposing  it  covered  with  water)  will  tend  to 
assume,  as  its  form  of  equilibrium,  that  of  an  oblongated 
ellipsoid,  having  its  longer  axis  directed  towards  the  disturb- 
ing body,  and  its  shorter  of  course  at  right  angles  to  that 
direction.  The  difference  of  the  longer  and  shorter  semi- 
axes  of  this  ellipsoid  due  to  the  moon's  attraction  would  be 

*  According  to  Newton's  calculation,  the  maximum  disturbing  force  of  the 
sun  on  the  water  does  not  exceed  one  25736400th  part  of  its  gravity.  That  of 
the  moon  will  therefore  be  to  this  fraction  as  the  cube  of  the  sun's  distance  to 
that  of  the  moon's  directly,  and  as  the  mass  of  the  sun  to  that  of  the  moon  in- 
versely, i.  c.  as  (400)*  x  001 1364  :  354936,  which,  reduced  to  numbers,  gives 
for  the  moon's  maximum  of  power  to  disturb  the  waters,  about  one  12560000th 
of  gravity,  or  somewhat  less  than  2^  times  the  sun's. 


OF    TflE    TIDES.  529 

about  58  inches :  that  of  the  ellipsoid,  similarly  formed  in 
virtue  of  the  sun,  about  2^  times  less,  or  about  23  inches. 

(751.)  Let  us  suppose  the  moon  only  to  act,  and  to  have 
no  orbitual  motion ;  then  if  the  earth  also  had  no  diurnal 
motion,  the  ellipsoid  of  equilibrium  would  be  quietly  formed, 
and  all  would  be  thenceforward  tranquil.  There  is  never 
time,  however,  for  this  spheroid  to  be  fully  formed.  Before 
the  waters  can  take  their  level,  the  moon  has  advanced  in 
her  orbit,  both  diurnal  and  monthly,  (for  in  this  theory  it 
will  answer  the  purpose  of  clearness  better,  if  we  suppose 
the  earth's  diurnal  motion  transferred  to  the  sun  and  moon  in 
the  contrary  direction,)  the  vertex  of  the  spheroid  has  shifted 
on  the  earth's  surface,  and  the  ocean  has  to  seek  a  new 
bearing.  The  effect  is  to  produce  an  immensely  broad  and 
excessively  flat  wave  (not  a  circulating  current),  which  fol- 
lows, or  endeavours  to  follow,  the  apparent  motions  of  the 
moon,  and  must,  in  fact,  by  the  principle  of  forced  vibrations, 
imitate,  by  equal  though  not  by  synchronous  periods,  all  the 
periodical  inequalities  of  that  motion.  When  the  higher  or 
lower  parts  of  this  wave  strike  our  coasts,  they  experience 
what  we  call  high  and  low  water. 

(752.)  The  sun  also  produces  precisely  such  a  wave,  whose 
vertex  tends  to  follow  the  apparent  motion  of  the  sun  in  the 
heavens,  and  also  to  imitate  its  periodic  inequalities.  This 
solar  wave  co-exists  with  the  lunar  —  is  sometimes  superposed 
on  it,  sometimes  transverse  to  it,  so  as  to  partly  neutralize  it, 
according  to  the  monthly  synodical  configuration  of  the  two 
luminaries.  This  alternate  mutual  reinforcement  and  destruc- 
tion of  the  solar  and  lunar  tides  cause  what  are  called  the 
spring  and  neap  tides  —  the  former  being  their  sum,  the  latter 
their  difference.  Although  the  real  amount  of  either  tide  is, 
at  present,  hardly  within  the  reach  of  exact  calculation,  yet 
their  proportion  at  any  one  place  is  probably  not  very  remote 
from  that  of  the  ellipticities  which  would  belong  to  their 
respective  spheroids,  could  an  equilibrium  be  attained.  Now 
these  ellipticities,  for  the  solar  and  lunar  spheroids,  are  respec- 
tively about  two  and  five  feet ;  so  that  the  average  spring 
tide  will  be  to  the  neap  as  7  to  3,  or  thereabouts. 

M    M 


630 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


(753.)  Another  effect  of  the  combination  of  the  solar  and 
lunar  tides  is  what  is  called  the  priming  and  lagging  of  the 
tides.  If  the  moon  alone  existed,  and  moved  in  the  plane  of 
the  equator,  the  tide-day  (i.  e.  the  interval  between  two  suc- 
cessive arrivals  at  the  same  place  of  the  same  vertex  of  the 
tide-wave)  would  be  the  lunar  day  (art.  143.),  formed  by  the 
combination  of  the  moon's  sidereal  period  and  that  of  the 
earth's  diurnal  motion.  Similarly,  did  the  sun  alone  exist, 
and  move  always  on  the  equator,  the  tide-day  would  be  the 
mean  solar  day.  The  actual  tide-day,  then,  or  the  interval 
of  the  occurrence  of  two  successive  maxima  of  their  superposed 
waves,  will  vary  as  the  separate  waves  approach  to  or  recede 
from  coincidence ;  because,  when  the  vertices  of  two  waves 
do  not  coincide,  their  joint  height  has  its  maximum  at  a  point 
intermediate  between  them.  This  variation  from  uniformity 
in  the  lengths  of  successive  tide-days  is  particularly  to  be  re- 
marked about  the  time  of  the  new  and  full  moon. 

(754.)  Quite  different  in  its  origin  is  that  deviation  of  the 
time  of  high  and  low  water  at  any  port  or  harbour,  from  the 
culmination  of  the  luminaries,  or  of  the  theoretical  maximum 
of  their  superposed  spheroids,  which  is  called  the  "  establish- 
ment "  of  that  port.  If  the  water  were  without  inertia,  and 
free  from  obstruction,  either  owing  to  the  friction  of  the  bed 
of  the  sea,  the  narrowness  of  channels  along  which  the  wave 
has  to  travel  before  reaching  the  port,  their  length,  &c.  &c, 
the  times  above  distinguished  would  be  identical.  But  all 
these  causes  tend  to  create  a  difference,  and  to  make  that 
difference  not  alike  at  all  ports.  The  observation  of  the 
establishments  of  harbours  is  a  point  of  great  maritime  im- 
portance ;  nor  is  it  of  less  consequence,  theoretically  speak- 
ing, to  a  knowledge  of  the  true  distribution  of  the  tide-waves 
over  the  globe.  In  making  such  observations,  care  must  be 
taken  not  to  confound  the  time  of  "  slack  water, "  when  the 
current  caused  by  the  tide  ceases  to  flow  visibly  one  way  or 
the  other,  and  that  of  high  or  low  wafer,  when  the  level  of 
the  surface  ceases  to  rise  or  fall.  These  are  totally  distinct 
phenomena,  and  depend  on  entirely  different  causes,  though 
in  land-locked  places  they  may  sometimes  coincide  in  point. 


OF    THE    TIDES.  531 

of  time.  They  are,  it  is  feared,  too  often  mistaken  one  for 
the  other  by  practical  men ;  a  circumstance  which,  whenever 
it  occurs,  must  produce  the  greatest  confusion  in  any  attempt 
to  reduce  the  system  of  the  tides  to  distinct  and  intelligible  laws. 

(755.)  The  declination  of  the  sun  and  moon  materially 
affects  the  tides  at  any  particular  spot.  As  the  vertex  of  the 
tide-wave  tends  to  place  itself  vertically  under  the  luminary 
which  produces  it,  when  this  vertical  changes  its  point  of 
incidence  on  the  surface,  the  tide-wave  must  tend  to  shift  ac- 
cordingly, and  thus,  by  monthly  and  annual  periods,  must 
tend  to  increase  and  diminish  alternately  the  principal  tides. 
The  period  of  the  moon's  nodes  is  thus  introduced  into  this 
subject ;  her  excursions  in  declination  in  one  part  of  that 
period  being  29°,  and  in  another  only  17°,  on  either  side  the 
equator. 

(756.)  Geometry  demonstrates  that  the  efficacy  of  a  lumi- 
nary in  raising  tides  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  cube  of 
its  distance.  The  sun  and  moon,  however,  by  reason  of  the 
ellipticity  of  their  orbits,  are  alternately  nearer  to  and  farther 
from  the  earth  than  their  mean  distances.  In  consequence  of 
this,  the  efficacy  of  the  sun  will  fluctuate  between  the  ex- 
tremes 19  and  21,  taking  20  for  its  mean  value,  and  that  of 
the  moon  between  43  and  59.  Taking  into  account  this 
cause  of  difference,  the  highest  spring  tide  will  be  to  the 
lowest  neap  as  59  +  21  to  43  —  19,  or  as  80  to  24,  or  10 
to  3.  Of  all  the  causes  of  differences  in  the  height  of  tides 
however,  local  situation  is  the  most  influential.  In  some 
places  the  tide-wave,  rushing  up  a  narrow  channel,  is  suddenly 
raised  to  an  extraordinary  height.  At  Annapolis,  for  instance, 
in  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  it  is  said  to  rise  120  feet.  Even  at 
Bristol  the  difference  of  high  and  low  water  occasionally 
amounts  to  50  feet. 

(757.)  It  is  by  means  of  the  perturbations  of  the  planets, 
as  ascertained  by  observation  and  compared  with  theory,  that 
we  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  the  masses  of  those  planets  which 
having  no  satellites,  offer  no  other  hold  upon  them  for  this 
purpose.  Every  planet  produces  an  amount  of  perturbation 
in  the  motions  of  every  other,  proportioned  to  its  mass,  and 

M  M   2 


532  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

to  the  degree  of  advantage  or  purchase  which  its  situation  in 
the  system  gives  it  over  their  movements.  The  latter  is  a 
subject  of  exact  calculation  ;  the  former  is  unknown,  otherwise 
than  by  observation  of  its  effects.  In  the  determination, 
however,  of  the  masses  of  the  planets  by  this  means,  theory 
lends  the  greatest  assistance  to  observation,  by  pointing  out 
the  combinations  most  favourable  for  eliciting  this  knowledge 
from  the  confused  mass  of  superposed  inequalities  which  affect 
every  observed  place  of  a  planet ;  by  pointing  out  the  laws  of 
each  inequality  in  its  periodical  rise  and  decay  ;  and  by  show- 
ing how  every  particular  inequality  depends  for  its  magnitude 
on  the  mass  producing  it.  It  is  thus  that  the  mass  of  Jupiter 
itself  (employed  by  Laplace  in  his  investigations,  and  inter- 
woven with  all  the  planetary  tables)  has  been  ascertained,  by 
observations  of  the  derangements  produced  by  it  in  the  mo- 
tions of  the  ultra-zodiacal  planets,  to  have  been  insufficiently 
determined,  or  rather  considerably  mistaken,  by  relying  too 
much  on  observations  of  its  satellites,  made  long  ago  by  Pound 
and  others,  with  inadequate  instrumental  means.  The  same 
conclusion  has  been  arrived  at,  and  nearly  the  same  mass  ob- 
tained, by  means  of  the  perturbations  produced  by  .Jupiter 
on  Encke's  comet.  The  error  was  one  of  great  importance ; 
the  mass  of  Jupiter  being  by  far  the  most  influential  element 
in  the  planetary  system,  after  that  of  the  sun.  It  is  satis- 
factory, then,  to  have  ascertained,  as  Mr.  Airy  has  done, 
the  cause  of  the  error ;  to  have  traced  it  up  to  its  source, 
in  insufficient  micrometric  measurements  of  the  greatest  elon- 
gations of  the  satellites  ;  and  to  have  found  it  disappear  when 
measures,  taken  with  more  care  and  with  infinitely  superior 
instruments,  are  substituted  for  those  before  employed. 

(758.)  In  the  same  way  that  the  perturbations  of  the 
planets  lead  us  to  a  knowledge  of  their  masses,  as  compared 
with  that  of  the  sun,  so  the  perturbations  of  the  satellites  of 
J  upiter  have  led,  and  those  of  Saturn's  attendants  will  no  doubt 
hereafter  lead,  to  a  knowledge  of  the  proportion  their  masses 
bear  to  their  respective  primaries.  The  system  of  Jupiter's 
satellites  has  been  elaborately  treated  by  Laplace ;  and  it  is 
from  his  theory,  compared  with  innumerable  observations  of 


MASS   OF    THE    MOON    DETERMINED.  533 

their  eclipses,  that  the  masses  assigned  to  them,  in  art.  540.  have 
been  fixed.  Few  results  of  theory  are  more  surprising  than  to 
see  these  minute  atoms  weighed  in  the  same  balance,  which  we 
have  applied  to  the  ponderous  mass  of  the  sun,  which  exceeds 
the  least  of  them  in  the  enormous  proportion  of  65000000  to  1. 

(759.)  The  mass  of  the  moon  is  concluded,  1st,  from  the 
proportion  of  the  lunar  to  the  solar  tide,  as  observed  at  various 
stations,  the  effects  being  separated  from  each  other  by  a 
long  series  of  observations  of  the  relative  hoights  of  spring 
and  neap  tides  which,  we  have  seen,  (art.  752.)  depend  on 
the  proportional  influence  of  the  two  luminaries.  2dly, 
from  the  phasnomenon  of  nutation,  which,  being  the  result  of 
the  moon's  attraction  alone,  affords  a  means  of  calculating 
her  mass,  independent  of  any  knowledge  of  the  sun's.  Both 
methods  agree  in  assigning  to  our  satellite  a  mass  about  one 
seventy -fifth  that  of  the  earth.  * 

(760.)  Not  only,  however,  has  a  knowledge  of  the  pertur- 
bations produced  on  other  bodies  of  our  system  enabled  us  to 
estimate  the  mass  of  a  disturbing  body  already  known  to 
exist,  and  to  produce  disturbance.  It  has  done  much  more, 
and  enabled  geometers  to  satisfy  themselves  of  the  existence, 
and  even  to  indicate  the  situation  of  a  planet  previously  un- 
known, with  such  precision,  as  to  lead  to  its  immediate  dis- 
covery on  the  very  first  occasion  of  pointing  a  telescope  to  the 
place  indicated.  We  have  already  (art.  506.)  had  occasion 
to  mention  in  general  terms  this  great  discovery ;  but  its  im- 
portance, and  its  connexion  with  the  subject  before  us,  call 
for  a  more  specific  notice  of  the  circumstances  attending  it. 
When  the  regular  observation  of  Uranus,  consequent  on  its 
discovery  in  1781,  had  afforded  some  certain  knowledge  of 
the  elements  of  its  orbit,  it  became  possible  to  calculate 
backwards  into  time  past,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  whether 
certain  stars  of  about  the  same  apparent  magnitude,  observed 
by  Flamsteed,  and  since  reported  as  missing,  might  not 
possibly  be  this  planet.  No  less  than  six  ancient  observ- 
ations of  it  as  a  supposed  star  were  thus  found   to   have 

•  Laplace.  Expos,  du  Syst,  dti  Monde,  pp  28.1  300.  Later  researches  have 
shewn  that  this  is  somewhat  too  large,  about  /.th  being  the  value  at  present 
received. 


634  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

been  recorded  by  that  astronomer,  —  one  in  1690,  one  in  1712, 
and  four  in  1715.  On  further  inquiry,  it  was  also  ascertained 
to  have  been  observed  by  Bradley  in  1753,  by  Mayer  in  1756, 
and  no  less  than  twelve  times  by  Le  Monnier,  in  1750,  1764, 
1768,  1769,  and  1771,  all  the  time  without  the  least  suspicion 
of  its  planetary  nature  The  observations,  however,  so  made, 
being  all  circumstantially  registered,  and  made  with  instru- 
ments the  best  that  their  respective  dates  admitted,  were 
quite  available  for  correcting  the  elements  of  the  orbit,  which, 
as  will  be  easily  understood,  is  done  with  so  much  the 
greater  precision  the  larger  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  em- 
braced by  the  extreme  observations  employed.  It  was, 
therefore,  reasonably  hoped  and  expected,  that,  by  making 
use  of  the  data  thus  afforded,  and  duly  allowing  for  the  per- 
turbations produced  since  1690,  by  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  the 
inferior  planets,  elliptic  elements  would  be  obtained,  which, 
taken  in  conjunction  with  those  perturbations,  would  re- 
present not  only  all  the  observations  up  to  the  time  of 
executing  the  calculations,  but  also  all  future  observations,  in 
as  satisfactory  a  manner  as  those  of  any  of  the  other  planets 
are  actually  represented.  This  expectation,  however,  proved 
delusive.  M.  Bouvard,  one  of  the  most  expert  and  laborious 
calculators  of  whom  astronomy  has  had  to  boast,  and  to 
whose  zeal  and  indefatigable  industry  we  owe  the  tables  of 
Jupiter  and  Saturn  in  actual  use,  having  undertaken  the 
task  of  constructing  similar  tables  for  Uranus,  found  it  im- 
possible to  reconcile  the  ancient  observations  above  mentioned 
with  those  made  from  1781  to  1820,  so  as  to  represent  both 
series  by  means  of  the  same  ellipse  and  the  same  system  of 
perturbations.  He  therefore  rejected  altogether  the  ancient 
scries,  and  grounded  his  computations  solely  on  the  modern, 
although  evidently  not  without  serious  misgivings  as  to  the 
grounds  of  such  a  proceeding,  and  "  leaving  it  to  future  time 
to  determine  whether  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  two 
series  arose  from  inaccuracy  in  the  older  observations,  or 
whether  it  depend  on  some  extraneous  and  unperceived  in- 
fluence which  may  have  acted  on  the  planet." 

(761.)  But  neither  did   the  tables  so  calculated  continue 


PERTURBATIONS    OF   URANUS.  535 

to  represent,  with  due  precision,  observations  subsequently 
made.  The  "error  of  the  tables"  after  attaining  a  certain 
amount,  by  which  the  true  longitude  of  Uranus  was  in 
advance  of  the  computed,  and  which  advance  was  steadily 
maintained  from  about  the  year  1795  to  1822,  began,  about 
the  latter  epoch,  rapidly  to  diminish,  till,  in  1830-31,  the 
tabular  and  observed  longitudes  agreed.  But,  far  from  re- 
maining in  accordance,  the  planet,  still  losing  ground,  fell, 
and  continued  to  fall  behind  its  calculated  place,  and  that 
with  such  rapidity  as  to  make  it  evident  that  the  existing 
tables  could  no  longer  be  received  as  representing,  with  any 
tolerable  precision,  the  true  laws  of  its  motion. 

(76^.)  The  reader  will  easily  understand  the  nature  and 
progression  of  these  discordancies  by  casting  his  eye  on  fig.  1. 
Plate  A,  in  which  the  horizontal  line  or  abscissa  is  divided 
into  equal  parts,  each  representing  50°  of  heliocentric  longi- 
tude in  the  motion  of  Uranus  round  the  sun,  and  in  which  the 
distances  between  the  horizontal  lines  represent  each  100" 
of  error  in  longitude.  The  result  of  each  year's  observation 
of  Uranus  (or  of  the  mean  of  all  the  observations  obtained 
during  that  year)  in  longitude,  is  represented  by  a  black  dot 
placed  above  or  below  the  point  of  the  abscissa,  corresponding 
to  the  mean  of  the  observed  longitudes  for  the  year:  above,  if 
the  observed  longitude  be  in  excess  of  the  calculated,  below 
if  it  fall  short  of  it,  and  on  the  line  if  they  agree  ;  and  at  a 
distance  from  the  line  corresponding  to  their  difference  on 
the  scale  above  mentioned.*  Thus  in  Flamsteed's  earliest 
observations  in  1690,  the  dot  so  marked  is  placed  above  the 
line  at  65//#9  above  the  line,  the  observed  longitude  being  so 
much  greater  than  the  calculated. 

(763.)  If,  neglecting  the  individual  points,  we  draw  a 
curve  (indicated  in  the  figure  by  a  fine  unbroken  line) 
through  their  general  course,  we  shall  at  once  perceive  a 

*  The  points  are  laid  down  from  M.  Love  rier'scomparison  of  the  whole  M-ries 
ot  observations  of  Uranus,  with  an  ephenieris  of  his  own  calculation,  founded  on 
a  complete  and  searching  revision  of  the  tables  of  Bouvard,  and  a  rigorous  com. 
putation  of  the  perturbations  caused  by  all  the  known  planets  capable  of  exer- 
cising any  influence  on  it.  The  differences  of  longitude  are  geocentric,  bin  tin 
our  present  purpose  it  matters  not  in  the  least  whether  we  consider  the  crrort 
in  heliocentric  or  in  geocentric  longitude. 


336  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

certain  regularity  in  its  undulations.  It  presents  two  great 
elevations  above,  and  one  nearly  as  great  intermediate  depres- 
sion below  the  medial  line  or  abscissa.  And  it  is  evident 
that  these  undulations  would  be  very  much  reduced,  and  the 
errors  in  consequence  greatly  palliated,  if  each  dot  were 
removed  in  the  vertical  direction  through  a  distance  and  in  the 
direction  indicated  by  the  corresponding  point  of  the  curve 
A,B,  C,D,E,F,  G,  H,  intersecting  the  abscissa  at  points  180° 
distant,  and  making  equal  excursions  on  either  side.  Thus 
the  point  a  ior  1750  being  removed  upwards  or  in  the  direc- 
tion towards  b  through  a  distance  equal  to  cb  would  be 
brought  almost  to  precise  coincidence  with  the  point  d  in 
the  abscissa.  Now,  this  is  a  clear  indication  that  a  very  large 
part  of  the  differences  in  question  is  due,  not  to  perturbation, 
but  simply  to  error  in  the  elements  of  Uranus  which  have 
been  assumed  as  the  basis  of  calculation.  For  such  excesses 
and  defects  of  longitude  alternating  over  arcs  of  180°  are 
precisely  what  would  arise  from  error  in  the  excentricity,  or 
in  the  place  of  the  perihelion,  or  in  both.  In  ellipses  slightly 
excentric,  the  true  longitude  alternately  exceeds  and  falls 
short,  of  the  mean  during  180°  for  each  deviation,  and  the 
greater  the  excentricity,  the  greater  these  alternate  fluctua- 
tions to  and  fro.  If  then  the  excentricity  of  a  planet's  orbit  be 
assumed  erroneously  (suppose  too  great)  the  observed  longi- 
tudes will  exhibit  a  less  amount  of  such  fluctuation  above 
and  below  the  mean  than  the  computed,  and  the  difference  of 
the  two,  instead  of  being,  as  it  ought  to  be,  always  nil,  will 
be  alternately  +  and  —over  arcs  of  1 80°.  If  then  a  difference 
he  observed  following  such  a  law,  it  may  arrive  from  errone- 
ously assumed  excentricity,  provided  always  the  longitudes 
at  which  they  agree  (supposed  to  differ  by  180°)  be  coincident 
with  those  of  the  perihelion  and  aphelion ;  for  in  elliptic 
motion  nearly  circular,  these  are  the  points  where  the  mean 
and  true  longitudes  agree,  so  that  any  fluctuation  of  the 
nature  observed,  if  this  condition  be  not  satisfied,  cannot 
arise  from  error  of  excentricity.  Now  the  longitude  of  the 
perihelion  of  Uranus  in  the  elements  employed  by  Bouvard  is 
(neglecting  fractions  of  a  degree)  168°,  and  of  the  aphelion 


PERTURBATIONS  OF  URANUS  BY  NErTUNE.    537 

348s  These  points  then,  in  onr  figure,  fall  at  «r  and  u.  re- 
spectively, that  is  to  say,  nearly  half  way  between  AC,  CE, 
EG,  &c  It  is  evident  therefore  that  it  is  not  to  error  of 
excentricity  that  the  fluctuation  in  question  is  mainly  due. 
(764.)  Let  us  now  consider  the  effect  of  an  erroneous 
assumption  of  the  place  of  the  perihelion.  Suppose  in  fig.  2. 
Plate  A,  ox  to  represent  the  longitude  of  a  planet,  and  xy 
the  excess  of  its  true  above  its  mean  longitude,  due  to  ellip- 
tic ity.  Then  if  R  be  the  place  of  the  perihelion,  and  P,  or 
T,  the  aphelion  in  longitude,  y  will  always  lie  in  a  certain 
undulating  curve  PQRST,  above  *  P  T  between  R  and  T, 
and  below  it  between  P  and  R.  Now  suppose  the  place  of 
the  perihelion  shifted  forward  to  r,  or  the  whole  curve  shifted 
bodily  forward  into  the  situation  pqrst,  then  at  the  same 
longitude  ox,  the  excess  of  the  true  above  the  mean  longitude 
will  be  xy'  only  ;  in  other  words,  this  excess  will  have  dimi- 
nished by  the  quantity  yy'  below  its  former  amount.  Take 
therefore  in  o  N  {Jig.  3.  PI.  A)  oy  —  ox  and  yy'  always=yy' 
mjig.  2.,  and  having  thus  constructed  the  curve  KLMNO, 
the  ordinate  yy'  will  always  represent  the  effect  of  the  sup- 
posed change  of  perihelion.  It  is  evident  (the  excentricity 
being  always  supposed  small),  that  this  curve  will  consist 
also  of  alternate  superior  and  inferior  waves  of  180°  each  in 
amplitude,  and  the  points  L,  N  of  its  intersection  with 
the  axis  will  occur  at  longitudes  corresponding  to  X,  Y 
intermediate  between  the  maxima  Q,  q  and  S,«  of  the 
original  curves,  that  is  to  say  (if  these  intervals  Q^,  Ss,  or 
Rr  to  which  both  are  equal,  be  very  small)  very  nearly  at 
90°  from  the  perihelion  and  aphelion.  Now  this  agrees  with 
the  conditions  of  the  case  in  hand,  and  we  are  therefore 
authorised  to  conclude  that  the  major  portion  of  the  errors  in 
question  has  arisen  from  error  in  the  place  of  the  perihelion 
of  Uranus  itself,  and  not  from  perturbation,  and  that  to  correct 
this  portion,  the  perihelion  must  be  shifted  somewhat  forward. 
As  to  the  amount  of  this  shifting,  our  only  object  being  ex- 
planation, it  will  not  be  necessary  here  to  enquire  into  it. 
It  will  suffice  that  it  must   be  such  as  shall   make  the  curve 

*   The  curves,  tigs.  2,  3,  arc  inverted  in  the  engraving. 


5.38  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

ABCDEFGas  nearly  as  possible  similar,  equal,  and  opposite 
to  the  curve  traced  out  by  the  dots  on  the  other  side.  And 
this  being  done,  we  may  next  proceed  to  lay  down  a  curve  of 
the  residual  differences  between  observation  and  theory  in 
the  mode  indicated  in  art.  (763.) 

'765.)  This  being  done,  by  laying  off  at  each  point  of  the 
line  of  longitudes  an  ordinate  equal  to  the  difference  of  the 
ordinates  of  the  two  curves  in  fig.  1.  when  on  opposite,  and 
their  sum  when  on  the  same  side  of  the  abscissa,  the  result 
will  be  as  indicated  by  the  dots  in  fig.  4.  And  here  it  is  at 
once  seen  that  a  still  farther  reduction  of  the  differences 
under  consideration  would  result,  if,  instead  of  taking  the 
line  A  B  for  the  line  of  longitudes,  a  line  a  b  slightly  inclined 
to  it  were  substituted,  in  which  case  the  whole  of  the  dif- 
ferences between  observation  and  theory  from  1712  to  1800 
would  be  annihilated,  or  at  least  so  far  reduced  as  hardly  to 
exceed  the  ordinary  errors  of  observation  ;  and  as  respects 
the  observation  of  1690,  the  still  outstanding  difference  of 
about  35"  would  not  be  more  than  might  be  attributed  to  a 
not  very  careful  observation  at  so  early  an  epoch.  Now  the 
assumption  of  such  a  new  line  of  longitudes  as  the  correct 
one  is  in  effect  equivalent  to  the  admission  of  a  slight  amount 
of  error  in  the  periodic  time  and  epoch  of  Uranus ;  for  it  is 
evident  that  by  reckoning  from  the  inclined  instead  of  the 
horizontal  line,  we  in  effect  alter  all  the  apparent  outstanding 
errors  by  an  amount  proportional  to  the  time  before  or  after 
the  date  at  which  the  two  lines  intersect  (viz.  about  1789). 
As  to  the  direction  in  which  this  correction  should  be  made, 
it  is  obvious  by  inspection  of  the  course  of  the  dots,  that  if 
we  reckon  from  A  B,  or  any  line  parallel  to  it,  the  observed 
planet  on  the  long  run  keeps  falling  more  and  more  behind 
the  calculated  one ;  i,  e.  its  assigned  mean  angular  velocity 
by  the  tables  is  too  great  and  must  be  diminished,  or  its 
periodic  time  requires  to  be  increased. 

(766.)  Let  this  increase  of  period  be  made,  and  in  corres- 
pondence with  that  change  let  the  longitudes  be  reckoned  on 
a  b.  and  the  residual  differences  from  that  line  instead  of 
A.  B,  and  we  shall  have  then  done  all   that  can  be  done  in 


PERTURBATIONS    OF    URANUS    BY    NEPTUNE.  539 

the  way  of  reducing  and  palliating  these  differences,  and 
that,  with  such  success,  that  up  to  the  year  1804  it  might 
have  been  safely  asserted  that  positively  no  ground  whatever 
existed  for  suspecting  any  disturbing  influence.  But  with 
this  epoch  an  action  appears  to  have  commenced,  and  gone 
on  increasing,  producing  an  acceleration  of  the  motion  in 
longitude,  in  consequence  of  which,  Uranus  continually  gains 
on  its  elliptic  place,  and  continued  to  do  so  till  1822,  when  it 
ceased  to  g:»in,  and  the  excess  of  longitude  was  at  its  maxi- 
mum, after  which  it  began  rapidly  to  lose  ground,  and  has 
continued  to  do  so  up  to  the  present  time.  It  is  perfectly 
clear,  then,  that  in  this  interval  some  extraneous  cause  must 
have  come  into  action  which  was  not  so  before,  or  not  in 
sufficient  power  to  manifest  itself  by  any  marked  effect,  and 
that  that  cause  must  have  ceased  to  act,  or  rather  begun  to 
reverse  its  action,  in  or  about  the  year  1822,  the  reverse 
action  being  even  more  energetic  than  the  direct. 

(767.)  Such  is  the  phenomenon  in  the  simplest  form  we 
are  now  able  to  present  it.  Of  the  various  hypotheses  formed 
to  account  for  it,  during  the  progress  of  its  developement, 
none  seemed  to  have  any  degree  of  rational  probability 
but  that  of  the  existence  of  an  exterior,  and  hitherto 
undiscovered,  planet,  disturbing,  according  to  the  received 
laws  of  planetary  disturbance,  the  motion  of  Uranus  by  its 
attraction,  or  rather  superposing  its  disturbance  on  those 
produced  by  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  the  only  two  of  the  old 
planets  which  exercise  any  sensible  disturbing  action  on  that 
planet.  Accordingly,  this  was  the  explanation  which  na- 
turally, and  almost  of  necessity,  suggested  itself  to  those 
conversant  with  the  planetary  perturbations  who  considered 
the  subject  with  any  degree  of  attention.  The  idea,  however, 
of  setting  out  from  the  observed  anomalous  deviations,  and 
employing  them  as  data  to  ascertain  the  distance  and  situation 
of  the  unknown  body,  or,  in  other  words,  to  resolve  the  in- 
verse problem  of  perturbations,  "given  the  disturbances  to  find 
the  orbit,  and  place  in  that  orbit  of  the  disturbing  planet,^ 
appears  to  have  occurred  only  to  two  mathematicians, 
Mr;  Adams  in  England  and    M.  Leverrier  in  France,  with 


540  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

sufficient  distinctness  and  hopefulness  of  success  to  induce 
them  to  attempt  its  solution.  Both  succeeded,  and  their 
solutions,  arrived  at  with  perfect  independence,  and  by  each 
in  entire  ignorance  of  the  other's  attempt,  were  found  to 
agree  in  a  surprising  manner  when  the  nature  and  diffi- 
culty of  the  problem  is  considered ;  the  calculations  of  M. 
Leverrier  assigning  for  the  heliocentric  longitude  of  the 
disturbing  planet  for  the  23d  Sept.  1846,  326°  0',  and  those 
of  Mr.  Adams  (brought  to  the  same  date)  329°  1 9',  diifering 
only  3°  19';  the  plane  of  its  orbit  deviating  very  slightly,  if 
at  all,  from  that  of  the  ecliptic. 

(768.)  On  the  day  above  mentioned  —  a  day  for  ever 
memorable  in  the  annals  of  astronomy —  Dr.  Galle,  one  of  the 
astronomers  of  the  Royal  Observatory  at  Berlin,  received  a 
letter  from  M.  Leverrier,  announcing  to  him  the  result  he  had 
arrived  at,  and  requesting  him  to  look  for  the  disturbing 
planet  in  or  near  the  place  assigned  by  his  calculation.  He  did 
so,  and  on  that  very  night  actually  found  it.  A  star  of  the 
eighth  magnitude  was  seen  by  him  and  by  M.  Encke  in  a 
situation  where  no  star  was  marked  as  existing  in  Dr.  Bre- 
miker's  chart,  then  recently  published  by  the  Berlin  Academy. 
The  next  night  it  was  found  to  have  moved  from  its  place, 
and  was  therefore  assuredly  a  planet.  Subsequent  observa- 
tions and  calculations  have  fully  demonstrated  this  planet, 
to  which  the  name  of  Neptune  has  been  assigned,  to  be  really 
that  body  to  whose  disturbing  attraction,  according  to  the 
Newtonian  law  of  gravity,  the  observed  anomalies  in  the 
motion  of  Uranus  were  owing.  The  geocentric  longitude 
determined  by  Dr.  Galle  from  this  observation  was  325°  53', 
which,  converted  into  heliocentric,  gives  326°  52',  differing 
0°  52'  from  M.  Leverrier's  place,  2°  27'  from  that  of  Mr. 
Adams,  and  only  47'  from  a  mean  of  the  two  calculations. 

(769.)  It  would  be  quite  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work,  and 
far  in  advanceof  the  amount  of  mathematical  know  ledge  we  have 
assumed  our  readers  to  possess,  to  attempt  giving  more  than 
a  superficial  idea  of  the  course  followed  by  these  geometers  in 
their  arduous  investigations.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  it  consisted 
in  regarding,  as  unknown  quantities,  to  be  determined,  the 


PERTURBATIONS   OF    URANUS    BTf    NEPTUNE.  541 

mass,  and  all  the  elements  of  the  unknown  planet  (supposed  to 
revolve  in  the  same  plane  and  the  same  direction  with  Uranus), 
except  its  major  semiaxis.  This  was  assumed  in  the  first 
instance  (in  conformity  with  "  Bode's  law,"  art.  (505.),  and 
certainly  at  the  time  with  a  high  prima  facie  probability,)  to  be 
double  that  of  Uranus,  or  38*364  radii  of  the  Earth's  orbit. 
Without  some  assumption  as  to  the  value  of  this  element,  owing 
to  the  peculiar  form  of  the  analytical  expression  of  the  per- 
turbations, the  analytical  investigation  would  have  presented 
difficulties  apparently  insuperable.  But  besides  these,  it  was 
also  necessary  to  regard  as  unknown,  or  at  least  as  liable  to 
corrections  of  unknown  magnitude  of  the  same  order  as  the 
perturbations,  all  the  elements  of  Uranus  itself,  a  circumstance 
whose  necessity  will  easily  be  understood,  when  we  consider 
that  the  received  elements  could  only  be  regarded  as  pro- 
visional, and  must  certainly  be  erroneous,  the  places  from 
which  they  were  obtained  being  affected  by  at  least  some 
portions  of  the  very  perturbations  in  question.  This  con- 
sideration, though  indispensable,  added  vastly  both  to  the 
complication  and  the  labour  of  the  inquiry.  The  axis  (and 
therefore  the  mean  motion)  of  the  one  orbit,  then,  being 
known  very  nearly,  and  that  of  the  other  thus  hypothetically 
assumed,  it  became  practicable  to  express  in  terms,  partly 
algebraic,  partly  numerical,  the  amount  of  perturbation  at 
any  instant,  by  the  aid  of  general  expressions  delivered  by 
Laplace  in  his  "  Mecanique  Celeste"  and  elsewhere.  These, 
then,  together  with  the  corrections  due  to  the  altered  elements 
of  Uranus  itself,  being  applied  to  the  tabular  longitudes,  fur- 
nished, when  compared  with  those  observed,  asenes  of  equations, 
in  which  the  elements  and  mass  of  Neptune, and  the  corrections 
of  those  of  Uranus  entered  as  the  unkriuitm  quaiitities,  and  by 
whose  resolution  (no  slight  effort  of  analytical  skill)  all  their 
values  were  at  length  obtained.  The  calculations  were  then 
repeated,  reducing  at  the  same  time  the  value  of  the  assumed 
distance  of  the  new  planet,  the  discordances  between  the 
given  and  calculated  results  indicating  it  to  have  been 
assumed  too  large;  when  the  results  were  found  to  agree 
better,  and  the   solutions    to    be,  in  fact,  more  satisfactory. 


542 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


Thus,  at  length,  elements  were  arrived  at  for  the  orbit  of 
the  unknown  planet,  as  below. 


Lev«?rrier. 

Adaroi. 

Epoch  of  Elements           - 

Jan.  1.  1847. 

Oct.  6.   1846. 

Mean  longitude  in  Epoch 

318°  47'  4 

323°  2' 

Semiaxis  Major    - 

36-1539 

37  -2474 

Excentricity          - 

0107 610 

0-120615 

Longitude  of  Perihelion  ... 

284°  4.5'  8 

299°  11' 

Mass  (the  Sun  being  1)  - 

0-OOOI0727 

0-00015003 

The  elements  of  M.  Leverrier  were  obtained  from  a  consider- 
ation of  the  observations  up  to  the  year  1845,  those  of  Mr. 
Adams,  only  as  far  as  1840.  On  subsequently  taking  into 
account,  however,  those  of  the  five  years  up  to  1845,  the 
latter  was  led  to  conclude  that  the  semiaxis  ought  to  be  still 
much  further  diminished,  and  that  a  mean  distance  of  33*33 
(being  to  that  of  Uranus  as  1  :  0*574)  would  probably  satisfy 
all  the  observations  very  nearly.* 

(770.)  On  the  actual  discovery  of  the  planet,  it  was,  of 
course,  assiduously  observed,  and  it  was  soon  ascertained  that  a 
mean  distance,  even  less  than  Mr.  Adams's  last  presumed  value, 
agreed  better  with  its  motion  ;  and  no  sooner  were  elements 
obtained  from  direct  observation,  sufficiently  approximate  to 
trace  back  its  path  in  the  heavens  for  a  considerable  interval 
of  time,  than  it  was  ascertained  to  have  been  observed  as  a  star 
by  Lalande  on  the  8th  and  10th  of  May,  1795,  the  latter  of 
the  two  observations,  however,  having  been  rejected  by  him 
as  faulty,  by  reason  of  its  non-agreement  with  the  former  (a 
consequence  of  the  motion  of  the  planet  in  the  interval).  From 
these  observations,  combined  with  those  since  accumulated,  the 
elements  calculated  by  Prof.  Walker,  U.S.,  result  as  follows  :  — 

-  Jan.   I.  1847,  M.  noon,  Greenwich. 

-  328°  32'  44"  2 
30  0367 


Epoch  of  Elements 

Mean  longitude  at  Epoch 

Semiaxis  major  - 

Excentricity 

Longitude  of  the  Perihelion 

Ascending  Node 

Inclination 

Periodic  time 

Mean  annual  Motion 


0-00871946 
4-7°  12'  6"-50 

-  130°  4' 20" -81 

1°  46'  58"*97 

-  164*6181  tropical  vear. 

2°-18688 


*    In  a  letter  to  the    Astronomer   Royal,    dated   Sept.  2.  1846,- 
week-i  previous  tc  the  optical  discovery  of  the  planet. 


-  f.  r .  th  res 


PKItTURBAI'IONS    OF    URANUS    BY    H£PTUKS.  543 

(771.)  The  great  disagreement  between  these  elements 
and  those  assigned  either  by  M.  Leverrier  or  Mr.  Adams  will 
not  fail  to  be  remarked ;  and  it  will  naturally  be  asked  how 
it  has  come  to  pass,  that  elements  so  widely  different  from  the 
truth  should  afford  anything  like  a  satisfactory  representation  of 
the  perturbation  in  question,  and  that  the  true  situation  of  the 
planet  in  the  heavens  should  have  been  so  well,  and  indeed 
accurately,  pointed  out  by  them.  As  to  the  latter  point,  any 
one  may  satisfy  himself  by  half  an  hour's  calculation  that 
both  sets  of  elements  do  really  place  the  planet,  on  the  day 
of  its  discovery,  not  only  in  the  longitudes  assigned  in  art. 
763.,  i.  e.  extremely  near  its  apparent  place,  but  also  at  a 
distance  from  the  Sun  very  much  more  approximately  cor- 
rect than  the  mean  distances  or  semiaxes  of  the  respective 
orbits.  Thus  the  radius  vector  of  Neptune,  calculated  from 
M.  Leverrier's  elements  for  the  day  in  question,  instead  of 
36*1539  (the  mean  distance)  comes  out  almost  exactly  33  ; 
and  indeed,  if  we  consider  that  the  excentricity  assigned  by 
those  elements  gives  for  the  perihelion  distance  32*2634,  the 
longitude  assigned  to  the  perihelion  brings  the  whole  arc  of 
the  orbit  (more  than  83°),  described  in  the  interval  from  1806 
to  1847  to  lie  within  42°  one  way  or  the  other  of  the  perihe- 
lion, and  therefore,  during  the  whole  of  that  interval,  the 
hypothetical  planet  would  be  moving  within  limits  of  distance 
from  the  sun,  32*6  and  33*0.  The  following  comparative 
tables  of  the  relative  situations  of  Uranus,  the  real  and  hy- 
pothetical planet,  will  exhibit  more  clearly  than  any  lengthened 
statement,  the  near  imitation  of  the  motion  of  the  former 
by  the  latter  within  that  interval.  The  longitudes  are  helio- 
centric* 


*  The  cftWilntioiw  are  oirricd  only  to  tenths  of  degrees,  as  quite  sufficient  for 
the  object  in  view. 


544 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


1 
1 

A.D. 

Urann*. 

Neptune. 

Leverrier. 

i 
A  da  nu. 

Long. 

Long. 

Rad.  Vec. 

Long. 

Rad.  Vec. 

Long. 

Rad.  Vec 

1805-0 

197° -8 

235° -9 

30-3 

241°-2 

33 -1 

246° -5 

34-2 

1810-0 

220-9 

247  •() 

30-3 

251-1 

32-8 

255-9 

33  -7 

18150 

243-2 

258-0 

30 -3 

261-2 

32 -5 

265-5 

33-3 

1820-0 

'264-7 

268-8 

30-2 

27 1  -4 

32-4 

275-4 

33  1 

18-21-0 

269  0 

271-0 

30-2 

273-5 

32-3 

277-4 

33  0 

1822-0 

273-3 

273-2 

30-2 

275-6 

32-3 

279-5 

33  0 

18  230 

277-6 

275-3 

30-2 

277-6 

32-3 

281-5 

32-9 

1824-0 

28  I  -8 

277-4 

SO -2 

279-7 

82 -3 

283-6 

32-9 

1825  0 

285-8 

279  6 

SO -2 

281-8 

32-3 

285-6 

32-8 

1830  0 

306-1 

290-5 

301 

292-1 

32  3 

296  0 

32-8 

1835-0 

326-0 

301-4 

30  1 

302-5 

32-4 

306  -3 

32-8 

1840  0 

345-7 

312-2 

SO  1 

312-6 

32-6 

316-3 

S2-9 

1845  0 

365  3 

323-1 

30  0 

322-6 

32-9 

326-0 

33  1 

1847-0 

373  3 

327-6 

30  0 

326  5 

33  1 

329-3 

33-2 

(772.)  From  this  comparison  it  will  be  seen  that  Uranus 
arrived  at  its  conjunction  with  Neptune  at  or  immediately 
before  the  commencement  of  1822,  with  the  calculated  planet 
of  Leverrier  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  year  1823,  and 
with  that  of  Adams  about  the  end  of  1824.  Both  the  theo- 
retical planets,  and  especially  that  of  M.  Leverrier,  therefore, 
during  the  whole  of  the  above  interval  of  time,  so  far  as  the 
directions  of  their  attractive  forces  on  Uranus  are  concerned, 
would  act  nearly  on  it  as  the  true  planet  must  have  done. 
As  regards  the  intensity  of  the  relative  disturbing  forces,  if 
we  estimate  these  by  the  principles  of  art.  (612.)  at  the  epochs 
of  conjunction,  and  for  the  commencement  of  1805  and  1845, 
we  find  for  the  respective  denominators  of  the  fractions  of  the 
sun's  attraction  on  Uranus  regarded  as  unity,  which  express 
the  total  disturbing  force,  N  S,  in  each  case,  as  below  : 


Neptune  with 


Peirce's  mass 


Struve's  mass 


1 


i9840 

\_ 
H496 


1805. 
27540 

20244 


Leverrier's  theoretical  Planet,  mass    208S7 

9322 


Conjunction.    1845. 
7508  SdS-4 


5519 
5193 


233  1 0 
19935 


The  masses  here  assigned  to  Neptune  are  those  respectively 
deduced  by  Prof.  Peirce  and  M.  Struve  from  observations  of 


PERTURBATIONS  OF  URANUS  BY  NEPTUNE.     545 

the  satellite  discovered  by  Mr.  Lassell,  made  with  the  large 
telescopes  of  Fraunhofer  in  the  observatories  of  Cambridge, 
[J.  S.  and  Pulkova  respectively.  These  it  will  be  perceived 
differ  very  considerably,  as  might  reasonably  be  expected  in 
the  results  of  micromctrical  measurements  of  such  difficulty, 
and  it  is  not  possible  at  present  to  say  to  which  the  preference 
ought  to  be  given.  As  compared  with  the  mass  assigned  by 
M.  Struve,  an  agreement  on  the  whole  more  satisfactory  could 
not  have  been  looked  for  within  the  interval  immediately 
in  question. 

(773.)  Subject  then  to  this  uncertainty  as  to  the  real  mass 
of  Neptune,  the  theoretical  planet  of  Leverrier  must  be  con- 
sidered as  representing  with  quite  as  much  fidelity  as  could 
possibly  be  expected  in  a  research  of  such  exceeding  dehcacv, 
the  particulars  of  its  motion  and  perturbative  action  during 
the  forty  years  elapsed  from  1805  to  1845,  an  interval  which 
(as  is  obvious  from  the  rapid  diminution  of  the  forces  on 
either  side  of  the  conjunction  indicated  by  the  numbers  here 
set  down)  comprises  all  the  most  influential  range  of  its 
action.  This  will,  however,  be  placed  in  full  evidence  by 
the  construction  of  curves  representing  the  normal  and  tan- 
gential forces  on  the  principles  laid  down  (as  far  as  the 
normal  constituent  is  concerned)  in  art.  (717.),  one  slight 
change  only  being  made,  which,  for  the  purpose  in  view,  con- 
duces greatly  to  clearness  of  conception.  The  force  L  8  (in 
the  figure  of  that  article)  being  supposed  applied  at  P  in  the 
direction  L  S,  we  here  construct  the  curve  of  the  nonnal 
force  by  erecting  at  P  {fig.  5.  Plate  A)  P  W  always  perpen- 
dicular to  the  disturbed  orbit,  A  P,  at  P,  measured  from  P 
in  the  same  direction  that  S  lies  from  L,  and  equal  in  length 
to  L  S.  PW  then  will  always  represent  both  the  direction 
and  magnitude  of  the  normal  force  acting  at  P.  And  in  like 
manner,  if  we  take  always  P  Z  on  the  tangent  to  the  dis- 
turbed orbit  at  P,  equal  to  N  L  of  the  former  figure,  and 
measured  in  the  same  direction  from  P  that  L  is  from 
N,  P  Z  will  represent  both  in  magnitude  and  direction 
the  tangential  force  acting  at  P.  Thus  will  be  traced 
out   the   two    curious   ovals  represented    in   our   ligure    of 

N   N 


346  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

their  proper  forms  and  proportions  for  the  case  in  question. 
That  expressing  the  normal  force  is  formed  of  four  lohes, 
having  a  common  point  in  S,  viz.,  SWmXSaSwSiS  W, 
and  that  expressing  the  tangential,  AZc/Be^YAZ, 
consisting  of  four  mutually  intersecting  loops,  surrounding 
and  touching  the  disturbed  orbit  in  four  points,  ABcrf. 
The  normal  force  acts  outwards  over  all  that  part  of  the 
orbit,  both  in  conjunction  and  opposition,  corresponding  to 
the  portions  of  the  lobes  m,  n,  exterior  to  the  disturbed  orbit, 
and  inwards  in  every  other  part.  The  figure  sets  in  a  clear 
light  the  great  disproportion  between  the  energy  of  this  force 
near  the  conjunction,  and  in  any  other  configuration  of  the 
planets ;  its  exceedingly  rapid  degradation  as  P  approaches 
the  point  of  neutrality  (whose  situation  is  35°  5'  on  either  side 
of  the  conjunction,  an  arc  described  synodically  by  Uranus  in 
16y-72);  and  the  comparatively  short  duration  and  consequent 
inefficacy  to  produce  any  great  amount  of  perturbation,  of  the 
more  intense  part  of  its  inward  action  in  the  small  portions  of 
the  orbit  corresponding  to  the  lobes  a,  b,  in  which  the  line 
representing  the  inward  force  exceeds  the  radius  of  the 
circle.  It  exhibits,  too,  with  no  less  distinctness,  the  gradual 
developement,  and  rapid  degradation  and  extinction  of  the 
tangential  force  from  its  neutral  points,  c,  d,  on  either  side 
up  to  the  conjunction,  where  its  action  is  reversed,  being 
accelerative  over  the  arc  d  A,  and  retardative  over  A  c,  each 
of  which  arcs  has  an  amplitude  of  7 1°  20',  and  is  described 
by  Uranus  synodically  in  34y-00.  The  insignificance  of  the 
tangential  force  in  the  configurations  remote  from  conjunction 
throughout  the  arc  c  B  d  is  also  obviously  expressed  by  the 
small  comparative  developement  of  the  loops  e,f. 

(774.)  Let  us  now  consider  how  the  action  of  these  forces 
results  in  the  production  of  that  peculiar  character  of  per- 
turbation which  is  exhibited  in  our  curve,  Jig.  4.  Plate 
A.  It  is  at  once  evident  that  the  increase  of  the  longitude 
from  1800  to  1822,  the  cessation  of  that  increase  in  1822, 
and  its  conversion  into  a  decrease  during  the  subsequent 
interval  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  growth,  rapid 
decay,  extinction  at  conjunction,  and  subsequent  reproduction 


: 


PERTURBATIONS  OF  URANUS  BY  NEPTUNE.    547 

m  a  reversed  sense  of  the  tangential  force :  so  that  we  cannot 
hesitate  in  attributing  the  greater  part  of  the  perturbation 
expressed  by  the  swell  and  subsidence  of  the  curve  between 
the  years  1800  and  1845,  —  all  that  part,  indeed,  which 
is  symmetrical  on  either  side  of  1822  —  to  the  action  of  the 
tangential  force. 

(775.)  But  it  will  be  asked, — has  then  the  normal  force 
(which,  on  the  plain  showing  of  Jig.  5.,  is  nearly  twice  :s 
powerful  as  the  tangential,  and  which  does  not  reverse  its 
action,  like  the  latter  force,  at  the  point  of  conjunction,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  is  there  most  energetic,)  no  influence  in 
producing  the  observed  effects?  We  answer,  v*ry  little, 
within  the  period  to  which  observation  had  extended  up  to 
1845.  The  effect  of  the  tangential  force  on  the  longitude  ia 
direct  and  immediate  (art.  660.),  that  of  the  normal  indirect, 
consequential,  and  cumulative  with  the  progress  of  time 
(art.  734.).  The  effect  of  the  tangential  force  on  the  mean 
motion  takes  place  through  the  medium  of  the  change  it  pro- 
duces on  the  axis,  and  is  transient :  the  reversed  action  after 
conjunction  (supposing  the  orbits  circular),  exactly  destroying 
all  the  previous  effect,  and  leaving  the  mean  motion  on  the 
whole  unaffected.  In  the  passage  through  the  conjunction, 
then,  the  tangential  force  produces  a  sudden  and  powerful 
acceleration,  succeeded  by  an  equally  powerful  and  equally 
sudden  retardation,  which  done,  its  action  is  completed,  and 
no  trace  remains  in  the  subsequent  motion  of  the  planet  that 
it  ever  existed,  for  its  action  on  the  perihelion  and  excentricity 
is  in  like  manner  also  nullified  by  its  reversal  of  direction. 
But  with  the  normal  force  the  case  is  far  otherwise.  Its 
immediate  effect  on  the  angular  motion  is  nil.  It  is  not  till 
it  has  acted  long  enough  to  produce  a  perceptible  change  in 
the  distance  of  the  disturbed  planet  from  the  sun  that  the 
angular  velocity  begins  to  be  sensibly  affected,  and  it  is  not 
till  its  whole  outward  action  has  been  exerted  (£  e.  over  the 
whole  interval  from  neutral  point  to  neutral  point)  that  its 
maximum  effect  in  lifting  the  disturbed  planet  away  from 
the  sun  has  been  produced,  and  the  full  amount  of  diminution 
in  angular  velocity  it  is  capable  of  causing  lias  been  develoj»ed. 

■  K  '2 


548  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

This  continues  to  act  in  producing  a  retardation  in  longitude 
long  after  the  normal  force  llself  has  reversed  its  action,  and 
from  a  powerful  outward  force  has  become  a  feeble  inward 
one.  A  certain  portion  of  this  perturbation  is  incident  on 
the  epoch  in  the  mode  described  in  art.  (731.)  et  seq.,  and 
permanently  disturbs  the  mean  motion  from  what  it  would 
have  been,  had  Neptune  no  existence.  The  rest  of  its  effect 
is  compensated  in  a  single  synodic  revolution,  not  by  the 
reversal  of  the  action  of  the  force  (for  that  reversed  action  is 
far  too  feeble  for  this  purpose),  but  by  the  effect  of  the  per- 
manent alteration  produced  in  the  excentricity,  which  (the  axis 
being  unchanged)  compensates  by  increased  proximity  in  one 
part  of  the  revolution,  for  increased  distance  in  the  other. 
{Sufficient  time  has  not  yet  elapsed  since  the  conjunction  to 
bring  out  into  full  evidence  the  influence  of  this  force.  Still 
its  commencement  is  quite  unequivocally  marked  in  the  more 
rapid  descent  of  our  curve  Jig.  4.,  subsequent  to  the  con- 
junction than  ascent  previous  to  that  epoch,  which  indicates 
the  commencement  of  a  series  of  undulations  in  its  future 
eourse  of  an  elliptic  character,  consequent  on  the  altered  ex- 
centricity and  perihelion  (the  total  and  ultimate  effect  of  this 
constituent  of  the  disturbing  force)  which  will  be  maintained 
till  within  about  20  years  from  the  next  conjunction,  with 
the  exception,  perhaps,  of  some  trifling  inequalities  about  the 
time  of  the  opposition,  similar  in  character,  but  far  inferior 
in  magnitude  to  those  now  under  discussion. 

(770.)  Posterity  will  hardly  credit  that,  with  a  full  know- 
ledge of  all  the  circumstances  attending  this  great  discovery 
—  of  the  calculations  of  Leverrier  and  Adams  —  of  the  com- 
munication of  its  predicted  place  to  Dr.  Galle  —  and  of  the 
new  planet  being  actually  found  by  him  in  that  place,  in  the 
remarkable  manner  above  commemorated;  not  only  have 
doubts  been  expressed  as  to  the  validity  of  the  calculations 
of  those  geometers,  and  the  legitimacy  of  their  conclusions, 
but  these  doubts  have  been  carried  so  far  as  to  lead  the 
objectors  to  attribute  the  acknowledged  fact  of  a  planet  pre- 
viously unknown  occupying  that  precise  place  in  the  heavena 


PERTURBATIONS  OF  URANUS  BY  NEPTUNE.    549 

tt  that  precise  time,  to  sheer  accident !  *  What  share  accident 
may  have  had  in  the  successful  issue  of  the  calculations,  we 
presume  the  reader,  after  what  has  been  said,  will  have  little 
difficulty  in  satisfying  himself.  As  regards  the  time  when 
the  discovery  was  made,  much  has  also  been  attributed  to 
fortunate  coincidence.  The  following  considerations  will,  we 
apprehend,  completely  dissipate  this  idea,  if  still  lingering  in 
the  mind  of  any  one  at  all  conversant  with  the  subject.  The 
period  of  Uranus  being  84*0140  years,  and  that  of  Neptune 
164*6181,  their  synodic  revolution  (art.  418.),  or  the  interval 
between  two  successive  conjunctions,  is  171*58  years.  The 
late  conjunction  having  taken  place  about  the  beginning  of 
1822;  that  next  preceding  must  have  happened  in  1649,  or 
more  than  40  years  before  the  first  recorded  observation  of 
Uranus  in  1690,  to  say  nothing  of  its  discovery  as  a  planet. 
In  1690,  then,  it  must  have  been  effectually  out  of  reach  of  any 
perturbative  influence  worth  considering,  and  so  it  remained 
during  the  whole  interval  from  thence  to  1800.  From  that 
time  the  effect  of  perturbation  began  to  become  sensible,  about 
1805  prominent,  and  in  1820  had  nearly  reached  its  maximum. 
At  this  epoch  an  alarm  was  sounded.  The  maximum  was 
not  attained,  —  the  event,  so  important  to  astronomy,  was  still 

*  These  doubts  seem  to  have  originated  partly  in  the  great  disagreement 
between  the  predicted  and  real  elements  of  Neptune,  partly  in  the  near  (possibly 
precise)  commensurability  of  the  mean  motions  of  Neptune  and  Uranus.  We 
conceive  them  however  to  be  founded  in  a  total  misconception  of  the  nature  of 
the  problem,  which  was  not,  from  such  obviously  uncertain  indications  as  the 
observed  discordances  could  give,  to  determine  as  astronomical  quantities  the 
axis,  excentricity  and  mass  of  the  disturbing  planet ;  but  practically  to  discover 
where  to  look  for  it :  when,  if  once  found,  these  elements  would  be  far  better 
ascertained.  To  do  this,  any  axis,  excentricity,  perihelion,  and  mas*,  howecer  wide 
of  the  truth,  which  would  represent,  even  roughly  the  amount,  but  vrith  tolerable 
correctness  the  direction  of  the  disturbing  force  during  the  very  moderate  inter- 
val when  the  departures  from  theory  were  really  considerable,  would  equally 
serve  their  purposes;  and  with  an  excentricity,  mass,  and  perihelion  disposable, 
it  is  obvious  that  any  assumption  of  the  axis  between  the  limits  SO  and  38,  nay, 
even  with  a  much  wider  inferior  limit,  would  serve  the  purpose.  In  his  attempt 
to  assign  an  inferior  limit  to  the  axis,  and  in  the  value  so  assigned,  M.  Leverrier, 
it  must  be  admitted,  was  not  successful.  .Mr.  Adams,  on  the  other  hand.  in«- 
fiuenced  by  no  considerate  ns  of  the  kind  which  appear  to  have  weighed  with 
his  brother  geometer,  fixed  ultimately  (as  we  have  seen)  before  the  act  mil  dis- 
covery of  the  planet,  on  an  axis  not  very  egregiously  wrong.  Still  it  were  to  be 
wished,  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  parlies,  that  some  one  would  undertake  the 
problem  de  novo,  employing  formula?  not  liable  to  the  passage  through  infill  ty 
which,  technically  speaking,  hampers,  or  may  be  supposed  to  hamper,  the  con- 
tinuous application  of  the  usual  perturbational  formula;  when  cases  uf  coiunien- 
surabilfty  occur 


F>?>0  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY-. 

in  progress  of  developement, —  when  the  fact  (any  thing  rtthef 
than  a  striking  one)  was  noticed,  and  made  matter  of  com- 
plaint. But  the  time  for  discussing  its  cause  with  any 
prospect  of  success  was  not  yet  come.  Every  thing  turns 
upon  the  precise  determination  of  the  epoch  of  the  maximum, 
when  the  perturbing  and  perturbed  planet  were  in  conjunc- 
tion, and  upon  the  law  of  increase  and  diminution  of  t  lie  pertur- 
bation itself  on  either  side  of  that  point.  Now  it  is  always 
difficult  to  assign  the  time  of  the  occurrence  of  a  maximum 
by  observations  liable  to  errors  bearing  a  ratio  far  from 
inconsiderable  to  the  whole  quantity  observed.  Until  the 
lapse  of  some  years  from  1822  it  would  have  been  impossible 
to  have  fixed  that  epoch  with  any  certainty,  and  as  respects 
the  law  of  degradation  and  total  arc  of  longitude  over  which 
the  sensible  perturbations  extend,  we  are  hardly  yet  arrived 
at  a  period  when  this  can  be  said  to  be  completely  deter- 
minable from  observation  alone.  In  all  this  we  see  nothing 
of  accident,  unless  it  be  accidental  that  an  event  which  must 
have  happened  between  1781  and  1953,  actually  happened 
in  1822;  and  that  we  live  in  an  age  when  astronomy  has 
reached  that  perfection,  and  its  cultivators  exercise  that  vi- 
gilance which  neither  permit  such  an  event,  nor  its  scientific 
importance,  to  pass  unnoticed.  The  blossom  had  been  watched 
with  interest  in  its  developement,  and  the  fruit  was  gathered 
in  the  very  moment  of  maturity.* 

(776  a.)  In  the  foregoing  chapters  we  have  enumerated 
and  described  the  several  bodies  so  far  as  known  of  which 
our  system  consists,  and  have  shown  how  their  mutual  dis- 
tances from  and  their  motions  with  respect  to  each  other  may 

*  The  student  who  may  wish  to  see  the  perturbations  of  Uranus  produ-"1'! 
by  Neptune,  as  computed  from  a  knowledge  of  the  elements  and  mass  of  that 
planet,  such  as  we  now  know  to  be  pretty  near  the  truth,  will  find  th<rn  rt-»  ed 
at  length  from  the  calculations  of  Mr.  Walker,  (of  Washington,  U.  S.)  in  the 
"Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,"  vol.  i.  p.  334. 
et  seq.  On  examining  the  comparisons  of  the  results  of  Mr.  Walker's  fotmulx 
with  those  of  Mr.  Adams's  theory  in  p.  312,  he  will  perhaps  be  surprised  at  the 
enormous  difference  between  the  actions  of  Neptune  and  Mr.  Adams's  "  hypo- 
thetical planet"  on  the  longitude  of  Uranus.  This  is  easily  explained.  Mr. 
Adams's  perturbations  are  deviations  from  Bouvarii's  orbit  of  Uranus,  as  it  stood 
immediately  previous  to  the  late  conjunction.  Mr.  Walker's  are  the  deviations 
from  a  mean  or  undisturbed  orbit  freed  from  the  influence  of  the  long  inequality 
resulting  from  the  near  commeusurability  of  the  motion.*. 


MASS    AXD    DENSITY    OF    THE    EAUTII.  551 

be  determined,  and  their  masses  compared  with  that  of  the 
central  body,  and  ultimately  with  that  of  our  own  planet  as 
a  unit  of  reference;  but  nothing  has  been  said  respecting  the 
means  by  which  that  unit  itself  can  be  brought  into  com- 
parison with  the  mass,  weight,  or  inertia  of  those  portions  of 
its  substance  which  we  see  and  handle  on  its  surface.  Thia 
datum  —  the  total  weight  of  the  earth  itself  —  the  number 
of  times  that  its  entire  mass  exceeds  that  of  a  pound  of  lead 
or  other  matter  —  or  in  other  words  (its  bulk  being  accu- 
rately known),  its  mean  density  —  remains  up  to  this  point 
of  the  present  work  undetermined,  and  is  the  one  thing  want- 
ing to  complete  our  knowledge  of  the  data  of  our  system  and 
fully  to  connect  astronomy  with  ordinary  mechanics.  We 
shall  now  therefore  proceed  to  explain  the  methods  by  which 
this  has  been  accomplished. 

(776  b.)  The  principle  which  at  once  suggests  itself  to  every 
mind  is  to  measure  the  direct  attraction,  if  it  be  possible,  of 
some  known  mass,  at  some  known  distance,  on  some  other. 
We  say,  if  it  be  possible,  because  whatever  notion  we  may 
form  a  priori  of  the  weight  of  the  earth  as  estimated  in 
pounds  or  tons,  it  is  clearly  something  enormous;  and  more- 
over, since  it  follows  from  the  law  of  gravitative  attraction* 
that  the  attractions  of  spheres  of  equal  density  on  points  at 
their  surface  are  to  each  other  as  their  radii,  the  attraction 
of  a  globe  a  foot  in  diameter,  of  the  same  average  density  of 
the  earth,  on  a  material  point  at  its  own  surface  would  only 
amount  to  the  4 1,849,280th  partof  the  weight  of  such  material 
point;  and  therefore  its  attraction  on  a  spherical  body, 
suppose  also  a  foot  in  die.  neter,  placed  in  contact  with  it, 
would  only  amount  to  one  167,397,120th  part  of  the  weight 
of  such  body.  Now  when  we  have  to  deal  with  fractions  of 
such  an  order  of  minuteness,  all  ordinary  modes  of  directly 
measuring  forces  and  weights  break  down,  and  the  utmost 
resources  of  invention  and  art  must  be  taxed  even  to  render 
them  perceptible,  to  say  nothing  of  their  precise  determi- 
nation. 

(776  c.)  The  first  and  most  obvious  mode  ot  producing  a 

*    I'rincip.  bk.  1 .  prop.  7'J. 


552  oin LINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

magnified  result  is  to  augment,  in  as  high  a  ratio  as  possible, 
the  attracting  mass ;  and  therefore  to  substitute  some  great 
natural  mass  of  the  most  suitable  form  which  can  be  found, 
for  an  artificial  sphere.  And  as  the  resources  afforded  by 
the  integral  calculus  furnish  the  means  of  calculating  the  at- 
traction of  a  body  of  any  size  and  figure  of  known  materials 
on  a  point  any  where  situated  without  it,  the  idea  naturally 
enough  suggested  itself  to  take  some  large  mountain,  of  as 
regular  a  shape  as  might  be  found,  for  the  attracting  body, 
and  to  measure  its  attraction,  on  a  principle  pointed  out  by 
Newton*,  by  the  deviation  from  verticality  of  a  plumb-line 
suspended  near  it,  which  will  necessarily  be  drawn  aside 
towards  the  mountain.  As  the  deflexion  to  be  expected 
however,  even  in  the  case  of  a  very  large  mountain,  is  still 
exceedingly  minute,  the  working  out  of  this  idea  into  prac- 
tice calls  for  very  exact  and  refined  astronomical  observations. 

(776  d.)  In  the  first  place  the  question  arises  in  limine, 
how  are  we  to  ascertain,  at  any  place,  what  is  a  vertical  di- 
rection? The  deviated  plumb-line,  it  is  obvious,  cannot  give 
us  this  information,  nor  can  levels,  for  the  surface  of  still 
water  is  always  at  right  angles  to  the  single  force,  whatever 
that  may  be,  which  results  from  a  combination  of  all  the 
forces  acting  on  it  —  in  other  words,  to  the  direction  of  the 
deviated  plumb-line.  Here  it  is  that  our  knowledge  of  the 
figure  and  dimensions  of  the  earth  stand  us  in  stead.  We 
cannot,  it  is  true,  remove  the  mountain  so  as  to  find  where 
the  plumb-line  would  point,  or  the  level  rest  in  its  absence; 
but  we  can  shift  our  station  to  the  opposite  side,  and  by 
sidereal  observation  ascertain  whether  the  direction  of  the 
plumb-line  has  varied  by  more  or  less  than  the  amount  of 
change  due  to  such  a  change  of  station  on  the  globe.  Thus 
then  we  proceed  :  — 

Suppose  M  the  mountain,  A  B  a  circle  of  latitude  passing 
through  two  stations  P,  Q,  at  its  foot,  (or  rather  at  such 
heights  on  its  slope  as  shall  correspond  to  the  maxima  of 
its  lateral  attraction,)  at  each  of  which  let  observations  be 
made  with  a  portable  zenith  sector  alternately  established  at 

*   Treatise  on  the  System  of  the  Worlil  in  a  popular  way,  (17l'K). 


ATTRACTION    OF    A    MOUNTAIN.  553 

one  and  the  other  of  the  z  -nith  distances  of  some  star  pass- 
ing very  near  the  zenith  of  the  mountain  (so  as  to  free  the 


observations  from  uncertainty  of  refraction).  Were  there 
no  lateral  attraction,  the  plumb-lines  at  both  stations  would 
point  directly  to  the  center  of  curvature  C  of  the  terrestrial 
spheroid  (art.  219.),  and  the  angle  between  them,  P  C  Q, 
would  be  the  difference  of  latitudes  of  the  stations.  Now 
the  dimensions  and  ellipticity  of  the  earth  as  a  whole  being 
known,  this  latter  difference  can  be  independently  determined 
by  a  trigonometrical  survey  instituted  for  the  purpose,  a 
base  being  measured,  and  the  meridional  distance  P  Q  as- 
certained by  triangulation  (art.  274.  et  seq.),  which,  converted 
into  seconds  of  latitude,  gives  the  difference  in  question ;  to 
which,  were  there  no  local  attraction,  the  observed  difference 
of  zenith  distances  ought  to  correspond.  But  this  will  not  be 
the  case.  The  mountain  will  attract  the  plummet  both  ways 
inwards,  into  situations  P  E,  Q  E,  including  a  greater  angle 
than  PC  Q,  and  this  being  the  observed  angle  or  apparent 
difference  of  zenith  distances  —  subtracting  from  it  the  dif- 
ference of  latitude  so  independently  obtained,  the  excess  will 
represent  the  sum  of  the  two  deviations  north  and  south  due 
to  the  attraction  required.  The  mountain  has  then  to  be 
surveyed,  and  modelled,  and  mineralogical  specimens  taken 
from  every  accessible  part  of  it,  and  their  specific  gravities 


554  OUTLINES   OF    ASfRONOMY. 

determined ;  and  thus,  no  matter  with  what  amount  of  cal- 
culation (for  it  is  no  light  task),  the  total  lateral  attraction 
is  computed  in  units  of  some  definite  scale;  such,  for  instance, 
that  each  unit  shall  represent  the  total  attraction  of  a  sphere 
of  lib.  weight,  on  a  point  1  foot  distant  from  its  center.  The 
sum  of  all  these  units,  each  reduced  to  a  horizontal  direc- 
tion, is  the  total  lateral  attraction  of  the  mountain,  and  is 
therefore  to  the  total  vertical  attraction  of  the  earth,  as  the 
tangent  of  the  deviation  (taken  so  as  to  divide  the  total  ob- 
served difference  in  the  ratio  of  the  computed  attractions  at 
either  station),  is  to  radius. 

(776  e.)  The  process  is  laborious  and  costly — requires  ex- 
cellent instruments  and  the  cooperation  of  more  than  one 
practised  observer.  It  has,  however,  been  put  in  execution 
on  several  occasions;  viz.,  1st,  by  the  French  Academi- 
cians, Bouguer  and  La  Condamine,  who  in  the  course  ol 
their  operations  in  Peru  for  the  measurement  of  an  arc  of 
the  meridian  (art.  216.)  instituted  observations  of  the  kind 
above  described  on  Chimborazo  in  1738.  Their  means  of 
observation,  however,  were  not  such  as  to  afford  any  distinct 
result,  though  a  deviation  of  the  plumb-line  to  the  amount  of 
about  11"  appears  to  have  been  obtained.  2nd,  by  Maske- 
lyne,  in  1774,  on  the  mountain  Schehallien  in  Scotland,  a 
mountain,  not  indeed  of  any  great  magnitude,  being  only  about 
3000  feet  in  altitude,  but  well  situated,  and  otherwise  well 
adapted  for  the  experiment.  It  was  successful.  A  joint 
amount  of  the  lateral  deviations  on  either  side,  of  11  "*6,  was 
well  ascertained  to  be  produced  by  the  local  attraction,  and 
the  calculations  being  executed,  (by  Dr.  Hutton  and  sub- 
sequently by  Professor  Playfair,)  a  result  entitled  to  some 
reliance  was  obtained,  according  to  which  the  mean  density 
of  the  earth  comes  out  4'713  times  that  of  water  at  the  sur- 
face. More  recently,  we  find  a  series  of  observations  in- 
stituted by  Sir  H.  James,  Superintendent  of  the  Ordnance 
Survey,  on  Arthur's  Seat  near  Edinburgh  *,  by  which,  from  a 
deflexion  of  2"-21  observed  on  the  north  and  of  2"-00  on  the 
south  side  of  that  mountain,  a  mean  density  results  of  5 '3 16. 

*  Phil.  IV,  1856,  p.  591. 


TM'.SDULUM    OBSERVATIONS.  555 

(776  /.;  Observations  of  the  time  of  oscillation  of  a  pen- 
dulum afford  (see  art  235.)  a  direct  measure  of  the  force  by 
which  the  oscillating  mass  is  urged  vertically  downwards. 
Hence  it  follows  that  if  this  time  be  very  precisely  deter- 
mined, both  at  the  summit  and  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain  or 
elevated  table  land,  the  attraction  of  the  mass  of  such  moun- 
tain or  table  land  vertically  downwards  will  become  known. 
For  gravity  decreasing  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  dis- 
tance would  be  enfeebled  by  the  increase  of  that  distance  in 
a  proportion  which  can  be  precisely  calculated  from  the 
known  height  of  the  upper  station  ;  and  therefore,  could  the 
pendulum  be  supported  in  the  air  at  that  height,  the  increase 
of  its  time  of  oscillation,  under  those  circumstances,  would 
be  exactly  known  by  calculation.  But  being  supported  on 
a  mountain  mass,  protruding  above  the  level  surface  of  the 
terrestrial  spheroid,  the  attraction  of  that  mass  acts  on  it  in 
addition  to  the  so  diminished  force  of  general  gravitation, 
and  prevents  it  from  losing  on  the  sea-level  rate  so  much  as 
it  would  do  were  the  mountain  devoid  of  attractive  power. 
Experiments  of  this  nature  have  been  made  by  the  Italian 
astronomers  Plana  and  Carlini  on  Mont  Cenis  in  Savoy,  and 
the  result,  all  computations  executed,  have  given  4*950  for 
the  mean  density  in  question. 

(776  g.)  But  it  is  also  possible  to  descend  below,  as  well 
as  to  rise  above,  the  general  sea-level,  and  to  observe  the 
pendulum  at  great  depths  below  that  level,  as  in  deep  mines. 
It  was  shown  by  Newton*  that  the  attraction  of  a  hollow, 
spherical,  homogeneous  shell  on  a  point  however  situate 
within  it,  is  simply  nil,  i.e.  that  the  material  point  so  placed 
is  equally  attracted  by  it  in  all  directions.  Hence  by  de- 
scending below  the  surface,  we  set  ourselves  free  of  the  at- 
traction of  the  whole  spherical  shell  exterior  to  the  point  of 
observation,  and  the  remaining  attraction  is  the  same  as  that 
of  the  whole  interior  mass  collected  in  its  center.  This  may, 
or  may  not,  be  less  than  the  attraction  of  the  whole  earth  on 
a  point  at  its  surface.  It  will  be  less  if  the  earth  be  homo- 
geneous or  of  the   same   density  throughout;  for  in  that 

*   Princip.  Lib.  i.  Prop.  7a 


656  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

case  Newton  has  shown*  that  the  attractive  forces  of  the 
Avhole  sphere,  and  of  the  interior  sphere,  each  on  a  point  on 
its  own  surface,  are  to  each  other  as  their  radii.  But  if  the 
internal  portions  of  the  earth  be  more  dense  than  the  external, 
(as  they  must  be  if  the  foregoing  determinations  be  any  ap- 
proach to  truth,)  it  may  be  greater.  The  experiment  has 
been  made,  on  three  several  occasions,  by  the  present  Astro- 
nomer Royal  (Mr.  Airy).  On  the  two  first  in  the  Dolcoath 
mine  in  Cornwall  at  a  depth  of  1200  feet  —  a  clock  and 
pendulum  were  transported  alternately  to  the  bottom  and  the 
mouth  of  the  shaft.  On  both  these  occasions  the  arrangements 
were  defeated  ;  on  the  first,  by  the  accidental  combustion 
of  the  packages  of  instruments  in  mid-air  while  in  the  act  of 
raising  them  from  below,  attended  with  their  precipitation 
down  the  shaft  of  the  mine  ;  on  the  other,  by  the  subsidence 
of  a  mass  of  rock,  "  many  times  the  size  of  Westminster 
Abbey,"  during  the  experiments,  deluging  the  mine  with 
water  and  forcing  a  premature  conclusion.  The  third  at- 
tempt, (in  the  Harton  Coal  Pit,  near  South  Shields,  1200 
feet  in  depth,)  proved  perfectly  successful,  and  the  oscillations 
of  the  pendulum  below  being  compared  with  those  of  the 
clock  above,  by  the  immediate  transmission  of  the  beats  of 
the  latter  clown  the  mine  by  an  electric  wire,  the  great  diffi- 
culty (that  of  the  exact  transmission  of  time)  was  annihilated. 
The  result  of  this  experiment  was  that  a  pendulum  vibrating 
seconds  at  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  would  gain  2\  sec.  per  day 
at  its  bottom ;  and  the  final  result  (of  which  the  calculations 
have  very  recently  been  published f)  gives  6 '565  for  the 
mean  density  of  the  earth. 

(776  h.)  The  difference  between  these  several  results  is 
considerable,  and  even  the  interval  between  the  last  men- 
tioned and  the  highest  of  the  others  pretty  large:  it  is 
bridged  over  however,  so  to  speak,  and  the  interval  partly 
filled  up,  by  the  results  of  a  totally  different  class  of  experi- 
ments of  a  much  more  curious  and  artificial  nature,  which  we 
have  now  to  describe.  We  have  already  seen  (art.  234.)  that 
the  force  of  gravity  may  be  brought  directly  into  comparison 

*   Princip.  Lib.  i.  Trop.  73.  f  1>llil-  Trans.  1856,  p   897. 


THK    CAVENDISH    EXPERIMENT. 


557 


with  other  material  forces  by  using  as  an  intermedium  the 
elastic  power  of  a  spring.  What  is  true  of  gravitation  to 
the  whole  mass  of  the  earth  is  equally  so  of  gravitation  to- 
wards any  material  mass,  as  a  leaden  ball.  It  may  be 
measured  by  equilibrating  it  with  the  tension  of  a  spring; 
provided,  1st,  that  we  can  frame  a  spring  so  delicate  as  to  be 
visibly  and  measurably  affected  by  so  minute  a  force  ;  2ndly, 
that  the  force  can  be  so  applied  as  to  be  the  only  force  tend- 
ing to  bend  the  spring,  a  condition  which  implies  that  it  shall 
act  on  it,  not  vertically,  but  horizontally,  so  as  to  eliminate  the 
weight  of  the  spring,  or  at  least  prevent  its  being  mixed  up 
with  the  result ;  and,  3rdly,  that  we  shall  possess  some  in- 
dependent means  of  measuring  the  elastic  power  of  the  spring 
itself.  All  these  conditions  are  satisfied  by  the  balance  of 
torsion,  devised  by  Michell  with  a  view  to  this  enquiry,  and  ap- 
plied, after  his  death,  to  the  intended  purpose  by  Cavendish,  in 
the  celebrated  experiment  usually  cited  as  "  the  Cavendish 
Experiment."* 

(776  i.)  The  apparatus  consists  essentially  of  a  long  wooden 
rod  made  so  as  to  unite  great  strength  with  little  weight; 
carrying  at  its  extremities  two  equal  balls  A,B,  and  suspended 


in  a  horizontal  situation  by  a  wire  no  thicker  than  necessary 
securely  to  sustain  the  weight,  from  a  point  over  its  center 


•  Phil.  Trans.  1798,  469.  Cavendish  expressly  states  that  MichelPs  inven- 
tion  of  this  beautiful  instrument,  and  his  communication  of  it  to  him,  was  antece- 
dent to  the  publication  of  Coulomb**  researches. 


."558  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

of  gravity,  the  wire  being  arranged  as  in  the  figure,  so  as  to 
relieve  the  rod  of  the  weight  of  the  balls,  its  office  being 
solely  to  keep  them  apart  at  a  given  horizontal  distance.  It 
\s  evident  that  when  suspended  from  C,  and  allowed  to  take 
its  position  of  equilibrium  undisturbed  by  any  external  force, 
the  rod  will  assume  such  a  situation  that  the  wire  C  D  shall 
be  quite  devoid  of  torsion  ;  but  that  if  the  rod  A  B  be  dis- 
turbed from  this  neutral  position,  C  D  remaining  vertical,  the 
elastic  force  of  the  wire  called  into  action  by  the  torsion  so 
induced  will  tend  to  bring  it  back  to  the  point  of  departure 
by  a  force  proportional  to  the  angle  of  torsion.  When  so 
disturbed  then,  and  abandoned  to  itself,  it  will  oscillate 
backward  and  forward  in  horizontal  arcs,  the  oscillations 
being  all  performed  in  equal  times;  and  from  the  time  observed 
to  be  occupied  in  each  oscillation,  the  weights  of  the  balls 
and  that  of  the  rod  being  known,  we  are  able,  from  dynamical 
principles,  to  determine  the  motive  force  by  which  the  wire 
acts  on  the  balls,  or  the  force  of  torsion.  Suppose,  now, 
two  heavy  leaden  spheres  to  be  brought,  laterally,  up  nearly 
into  contact,  the  one  with  A,  the  other  with  B,  but  on  oppo- 
site sides  of  them,  they  will  attract  A,B,  and  their  attrac- 
tions will  conspire  in  twisting  the  wire  the  same  way;  so  that 
the  point  of  rest  will  be  changed  from  the  original  neutral 
point  to  one  in  which  the  torsion  shall  just  counterbalance 
the  attractions.  By  shifting  the  attracting  balls  alternately 
to  the  one  and  the  other  sides  of  A  B,  these  will  assume  posi- 
tions of  rest  alternately  on  opposite  sides  of  the  original 
neutral  point,  and  equidistant  from  it,  so  that  the  deviation, 
if  any,  shall  thus  become  doubled  in  its  effect  on  the  read- 
ings off  of  a  scale  marked  by  a  pointer  at  the  end  of  the  rod, 
which  may  be  observed  through  a  telescope  placed  at  a  dis- 
tance, so  that  the  approach  of  the  observer's  person  may  create 
no  disturbance. 

(776;.)  Practically,  the  observation  is  not  so  simple  as  in 
the  above  statement.  The  balls  can  hardly  ever  be  brought 
completely  to  rest;  and  the  neutral  point  has  to  be  concluded 
by  noting  the  extremes  of  the  arc  of  oscillation,  perpetually 
diminishing  bv  the   resistance  of  the  air.      And  when   the 


TITK   CAVENDISH    EXPERIMENT.  559 

attracting  balls  are  brought  into  action,  their  attraction  (act- 
ing laterally,  according  to  the  inverse  squares  of  the  distances) 
mixes  itself  with  the  force  of  torsion,  to  produce  a  compound 
law  of  force,  under  whose  influence  the  times,  velocities,  and 
arcs  have  a  different  relation  from  those  due  to  the  torsion 
alone,  and  which,  when  investigated  rigorously,  lead  to  cal- 
culations of  great  complexity.  Fortunately,  the  extreme 
minuteness  of  the  attractive  forces  dispenses  with  a  rigorous 
Bolution  of  this  problem,  and  allows  of  a  very  simple  and 
ready  approximation,  quite  exact  enough  for  the  purpose. 
But  besides  these,  a  host  of  disturbing  influences,  arising 
from  currents  of  air  induced  by  difference  of  temperature, 
has  to  be  contended  with  or  guarded  against,  so  as  to  render 
the  experiment  one  of  great  difficulty  and  full  of  niceties,  the 
mere  enumeration  of  which  here,  however,  would  lead  us  fai 
beyond  our  limits.  * 

(776  k.)  The  experiment,  as  conducted  by  Cavendish, 
afforded  as  its  final  result  5*480.  Repeated  since,  with 
greater  precautions,  by  Professor  Reich,  5*43S  was  obtained  ; 
and  still  more  recently,  by  the  late  F.  Baily,  in  a  series  of 
experiments  exhibiting  an  astonishing  amount  of  skill  and 
patience  in  overcoming  the  almost  innumerable  obstacles  to 
complete  success,  5 '660;  a  result  undoubtedly  preferable  to 
the  two  former.  Thus  the  final  result  of  the  whole  enquiry 
will  stand  as  below,  the  densities  concluded  being  arranged 
in  order  of  magnitude :  — 

Schehallien  experiment,  by  Maskelyne,  calculated  by  Playfair     D=  4-71.1 

Carlini  from  pendulum  on  Mount  Cenis  (corrected  by  Giulio)       -  4'950 

Col.  James  from  attraction  of  Arthur's  Seat  ...  5"M6 

Heich,  repetition  of  Cavendish  experiment  -  5  4S8 

Cavendish,  result  5-480,  corrected  by  Mr.  Baily's  recomputation     -  5-4i8 

Baily's  repetition  of  C;ivendish  experiment  ...  5-660 

Airy,  from  pendulum  in  Hartou  coal-pit    -  6'5l>5 

General  mean  -  -     5-44  1 1 

Mean  of  greatest  and  least     -     5G39 


•  The  reader  is  warned  to  be  on  his  guard  against  accepting  as  correct  an 
account  of  the  principle  of  the  Cavendish  experiment,  professing  to  em.iii.iK 
from  one  very  high  astronomical  authority,  and  passed  without  note  or  comment 
(and  therefore  so  far  sanctioned)  by  another,  but  which  imrulvw  a  total  miscon- 
ception of  its  true   nature  (AragO,   Lezinnt  tli  Atlronoinia  tr-.uinth-  til  annotate  iti 

K.  Capaeei,  Napoli,  1851,  p.  ■_■:>«. ) 

f  Newton,  by  one  of  his  MtOftmhing  divinations,   had  already  expressed  his 


J60  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

(776  /.)  Calculating  on  5\  as  a  result  sufficiently  approxi- 
mative and  convenient  for  memory ;  taking  the  mean  diameter 
of  the  earth,  considered  as  a  sphere,  at  7912*41  miles,  and 
the  weight  of  a  cubic  foot  of  water  at  62'3211  lbs.;  we  find 
for  its  solid  content  in  cubic  miles,  259,373  millions,  and  for 
its  weight  in  tons  of  2240  lbs.  avoird.  each,  5842  trillions  (  = 
5842  x  1018). 

opinion  that  the  nipnn  density  of  the  earth  would   be  found  to  he  betwe*i\  five 
ami  sis  thnes  that  oi  water.      (Priiic.  iii.   iO.  ) 


561 


PART  m. 

OP   SIDEREAL    ASTRONOMY. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Or  THF    FIXED    STARS. THEIR  CLASSIFICATION  BY  MAGNITUDES.  — « 

PHOTOMETRIC  SCALE  OF    MAGNITUDES. CONVENTIONAL  OR  Via* 

GAR  SCALE. PHOTOMETRIC  COMPARISON  OF  STARS. DISTRIBU- 
TION   OF    STARS   OVER    THE   HEAVENS. OF    THE    MILKY  WAY  OH 

GALAXY. — ITS  SUPPOSED  FORM  THAT  OF  A  FLAT  STRATUM  PAR- 
TIALLY SUBDIVIDED. ITS  VISIBLE  COURSE  AMONG  THE  CONSTEL- 
LATIONS.—  ITS  INTERNAL  STRUCTURE. ITS  APPARENTLY  INDE- 
FINITE EXTENT   IN    CERTAIN    DUtECTIONS. OF  THE  DISTANCE  OF 

THE  FIXED   STARS.  —  THEIR  ANNUAL   PARALLAX. PARALLACTIC 

UNIT  OF  SIDEREAL  DISTANCE.  — EFFECT  OF  PARALLAX  ANALOGOUS 
TO  THAT  OF  ABERRATION HOW  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  IT. DE- 
TECTION OF  PARALLAX  BY  MERIDIONAL  OBSERVATIONS.  —  HEN- 
DERSON'S APPLICATION  TO  a  CENTAURI.  —  BY  DIFFERENTIAL  OB- 
SERVATIONS.   DISCOVERIES    OF   BESSEL   AND  STRUVE.  —  LIST  Ob 

STARS  IN  WHICH  PARALLAX  HAS  BEEN  DETECTED. OF  THE  REAL 

MAGNITUDES    OF    THE     STARS. COMPARISON    OF     THEIR    L1GHT8 

WITH  THAT  OF  THE  SUN. 

(777.)  Besides  the  bodies  we  have  described  in  the  fore 
going  chapters,  the  heavens  present  us  with  an  innumerable 
multitude  of  other  objects,  which  are  called  generally  by  the 
name  of  stars.  Though  comprehending  individuals  differing 
from  each  other,  not  merely  in  brightness,  but  in  many  other 
essential  points,  they  all  agree  in  one  attribute,  —  a  high 
degree  of  permanence  as  to  apparent  relative  situation.  This 
has  procured  them  the  title  of  "  fixed  stars  ;  "  an  expression 
which  is  to  be  understood  in  a  comparative  and  not  an  abso- 
lute sense,  it  being  certain  that  many,  and  probable  that  ail, 
are  id  a  state  of  motion,  although  too  slow  to  be  perceptible 


I 


562  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

unless  by  means  of  very  delicate  observations,  continued 
during  a  long  series  of  years. 

(778.)  Astronomers  are  in  the  habit  of  distinguishing  the 
stars  into  classes,  according  to  their  apparent  brightness. 
These  are  termed  magnitudes.  The  brightest  stars  are  said 
to  be  of  the  first  magnitude;  those  which  fall  so  far  short 
of  the  first  degree  of  brightness  as  to  make  a  strongly  marked 
distinction  are  classed  in  the  second ;  and  so  on  down  to  the 
sixth  or  seventh,  which  comprise  the  smallest  stars  visible  to 
the  naked  eye,  in  the  clearest  and  darkest  night.  Beyond 
these,  however,  telescopes  continue  the  range  of  visibility, 
and  magnitudes  from  the  8th  down  to  the  16th  are  familiar  to 
those  who  are  in  the  practice  of  using  powerful  instruments ; 
nor  does  there  seem  the  least  reason  to  assign  a  limit  to  this 
progression ;  every  increase  in  the  dimensions  and  power  of 
instruments,  which  successive  improvements  in  optical  science 
have  attained,  having  brought  into  view  multitudes  innu- 
merable of  objects  invisible  before;  so  that,  for  any  thing 
experience  has  hitherto  taught  us,  the  number  of  the  stars 
may  be  really  infinite,  in  the  only  sense  in  which  we  can 
assign  a  meaning  to  the  word. 

(779.)  This  classification  into  magnitudes,  however,  it 
must  be  observed,  is  entirely  arbitrary.  Of  a  multitude 
of  bright  objects,  differing  probably,  intrinsically,  both  in 
size  and  in  splendour,  and  arranged  at  unequal  distances  from 
us,  one  must  of  necessity  appear  the  brightest,  one  next  below 
it,  and  so  on.  An  order  of  succession  (relative,  of  course,  to 
our  local  situation  among  them)  must  exist,  and  it  is  a  matter 
of  absolute  indifference,  where,  in  that  infinite  progression 
downwards,  from  the  one  brightest  to  the  invisible,  we  choose 
to  draw  our  lines  of  demarcation.  All  this  is  a  matter  of 
pure  convention.  Usage,  however,  has  established  such  a 
convention  ;  and  though  it  is  impossible  to  determine  exactly, 
or  a  priori,  where  one  magnitude  ends  and  the  next  begins, 
and  although  different  observers  have  differed  in  their  magni- 
tudes, yet,  on  the  whole,  astronomers  have  restricted  their 
first  magnitude  to  about  23  or  24  principal  stars ;  their 
second  to  50  or  60  next  inferior ;  their  third  to  about  200  yet 


MAGNITUDES    OF    THE    STARS.  563 

smaller,  and  so  on ;  the  numbers  inn  reining  very  rapidly  as 
we  descend  in  the  scale  of  brightness,  the  whole  number 
of  stars  already  registered  down  to  the  seventh  magnitude, 
inclusive,  amounting  to  from  12000  to  15000. 

(780.)  As  we  do  not  see  the  actual  disc  of  a  star,  but 
judge  only  of  its  brightness  by  the  total  impression  made 
upon  the  eye,  the  apparent  "  magnitude  "  of  any  star  will,  it 
is  evident,  depend,  1st,  on  the  stars  distance  from  us;  2d,  on 
the  absolute  magnitude  of  its  illuminated  surface ;  3d,  on  the 
intrinsic  brightness  of  that  surface.  Now,  as  we  know  no- 
thing, or  next  to  nothing,  of  any  of  these  data,  and  have 
every  reason  for  believing  that  each  of  them  may  differ  in 
different  individuals,  in  the  proportion  of  many  millions  to 
one,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  not  to  expect  much  satisfaction  in 
any  conclusions  we  may  draw  from  numerical  statements  of 
the  number  of  individuals  which  have  been  arranged  in  our 
artificial  classes  antecedent  to  any  general  or  definite  principle 
of  arrangement.  In  fact,  astronomers  have  not  yet  agreed 
upon  any  principle  by  which  the  magnitudes  may  be  photo- 
metrically classed  a  priori,  whether  for  example  a  scale  of 
brightnesses  decreasing  in  geometrical  progression  should  be 
adopted,  each  term  being  one  half  of  the  preceding,  or  one 
third,  or  any  other  ratio,  or  whether  it  would  not  be  prefer- 
able to  adopt  a  scale  decreasing  as  the  squares  of  the  terms 
of  an  harmonic  progression,  i.e.  according  to  the  series  1, 
¥>  v>  tV»  2T>  &c*  ^e  former  would  be  a  purely  photometric 
scale,  and  would  have  the  apparent  advantage  that  the  light 
of  a  star  of  any  magnitude  would  bear  a  fixed  proportion  to 
that  of  the  magnitude  next  above  it,  an  advantage,  however, 
merely  apparent,  as  it  is  certain,  from  many  optical  facts,  that 
the  unaided  eye  forms  very  different  judgments  of  the  pro- 
portions existing  between  bright  lights,  and  those  between 
feeble  ones.  The  latter  scale  involves  a  physical  idea,  that  of 
supposing  the  scale  of  magnitudes  to  correspond  to  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  first  magnitude  standard  star,  removed  succes- 
sively to  twice,  three  times,  &c.  its  original  or  standard 
distance.  Such  a  scale,  which  would  make  the  nominal 
macuitude  a  sort  of  index  to  the  presumable  or  average  dis- 


564  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

tance,  on  the  supposition  of  an  equality  among  the  real  lights 
of  the  stars,  would  facilitate  the  expression  of  speculative  ideas 
on  the  constitution  of  the  sidereal  heavens.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  would  at  first  sight  appear  to  make  too  small  a  differ- 
ence between  the  lights  in  the  lower  magnitudes.  For  ex- 
ample, on  this  principle  of  nomenclature,  the  light  of  a  star 
of  the  seventh  magnitude  would  be  thirty-six  49ths  of  that 
of  one  of  the  sixth,  and  of  the  tenth  81  hundredths  of  the 
ninth,  while  between  the  first  and  the  second  the  proportion 
would  be  that  of  four  to  one.  So  far,  however,  from  this 
being  really  objectionable,  it  falls  in  well  with  the  general 
tenor  of  the  optical  facts  already  alluded  to,  inasmuch  as  the 
eye  (in  the  absence  of  disturbing  causes)  does  actually  discri- 
minate with  greater  precision  between  the  relative  intensities 
of  feeble  lights  than  of  bright  ones,  so  that  the  fraction  f  § 
for  instance,  expresses  quite  as  great  a  step  downwards  (phy- 
siologically speaking)  from  the  sixth  magnitude,  as  £  does 
from  the  first.  As  the  choice,  therefore,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
lies  between  these  two  scales,  in  drawing  the  lines  of  demar- 
cation between  what  may  be  termed  the  photometrical  magni- 
tudes of  the  stars,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  adopting,  and 
recommending  others  to  adopt,  the  latter  system  in  preference 
to  the  former. 

(781.)  The  conventional  magnitudes  actually  in  use  among 
astronomers,  so  far  as  their  usage  is  consistent  with  itself, 
conforms  moreover  very  much  more  nearly  to  this  than  to  the 
geometrical  progression,  it  has  been  shown  *  by  direct  pho- 
tometric measurement  of  the  light  of  a  considerable  number 
of  stars  from  the  first  to  the  fourth  magnitude,  that  if  M  be 
the  number  expressing  the  magnitude  of  a  star  on  the  above 
system,  and  m  the  number  expressing  the  magnitude  of  the  same 
star  in  the  loose  and  irregular  language  at  present  conven- 
tionally or  rather  provisionally  adopted,  so  far  as  it  can  be  col- 
lected from  the  conflicting  authorities  of  different  observers, 
the  difference  between  these  numbers,  or  M — m.  is  the  same 
in  all  the  higher  parts  of  the  scale,  and  is  less  than  half  a  mag- 

*  See  '•  Result ■•"f  Observations  Made  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  fcc.  \i." 
p.  i'i\.     B\  i\ic  Author. 


FRACTIONAL    SUBDIVISION    OF    MAGNITUDES.  565 

nit  tide  ^0m.  414).  The  standard  star  assumed  as  the  unit  of 
magnitude  in  the  measurements  referred  to,  is  the  bright 
southern  star  u  Centauri,  a  star  somewhat  superior  to  Arcturus 
in  lustre.  If  we  take  the  distance  of  this  star  for  unity,  it 
follows  that  when  removed  to  the  distances  1*414,  2-414, 
3*414,  &c.  its  apparent  lustre  would  equal  those  of  average 
stars  of  the  1st,  2d,  3d,  &c.  magnitudes,  as  ordinarily  reckoned, 
respectively. 

(782.)  The  difference  of  lustre  between  stars  of  two  con- 
secutive magnitudes  is  so  considerable  as  to  allow  of  many 
intermediate  gradations  being  perfectly  well  distinguished. 
Hardly  any  two  stars  of  the  first  or  of  the  second  magnitude 
would  be  judged  by  an  eye  practised  in  such  comparisons  to 
be  exactly  equal  in  brightness.  Hence,  the  necessity,  if  any- 
thing like  accuracy  be  aimed  at,  of  subdividing  the  magni- 
tudes and  admitting  fractions  into  our  nomenclature  of 
brightness.  When  this  necessity  first  began  to  be  felt,  a 
simple  bisection  of  the  interval  was  recognized,  and  the  inter- 
mediate degree  of  brightness  was  thus  designated,  viz.  1.2  m, 
2.3  m,  and  so  on.  At  present  it  is  not  unfrequent  to  find  the 
interval  trisected  thus:  1  m,  1.2m,  2.1m,  2m,  &c.  where 
the  expression  1.2  m  denotes  a  magnitude  intermediate  be- 
tween the  first  and  second,  but  nearer  1  than  2 ;  while  2.1  m 
designates  a  magnitude  also  intermediate,  but  nearer  2  than 
1.  This  may  suffice  for  common  parlance,  but  as  this  depart- 
ment of  astronomy  progresses  towards  exactness,  a  decimal 
subdivision  will  of  necessity  supersede  these  rude  forms  of 
expression,  and  the  magnitude  will  be  expressed  by  an  integer 
number  followed  by  a  decimal  fraction;  as  for  instance,  2.51 
which  expresses  the  magnitude  of  7  Geminorum  on  the 
vulgar  or  conventional  scale  of  magnitudes,  by  which  we  at 
once  perceive  that  its  place  is  almost  exactly  half  way 
between  the  2d  and  3d  average  magnitudes,  and  that  its 
light  is  to  that  of  an  average  first  magnitude  star  in  that  scale 
(of  which  a  Ononis  in  its  usual  or  normal  state  *  may  be 
taken  as  a  typical  specimen)  as  1 a :  (2*51 )  a,  and  to  that  of  « 

"  In  the  interval  from  18:'f"  to  1889  this  «tar  underwent  conwicrnM.e  ard  re- 
markable fluctuations  of  brightness. 


566  OUTLINES   OF   ASTBONOMT. 

Centauri  as  1 2:  (2*924)-,  making  its  place  in  the  photometric 
scale  (so  defined)  2*924.  Lists  of  stars  northern  and  southern, 
comprehending  those  of  the  vulgar  first,  second,  and  third 
magnitudes,  with  their  magnitudes  decimally  expressed  in 
both  systems,  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  this  work.  The 
light  of  a  star  of  the  sixth  magnitude  may  be  roughly  stated 
as  about  the  hundredth  part  of  one  of  the  first.  Sirius  would 
make  between  three  and  four  hundred  stars  of  that  magnitude. 
(783.)  The  exact  photometrical  determination  of  the  com- 
parative intensities  of  light  of  the  stars  is  attended  with  many 
and  great  difficulties,  arising  partly  from  their  differences  of 
colour ;  partly  from  the  circumstance  that  no  invariable 
standard  of  artificial  light  has  yet  been  discovered ;  partly 
from  the  physiological  cause  above  alluded  to,  by  which  the 
eye  is  incapacitated  from  judging  correctly  of  the  proportion 
of  two  lights,  and  can  only  decide  (and  that  with  not  very 
great  precision)  as  to  their  equality  or  inequality  ;  and  partly 
from  other  physiological  causes.  The  least  objectionable 
method  hitherto  proposed  would  appear  to  be  the  following. 
A  natural  standard  of  comparison  is  in  the  first  instance 
selected,  brighter  than  any  of  the  stars,  so  as  to  allow  of 
being  equalized  with  any  of  them  by  a  reduction  of  its  light 
optically  effected,  and  at  the  same  time  either  invariable,  or 
at  least  only  so  variable  that  its  changes  can  be  exactly  cal- 
culated and  reduced  to  numerical  estimation.  Such  a 
standard  is  offered  by  the  planet  Jupiter,  which,  being  much 
brighter  than  any  star,  subject  to  no  phases,  and  variable  in 
light  only  by  the  variation  of  its  distance  from  the  sun,  and 
which  moreover  comes  in  succession  above  the  horizon  at  a 
convenient  altitude  simultaneously  with  all  the  fixed  stars, 
and  in  the  absence  of  the  moon,  twilight,  and  other  disturb- 
ing causes  (which  fatally  affect  all  observations  of  this  nature), 
combines  all  the  requisite  conditions.  Let  us  suppose,  now, 
that  Jupiter  being  at  A  and  the  star  to  be  compared  with  it 
at  B,  a  glass  prism  C  is  so  placed  that  the  light  of  the 
planet  deflected  by  total  internal  rejlexion  at  its  base,  shall 
emerge  parallel  to  B  E  the  direction  of  the  star's  visual  ray. 
After  reflexion,  let  it  be  received  on  a  lens  D,  in  whose  focus 


PHOTOMETRIC    SCALE    OF    MAGNITUDES. 


567 


F,  it  w  ill  form  a  small  bright  star-like  image  capable  of  being 
viewed  by  an  eye  placed  at  E,  so  far  out  of  the  axis  of  the  cone 
of  diverging  rays  as  to  admit  of  seeing  at  the  kame  time,  and 


with  the  same  eye,  and  so  comparing,  this  image  with  the 
star  seen  directly.  By  bringing  the  eye  nearer  to  or  further 
from  the  focus  F,  the  apparent  brightness  of  the  focal  point 
will  be  varied  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  dis- 
tance E  F,  and  therefore  may  be  equalized,  as  well  as  the  eye 
can  judge  of  such  equalities,  with  the  star.  If  this  be  done 
for  two  stars  several  times  alternately,  and  a  mean  of  the 
results  taken,  by  measuring  E  F,  their  relative  brightness 
will  be  obtained :  that  of  Jupiter,  the  temporary  standard  of 
comparison,  being  altogether  eliminated  from  the  result. 

(784.)  A  moderate  number  of  well  selected  stars  being  thus 
photometrically  determined  by  repeated  and  careful  measure- 
ments, so  as  to  afford  an  ascertained  and  graduated  scale  of 
brightness  among  the  stars  themselves,  the  intermediate  steps 
or  grades  of  magnitude  may  be  filled  up,  by  inserting  between 
them,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  eye,  other  stars, 
forming  an  ascending  or  descending  sequence,  each  member 
of  such  a  sequence  being  brighter  than  that  below,  and  less 
bright  than  that  above  it;  and  thus  at  length,  a  scale  of  nume- 
rical magnitudes  will  become  established,  complete  in  all  its 
members,  from  Sirius,  the  brightest  of  the  stars,  down  to  the 
least  visible  magnitude.*     It  were  much  to  be  wished  that 

*  For  the  method  of  combining  and  treating  such  sequences,  where  accumu- 
lated in  considerable  numbers,  so  as  to  eliminate  from  their  results  the  influence 
of  eironeous  judgment,  atmospheric  circumstances.  &c.,  which  often  give  rise  to 
Contradictory  arrangement)  in  the  order  of  stars  differing  hut  little  in  mapmt  inv, 


568  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

this  branch  of  astronomy,  which  at  present  can  hardly  be  said 
to  be  advanced  beyond  its  infancy,  were  perseveringly  and  sys- 
tematically cultivated.  It  is  by  no  means  a  subject  of  mere 
barren  curiosity,  as  will  abundantly  appear  when  we  come  to 
speak  of  the  phenomena  of  variable  stars;  and  being  moreover 
one  in  which  amateurs  of  the  science  may  easily  chalk  out  for 
themselves  a  useful  and  available  path,  may  naturally  be  ex- 
pected to  receive  large  and  interesting  accessions  at  their  hands 

(785.)  If  the  comparison  of  the  apparent  magnitudes  of  trie 
stars  with  their  numbers  leads  to  no  immediately  obvious  con- 
clusion, it  is  otherwise  when  we  view  them  in  connection  with 
their  local  distribution  over  the  heavens.  If  indeed  we  confine 
ourselves  to  the  three  or  four  brightest  classes,  we  shall  find 
them  distributed  with  a  considerable  approach  to  impartiality 
over  the  sphere  :  a  marked  preference  however  being  observ- 
able, especially  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  to  a  zone  or  belt, 
following  the  direction  of  a  great  circle  passing  through  t 
Orionis  and  a.  Crucis.  But  if  we  take  in  the  whole  amount 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  we  shall  perceive  a  great  increase  of 
number  as  we  approach  the  borders  of  the  Milky  Way.  And 
when  we  come  to  telescopic  magnitudes,  we  find  then* 
crowded  beyond  imagination,  along  the  extent  of  that  circle, 
and  of  the  branches  which  it  sends  off  from  it ;  so  that  in  fact 
its  whole  light  is  composed  of  nothing  but  stars  of  every  mag- 
nitude, from  such  as  are  visible  to  the  naked  eye  down  to  the 
smallest  point  of  light  perceptible  with  the  best  telescopes. 

(786.)  These  phenomena  agree  with  the  supposition  that 
the  stars  of  our  firmament,  instead  of  being  scattered  in  all 
directions  indifferently  through  space,  form  a  stratum  of  which 
the  thickness  is  small,  in  comparison  with  its  length  and 
breadth  ;  and  in  which  the  earth  occupies  a  place  somewhere 
about  the  middle  of  its  thickness,  and  near  the  point  where  it 
subdivides  into  two  principal  laminae,  inclined  at  a  small  angle 
to  each  other  (art.  302.).     For  it  is  certain  that,  to  an  eye*.<> 

as  well  as  for  an  a<'cuuut  of  a  series  of  photometric  comparisons  (ill  which,  how- 
ever, not  Jupiter,  but  the  moon,  was  used  as  an  intermediate  standard),  see  the 
work  above  riled,  note  on  p.  35:5.  (Results  of  Observations,  &c.)  Prof  Heis 
of  Monster  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  only  observer  who  has  adopted  and 
extended  the  method  of  sequences  there  employed. 


GENERAL  FOKM  OF  THE  GALAXY.         669 

bituated,  the  apparent  density  of  the  stars,  supposing  them 
pretty  equally  scattered  through  the  space  they  occupy,  would 
be  least  in  a  direction  of  the  visual  ray  (as  S  A),  perpendi- 
cular to  the  lamina,  and  greatest  in  that  of  its  breadth,  as 
SB,  S  C,  SD;  increasing  rapidly  in  passing  from  one  to  the 
other  direction,  just  as  we  see  a  slight  haze  in  the  atmosphere 
thickening  into  a  decided  fog  bank  near  the  horizon,  by  the 
rapid  increase  of  the  mere  length  of  the  visual  ray.  Such  is 
the  view  of  the  construction  of  the  starry  firmament  taken  by 
Sir  William  Herschel,  whose  powerful  telescopes  first  effected 
a  complete  analysis  of  this  wonderful  zone,  and  demonstrated 
the  fact  of  its  entirely  consisting  of  stars.  *     So  crowded  are 


they  in  some  parts  of  it,  that  by  counting  the  stars  in  a  single 
field  of  his  telescope,  he  was  led  to  conclude  that  50000  had 
} Kissed  under  his  review  in  a  zone  two  degrees  in  breadth, 
during  a  single  hour's  observation.  In  that  part  of  the  milky 
way  which  is  situated  in  10A  30m  E,  A  and  between  the 
147th  and  150th  degree  of  NPD,  upwards  of  5000  stars 
have  been  reckoned  to  exist  in  a  square  degree.  The  im- 
mense distances  at  which  the  remoter  regions  must  be  situated 
will  sufficiently  account  for  the  vast  predominance  of  small 
magnitudes  which  are  observed  in  it. 

(787.)  The  course  of  the  Milky  Way  as  traced  through  the 
heavens  by  the  unaided  eye,  neglecting  occasional  deviations 
and  following  the  line  of  its  greatest  brightness  as  well  as  its 
varying  breadth  and  intensity  will  permit,  conforms  as  nearly 
as  the  indefiniteness  of  its  boundary  will  allow  it  to  be  fixed, 
to  that  of  a  great  circle  inclined  at  an  angle  of  about  63°  to 
the  equinoctial,  and  cutting  that  circle  in  li  A  6  k  47  m  and 

•  'lliomas  Wright  of  Durham  (Theory  of  the  Universe,  London,  1750)  ap- 
pears so  early  as  17:54  to  have  entertained  the  same  general  view  as  to  the  con- 
stitution of  the  Milky  Way  and  starry  firmament,  founded,  quite  in  the  spirit  of 
just  astronomical  speculation  on  a  partial  resolution  of  a  portion  of  it  with  n 
"one-foot  reflector"  (a  reflector  one  foot  in  focal  length).  See  an  account  of 
this  rare  work  by  Mr.  de  Morgan  in  Phil.  Mag.  Sir.  3.  xxxii.  p.  941.  et  se<j. 


570  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

18/t  47m,  so  that  its  northern  and  southern  pcles  respectively 
are  situated  in  R.  A.  12/*  47m  NPD  63°  and  R.  A.  0A  47 m 
N  P  D  117°.  Throughout  the  region  where  it  is  so  remark- 
ably subdivided  (art.  186.),  this  great  circle  holds  an  inter- 
mediate situation  between  the  two  great  streams ;  with  a 
nearer  approximation  however  to  the  brighter  and  continu- 
ous stream,  than  to  the  fainter  and  interrupted  one.  If  we 
trace  its  course  in  order  of  right  ascension,  we  find  it  travers- 
ing the  constellation  Cassiopeia,  its  brightest  part  passing 
about  two  degrees  to  the  north  of  the  star  &  of  that  constel- 
lation, i.  e.  in  about  62°  of  north  declination,  or  28°  NPD. 
Passing  thence  between  y  and  s  Cassiopeiae  it  sends  off  a 
branch  to  the  south-preceding  side,  towards  a  Persei,  very 
conspicuous  as  far  as  that  star,  prolonged  faintly  towards 
s  of  the  same  constellation,  and  possibly  traceable  towards 
the  Hyades  and  Pleiades  as  remote  outliers.  The  main 
stream  however  (which  is  here  very  faint),  passes  on  through 
Auriga,  over  the  three  remarkable  stars,  s,  f,  rj,  of  that  con- 
stellation called  the  Hosdi,  preceding  Capella,  between  the 
feet  of  Gemini  and  the  horns  of  the  Bull  (where  it  inter- 
sects the  ecliptic  nearly  in  the  Solstitial  Colure)  and  thence 
over  the  club  of  Orion  to  the  neck  of  Monoceros,  inter- 
secting the  equinoctial  in  R.  A.  6  h  54m.  Up  to  this  point, 
from  the  offset  in  Perseus,  its  light  is  feeble  and  indefinite, 
but  thenceforward  it  receives  a  gradual  accession  of  bright- 
ness, and  where  it  passes  through  the  shoulder  of  Monoceros 
and  over  the  head  of  Canis  Major  it  presents  a  broad, 
moderately  bright,  very  uniform,  and  to  the  naked  eye,  star- 
less stream  up  to  the  point  where  it  enters  the  prow  of  the 
ship  Argo,  nearly  on  the  southern  tropic*  Here  it  again 
subdivides  (about  the  star  mPuppis),  sending  off  a  narrow  and 
winding  branch  on  the  preceding  side  as  far  as  y  Argus,  where 
it  terminates  abruptly.  The  main  stream  pursues  its  south- 
ward course  to  the  123d  parallel  of  NPD,  where  it  diffuses 

*  In  reading  lliis  description  a  celestial  globe  will  be  a  necessary  companion. 
It  ma}-  be  thought  needless  to  detail  the  course  of  the  Milky  Way  verbally,  since 
it  is  mapped  down  on  all  celestial  charts  and  globes.  But  in  the  generality  of* 
them,  indeed  i:i  all  which  have  come  to  our  knowledge,  this  is  done  so  very 
loosely  and  incorrectly,  as  by  no  means  to  dispense  with  a  verbal  description. 


COURSE  OF  THE  VIA  LACTEA  TRACED.      571 

itself  broadly  and  again  subdivides,  opening  out  into  a  wide 
fan-like  expanse,  nearly  20°  in  breadth  formed  of  interlacing 
branches,  all  which  terminate  abruptly,  in  a  line  drawn  nearly 
through  X  and  7  Argils. 

(788.)  At  this  place  the  continuity  of  the  Milky  Way  is 
interrupted  by  a  wide  gap,  and  where  it  recommences  on 
the  opposite  side  it  is  by  a  somewhat  similar  fan- shaped 
assemblage  of  branches  which  converge  upon  the  bright  star 
77  Argfis.  Thence  it  crosses  the  hind  feet  of  the  Centaur, 
forming  a  curious  and  sharply  defined  semicircular  concavity 
of  small  radius,  and  enters  the  Cross  by  a  very  bright  neck  or 
isthmus  of  not  more  than  3  or  4  degrees  in  breadth,  being 
the  narrowest  portion  of  the  Milky  Way.  After  this  it  imme- 
diately expands  into  a  broad  and  bright  mass,  enclosing  the 
stars  a.  and  (S  Crucis,  and  /3  Centauri,  and  extending  almost 
up  to  a  of  the  latter  constellation.  In  the  midst  of  this 
bright  mass,  surrounded  by  it  on  all  sides,  and  occupying 
about  half  its  breadth,  occurs  a  singular  dark  pear-shaped 
vacancy,  so  conspicuous  and  remarkable  as  to  attract  the 
notice  of  the  most  superficial  gazer,  and  to  have  acquired 
among  the  early  southern  navigators  the  uncouth  but  ex- 
pressive appellation  of  the  coal-sack.  In  this  vacancy  which 
is  about  8°  in  length,  and  5°  broad,  only  one  very  small  stai 
visible  to  the  naked  eye  occurs,  though  it  is  far  from  devoid 
of  telescopic  stars,  so  that  its  striking  blackness  is  simply  due 
to  the  effect  of  contrast  with  the  brilliant  ground  with  which 
it  is  on  all  sides  surrounded.  This  is  the  place  of  nearest 
approach  of  the  Milky  Way  to  the  South  Pole.  Throughout 
all  this  region  its  brightness  is  very  striking,  and  when  com- 
pared with  that  of  its  more  northern  course  already  traced, 
conveys  strongly  the  impression  of  greater  proximity,  and 
would  almost  lead  to  a  belief  that  our  situation  as  spectators 
is  separated  on  all  sides  by  a  considerable  interval  from  the 
dense  body  of  stare  composing  the  Galaxy,  which  in  this  view 
of  the  subject  would  come  to  be  considered  as  a  flat  ring  or 
some  other  reentering  form  of  immense  and  irregular  breadth 
and  thickness,  within  which  we  are  excentrically  situated, 
nearer  to  the  southern  than  to  the  northern  part  of  its  circuit. 


572  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(789.)  At  a  Centauri,  the  Milky  Way  again  subdivides41, 
sending  off  a  great  branch  of  nearly  half  its  breadth,  but 
which  thins  off  rapidly,  at  an  angle  of  about  20°  with 
its  general  direction,  towards  the  preceding  side,  to  77  and  d 
Lupi,  beyond  which  it  loses  itself  in  a  narrow  and  faint 
streamlet.  The  main  stream  passes  on  increasing  in  breadth 
to  7  Norma?,  where  it  makes  an  abrupt  elbow  and  again  sub- 
divides into  one  principal  and  continuous  stream  of  very 
irregular  breadth  and  brightness  on  the  following  side,  and  a 
complicated  system  of  interlaced  streaks  and  masses  on  the 
preceding,  which  covers  the  tail  of  Scorpio,  and  terminates  in 
a  \ast  and  faint  effusion  over  the  whole  extensive  region 
occupied  by  the  preceding  leg  of  Ophiuchus,  extending  north- 
wards to  the  parallel  of  103°  NPD,  beyond  which  it  cannot 
be  traced ;  a  wide  interval  of  14°,  free  from  all  appearance 
of  nebulous  light,  separating  it  from  the  great  branch  on  the 
north  side  of  the  equinoctial  of  which  it  is  usually  repre- 
sented as  a  continuation. 

(790.)  Returning  to  the  point  of  separation  of  this  great 
branch  from  the  main  stream,  let  us  now  pursue  the  course  of 
the  latter.  Making  an  abrupt  bend  to  the  following  side,  it 
passes  over  the  stars  1  Arte,  0  and  1  Scorpii,  and  7  Tubi  to 
7  Sagittarii,  where  it  suddenly  collects  into  a  vivid  oval  mass 
about  6°  in  length  and  4°  in  breadth,  so  excessively  rich  in 
stars  that  a  very  moderate  calculation  makes  their  number 
exceed  100,000.  Northward  of  this  mass,  this  stream  crosses 
the  ecliptic  in  longitude  about  276°,  and  proceeding  along  the 
bow  of  Sagittarius  into  Antinous  has  its  course  rippled  by 
three  deep  concavities,  separated  from  each  other  by  remark- 
able protuberances,  of  which  the  larger  and  brighter  (situated 
between  Flamsteed's  stars  3  and  6  Aquilae)  forms  the  most 
conspicuous  patch  in  the  southern  portion  of  the  Milky  Way 
visible  in  our  latitudes. 

(791.)  Crossing  the  equinoctial  at  the  19th  hour  of  right 
ascension,  it  next  runs  in  an  irregular,  patchy,  and  winding 
stream  through  Aquila,  Sagitta  and  Vulpecula  up  to  Cygnus ; 

•  All  the  maps  and  globes  place  this  subdivision  at  P  Centauri,  but  erro- 
neously. 


COURSE  OF'  THE  VIA  LACTEA  TRACED.      573 

at  s  of  which  constellation  its  continuity  is  interrupted,  and  a 
very  confused  and  irregular  region  commences,  marked  by  a 
broad  dark  vacuity,  not  unlike  the  southern  "  coal-sack,"  occu- 
pying the  space  between  s,  a,  and  7  Cygni,  which  serves  as  a 
kind  of  center  for  the  divergence  of  three  great  streams ;  one, 
which  we  have  already  traced ;  a  second,  the  continuation  of 
the  first  (across  the  interval)  from  a  northward,  between  La- 
certa  and  the  head  of  Cepheus  to  the  point  in  Cassiopeia  whence 
we  set  out,  and  a  third  branching  off  from  7  Cygni,  very  vivid 
and  conspicuous,  running  off  in  a  southern  direction  through 
#  Cygni,  and  s  Aquilae  almost  to  the  equinoctial,  where  it 
loses  itself  in  a  region  thinly  sprinkled  with  stars,  where  in 
some  maps  the  modern  constellation  Taurus  Poniatovski  is 
placed.  This  is  the  branch  which,  if  continued  across  the 
equinoctial,  might  be  supposed  to  unite  with  the  great  south- 
ern effusion  in  Ophiuchus  already  noticed  (art.  789.).  A 
considerable  offset,  cr  protuberant  appendage,  is  also  thrown 
off  by  the  northern  stream  from  the  head  of  Cepheus  directly 
towards  the  pole,  occupying  the  greater  part  of  the  quartile 
formed  by  a,  /3,  t,  and  8  of  that  constellation. 

(792.)  We  have  been  somewhat  circumstantial  in  de 
scribing  the  course  and  principal  features  of  the  Via  Lactea, 
not  only  because  there  does  not  occur  any  where  (so  far  as 
we  know)  any  correct  account  of  it,  but  chiefly  by  reason  of 
its  high  interest  in  sidereal  astronomy,  and  that  the  reader 
may  perceive  how  very  difficult  it  must  necessarily  be  to  form 
any  just  conception  of  the  real,  solid  form,  as  it  exists  in 
space,  of  an  object  so  complicated,  and  which  we  see  from  a 
point  of  view  so  unfavourable.  The  difficulty  is  of  the  same 
kind  which  we  experience  when  we  set  ourselves  to  conceive 
the  real  shape  of  an  auroral  arch  or  of  the  clouds,  but  far 
greater  in  degree,  because  we  know  the  laws  which  regulate 
the  formation  of  the  latter,  and  limit  them  to  certain  con- 
ditions of  altitude  —  because  their  motion  presents  them  to  ua 
in  various  aspects,  but  chiefly  because  we  contemplate  them 
from  a  station  considerably  below  their  general  plane,  so  as  to 
allow  of  our  mapping  out  some  kind  of  ground-plan  of  their 
shape.      All  these  aids  arc  wanting  when  we  attempt  to  map 


574  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

and  model  out  the  Galaxy,  and  beyond  the  obvious  conclusion 
that  its  form  must  be,  generally  speaking,^ t,  and  of  a  thick- 
ness small  in  comparison  with  its  area  in  length  and  breadth, 
the  laws  of  perspective  afford  us  little  further  assistance  in  the 
inquiry.  Probability  may,  it  is  true,  here  and  there  en- 
lighten us  as  to  certain  features.  Thus  when  we  see,  as  in 
the  coal-sack,  a  sharply  denned  oval  space  free  from  stars, 
insulated  in  the  midst  of  a  uniform  band  of  not  much  more 
than  twice  its  breadth,  it  would  seem  much  less  probable  that 
a  conical  or  tubular  hollow  traverses  the  whole  of  a  starry 
stratum,  continuously  extended  from  the  eye  outwards,  than 
that  a  distant  mass  of  comparatively  moderate  thickness 
should  be  simply  perforated  from  side  to  side,  or  that  an  oval 
vacuity  should  be  seen  foreshortened  in  a  distant  foreshortened 
area,  not  really  exceeding  two  or  three  times  its  own  breadth. 
Neither  can  we  without  obvious  improbability  refuse  to 
admit  that  the  long  lateral  offsets  which  at  so  many  places 
quit  the  main  stream  and  run  out  to  great  distances,  are 
either  planes  seen  edgeways,  or  the  convexities  of  curved 
surfaces  viewed  tangentially,  rather  than  cylindrical  or  co- 
lumnar excrescences  bristling  up  obliquely  from  the  general 
level.  And  in  the  same  spirit  of  probable  surmise  we  may 
account  for  the  intricate  reticulations  above  described  as 
existing  in  the  region  of  Scorpio,  rather  by  the  accidental 
crossing  of  streaks  thus  originating,  at  very  different  distances, 
or  by  a  cellular  structure  of  the  mass,  than  by  real  inter- 
sections. Those  cirrous  clouds  which  are  often  seen  in  windy 
weather,  convey  no  unapt  impression  either  of  the  kind  ot 
appearance  in  question,  or  of  the  structure  it  suggests.  It 
is  to  other  indications  however,  and  chiefly  to  the  telescopic 
examination  of  its  intimate  constitution,  and  to  the  law  ot 
the  distribution  of  stars,  not  only  within  its  bosom,  but 
generally  over  the  heavens,  that  we  must  look  for  more 
definite  knowledge  respecting  its  true  form  and  extent. 

(793.)  It  is  on  observations  of  this  latter  class,  and  not  on 
merely  speculative  or  conjectural  views,  that  the  generalization 
in  Art.  786.,  which  refers  the  phenomena  of  the  starry  fir- 
mament to  the  system  of  the  Galaxy  as  their  embodying  fact. 


LAW    OF    DISTRIBUTION    OF    TI1E    STARS.  575 

is  brought  to  depend.  The  process  ot*  "gauging  "  the  heavens 
was  devised  by  Sir  W.  Herschel  for  this  purpose.  It  con- 
sisted in  simply  counting  the  stars  of  all  magnitudes  which 
occur  in  single  fields  of  view,  of  15'  in  diameter,  visible 
through  a  reflecting  telescope  of  18  inches  aperture,  and  20 
feet  focal  length,  with  a  magnifying  power  of  180°:  the 
points  of  observation  being  very  numerous  and  taken  in- 
discriminately in  every  part  of  the  surface  of  the  sphere 
visible  in  our  latitudes.  On  a  comparison  of  many  hundred 
such  "gauges"  or  local  enumerations  it  appears  that  the 
density  of  star  lighjt  (or  the  number  of  stars  existing  on  an 
average  of  several  such  enumerations  in  any  one  immediate 
neighbourhood)  is  least  in  the  pole  of  the  Galactic  circle*, 
and  increases  on  all  sides,  with  the  Galactic  polar  distance 
(and  that  nearly  equally  in  all  directions)  down  to  the  Milky 
Way  itself,  where  it  attains  its  maximum.  The  progressive 
rate  of  increase  in  proceeding  from  the  pole  is  at  first  slow, 
but  becomes  more  and  more  rapid  as  we  approach  the  plane 
of  that  circle  according  to  a  law  of  which  the  following 
numbers,  deduced  by  M.  Struve  from  a  careful  analysis  of 
all  the  gauges  in  question,  will  afford   a  correct  idea. 

/-i     ••    j.  xt    iL  r>  i       t-w-  .  Average  Number  of  Stars  in  a 

vjalactict  North  Polar  Distance.  c-  ii  ■-    •     rv 

'  rield  lo    in  Diameter. 

0°  4-15 

15°  4-68 

30°  6  52 

45°  10-36 

60°  17-68 

75°  30-30 

90°  122-00 

From  which  it  appears  that  the  mean  density  of  the  stars  in  tne 
galactic  circle  exceeds  in  a  ratio  of  very  nearly  30  to  1  that 

*  From  7aAo,  7oA<uctoi,  milk  ;  meaning  the  great  circle  spoken  of  in 
Ali.  7S7.,  to  which  tlie  course  of  the  Via  l.acua  most  nearly  conforms. 
This  circle  is  to  sidereal  what  the  invariable  ecliptic  is  to  planetary  astronomy  — 
a  plane  of  ultimate  reference,  the  ground-plane  of  the  si'Jcreal  system. 

f  Etudes  d'Astronomie  Stellaire,  p.  71.  .M.  Struve  maintains  the  Galactic 
circle  to  be  a  small,  not  a  great,  circle  of  the  sphere.  The  appeal  is  to  t'te  eye 
tight      I  retain  my  own  conviction. 


.576 


OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 


in  its  pole,  and  in  a  proportion  of  more  than  4  to  1  that  in  a 
direction  15°  inclined  to  its  plane. 

(794.)  These  numbers  fully  bear  out  the  statement  in 
Art.  786.  and  even  draw  closer  the  resemblance  by  which 
that  statement  is  there  illustrated.  For  the  rapidly  in- 
creasing density  of  a  fog-bank  as  the  visual  ray  is  depressed 
towards  the  plane  of  the  horizon  is  a  consequence  not  only  of 
the  mere  increase  in  length  of  the  foggy  space  traversed,  but 
also  of  an  actual  increase  of  density  in  the  fog  itself  in  its 
lower  strata.  Now  this  very  conclusion  follows  from  a  com- 
parison inter  se  of  the  numbers  above  set  down,  as  M.  Struve 
has  clearly  shown  from  a  mathematical  analysis  of  the  empirical 
formula,  which  faithfully  represents  their  law  of  progression, 
and  of  which  he  states  the  result  in  the  following  table,  ex- 
pressing the  densities  of  the  stars  at  the  respective  distances, 
1,  2,  3,  &c,  from  the  galactic  plane,  taking  the  mean  density 
of  the  stars  in  that  plane  itself  for  unity. 


Distances  from  the 

Density  of 

Distances  from  the 

Density  of 

Galactic  Plane. 

Stars. 

Galactic  Plane. 

Stars. 

o-oo 

1O0000 

0-50 

0-08646 

0-05 

0  48568 

0-60 

0  05510 

0-10 

0-83288 

0-70 

0-03079 

0*20 

0-23895 

0-80 

001414 

0-30 

01 7980 

0-866 

0-00532 

040 

0-13021 

The  unit  of  distance,  of  which  the  first  column  of  this  table 
expresses  fractional  parts,  is  the  distance  at  which  such  a 
telescope  is  capable  of  rendering  just  visible  a  star  of  average 
magnitude,  or,  as  it  is  termed,  its  space-penetrating  power. 
As  we  ascend  therefore  from  the  galactic  plane  into  this 
kind  of  stellar  atmosphere,  we  perceive  that  the  density  of 
its  parallel  strata  decreases  with  great  rapidity.  At  an 
altitude  above  that  plane  equal  to  only  one-twentieth  of  the 
telescopic  limit,  it  has  already  diminished  to  one-half,  and  at  an 
altitude  of  0*866,  to  hardly  more  than  one-two-hundredth  of 
its  amount  in  that  plane.  So  far  as  we  can  perceive  there  is 
no  flaw  in  this  reasoning,  if  only  it  be  granted,  1st,  that  the  level 
planes  are  continuous,  and  of  equal  density  throughout;  and, 
2dly,  that  or  absolute  and  definite  limit  is  set  to  telescopic  vision, 


LAW    OF    DISTRIBUTION    OF    THE    STARS.  577 

beyond  which,  if  stars  exist,  they  elude  our  sight,  and  are  to  us 
as  if  they  existed  not :  a  postulate  whose  probability  the  reader 
will  be  in  a  better  condition  to  estimate,  when  in.  possession 
of  some  other  particulars  respecting  the  constitution  of  the 
Galaxy  to  be  described  presently. 

(795.)  A  similar  course  of  observation  followed  out  in  the 
southern  hemisphere,  leads  independently  to  the  same  con- 
clusion as  to  the  law  of  the  visible  distribution  of  stars  over 
the  southern  galactic  hemisphere,  or  that  half  of  the  celestial 
surface  which  has  the  south  galactic  pole  for  its  center.  A 
system  of  gauges,  extending  over  the  whole  surface  of  that 
hemisphere  taken  with  the  same  telescope,  field  of  view  and 
magnifying  power  employed  in  Sir  William  Herschel'a 
gauges,  has  afforded  the  average  numbers  of  stars  per  field 
of  15'  in  diameter,  within  the  areas  of  zones  encircling  that 
pole  at  intervals  of  1 5°,  set  down  in  the  following  table. 


Zones  of  Galactic  South 
Polar  Distance. 

Average 
pei 

Number  of  Stars 
r  Field  of  15'. 

0°  to  15° 

6-05 

15  to  30 

6-62 

30  to  45 

9-08 

45  to  60 

13-49 

60  to  75 

26-29 

75  to  90 

59-06 

(796.)  These  numbers  are  not  directly  comparable  with  those 
of  M.  Struve,  given  in  Art.  793,  because  the  latter  correspond 
to  the  limiting  polar  distances,  while  these  are  the  averages 
for  the  included  zones.  That  eminent  astronomer,  however, 
has  given  a  table  of  the  average  gauges  appropriate  to  each 
degree  of  north  galactic  polar  distance*,  from  which  it  is  easy 
to  calculate  averages  for  the  whole  extent  of  each  zone. 
How  near  a  parallel  the  results  of  this  calculation  for  the 
northern  hemisphere  exhibit  with  those  above  stated  for 
the  southern,  will  be  seen  by  the  following  table. 

•    fciuues   d'Astronoinie  Stcllaliv,  p.  34. 
P  P 


578  OUTLINES   OY    ASTRONOMY. 

■w            c  /-  i  •  .■     vt     a  Average  Number  of  Stars 

Zones  ox  Galactic  North  7.-  u     c  ■  n  e 

u  -      T4-  per  l-ield  of  15'  from 

Poiar  Distance.  M.  Strut's  Table. 

0°t0  15°  4-32 

15   to  30  5-42 

30  to  45  8-21 

45   to  60  13-61 

60   to  75  24-09 

75  to  90  53-43 

It  would  appear  from  this  that,  with  an  almost  exactly 
similar  law  of  apparent  density  in  the  two  hemispheres,  the 
southern  were  somewhat  richer  in  stars  than  the  northern, 
which  may,  and  not  improbably  does  arise,  from  our  situa- 
tion not  being  precisely  in  the  middle  of  its  thickness,  but 
somewhat  nearer  to  its  northern  surface. 

(797.)  When  examined  with  powerful  telescopes,  the  con- 
stitution of  this  wonderful  zone  is  found  to  be  no  less  various 
than  its  aspect  to  the  naked  eye  is  irregular.  In  some  regions 
the  stars  of  which  it  is  wholly  composed  are  scattered  with 
remarkable  uniformity  over  immense  tracts,  while  in  others 
the  irregularity  of  their  distribution  is  quite  as  striking,  ex- 
hibiting a  rapid  succession  of  closely  clustering  rich  patches 
separated  by  comparatively  poor  intervals,  and  indeed  in  some 
instances  by  spaces  absolutely  dark  and  completely  void  of  any 
star,  even  of  the  smallest  telescopic  magnitude.  In  some 
places  not  more  than  40  or  50  stars  on  an  average  occur  in  a 
"  gauge"  field  of  1.5',  while  in  others  a  similar  average  gives  a 
result  of  400  or  500.  Nor  is  less  variety  observable  in  the 
character  of  its  different  regions  in  respect  of  the  magnitudes 
of  the  stars  they  exhibit,  and  the  proportional  numbers  of 
the  larger  and  smaller  magnitudes  associated  together,  than 
in  respect  of  their  aggregate  numbers.  In  some,  for  instance, 
extremely  minute  stars,  though  never  altogether  wanting, 
occur  in  numbers  so  moderate  as  to  lead  us  irresistibly  to  the 
conclusion  that  in  these  regions  we  see  fairly  through  the 
starry  stratum,  since  it  is  impossible  otherwise  (supposing 
their  light  not  intercepted)  that  the  numbers  of  the  smaller 


TELESCOPIC    CONSTITUTION    OP    THE    GALAXY.         57 if 

magnitudes  should  not  go  on  continually  increasing  ad 
infinitum.  In  such  cases  moreover  the  ground  of  the  heavens, 
as  seen  between  the  stars,  is  for  the  most  part  perfectly  dark, 
which  again  would  not  be  the  case,  if  innumerable  multitudes 
of  stars,  too  minute  to  be  individually  discernible,  existed  be- 
yond. In  other  regions  we  are  presented  with  the  pheno- 
menon of  an  almost  uniform  degree  of  brightness  of  the 
individual  stars,  accompanied  with  a  very  even  distribution 
of  them  over  the  ground  of  the  heavens,  both  the  larger  and 
smaller  magnitudes  being  strikingly  deficient.  In  such  cases 
it  is  equally  impossible  not  to  perceive  that  we  are  looking 
through  a  sheet  of  stars  nearly  of  a  size,  and  of  no  great  thick- 
ness compared  with  the  distance  which  separates  them  from  us. 
Were  it  otherwise  we  should  be  driven  to  suppose  the  more 
distant  stars  uniformly  the  larger,  so  as  to  compensate  by 
their  greater  intrinsic  brightness  for  their  greater  distance,  a 
supposition  contrary  to  all  probability.  In  others  again,  and 
that  not  unfrequently,  we  are  presented  with  a  double  phe- 
nomenon of  the  same  kind,  viz.  a  tissue  as  it  were  of  large  stars 
spread  over  another  of  very  small  ones,  the  intermediate  mag- 
nitudes being  wanting.  The  conclusion  here  seems  equally 
evident  that  in  such  cases  we  look  through  two  sidereal  sheets 
separated  by  a  starless  interval. 

(798.)  Throughout  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  extent 
of  the  Milky  Way  in  both  hemispheres,  the  general  blackness 
of  the  ground  of  the  heavens  on  which  its  stars  are  projected, 
and  the  absence  of  that  innumerable  multitude  and  excessive 
crowding  of  the  smallest  visible  magnitudes,  and  of  glare 
produced  by  the  aggregate  light  of  multitudes  too  small  to 
affect  the  eye  singly,  which  the  contrary  supposition  would 
appear  to  necessitate,  must,  we  think,  be  considered  unequi- 
vocal indications  that  its  dimensions  in  directions  ichere  these 
conditions  obtain,  are  not  only  not  infinite,  but  that  the  space- 
penetrating  power  of  our  telescopes  suffices  fairly  to  pierce 
through  and  beyond  it.  It  is  but  right  however  to  warn  our 
readers  that  this  conclusion  has  been  controverted,  and  that 
by  an  authority  not  lightly  to  be  put  aside,  on  the  ground  of 

certain  views  taken  by  Gibers  as  to  a  defect  of  perfect  tians- 

!•  p  a 


680  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

parency  in  the  celestial  spaces,  in  virtue  of  which  the  light  of 
the  more  distant  stars  is  enfeebled  more  than  in  proportion 
to  their  distance.  The  extinction  of  light  thus  originating, 
proceeding  in  geometrical  progression  while  the  distance 
increases  in  arithmetical,  a  limit,  it  is  argued,  is  placed  to 
the  space-penetrating  powers  of  telescopes,  far  within  that 
which  distance  alone  apart  from  such  obscuration  would 
assign.  It  would  lead  us  too  far  aside  of  the  objects  of  a 
treatise  of  this  nature  to  enter  upon  any  discussion  of  the 
grounds  (partly  metaphysical)  on  which  these  views  rely. 
It  must  suffice  here  to  observe  that  the  objection  alluded  to, 
if  applicable  to  any,  is  equally  so  to  every  part  of  the  galaxy. 
We  are  not  at  liberty  to  argue  that  at  one  part  of  its  circum- 
ference, our  view  is  limited  by  this  sort  of  cosmical  veil  which 
extinguishes  the  smaller  magnitudes,  cuts  off  the  nebulous 
light  of  distant  masses,  and  closes  our  view  in  impenetrable 
darkness  ;  while  at  another  we  are  compelled  by  the  clearest 
evidence  telescopes  can  afford  to  believe  that  star-strown 
vistas  lie  open,  exhausting  their  powers  and  stretching  out  be- 
yond their  utmost  reach,  as  is  proved  by  that  very  phenomenon 
which  the  existence  of  such  a  veil  would  render  impossible, 
viz.  infinite  increase  of  number  and  diminution  of  magnitude, 
terminating  in  complete  irresolvable  nebulosity.  Such  is,  in 
effect,  the  spectacle  afforded  by  a  very  large  portion  of  the 
Milky  Way  in  that  interesting  region  near  its  point  of  bifur- 
cation in  Scorpio  (arte.  789,  792.)  where,  through  the  hollows 
and  deep  recesses  of  its  complicated  structure  we  be- 
hold what  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  wide  and  indefinitely 
prolonged  area  strewed  over  with  discontinuous  masses  and 
clouds  of  stars  which  the  telescope  at  length  refuses  to 
analyse.*  Whatever  other  conclusions  we  may  draw,  this 
must  any  how  be  regarded  as  the  direction  of  the  greatest 
linear  extension  of  the  ground-plan  of  the  galaxy.     And  it 

*  It  would  be  doing  great  injustice  to  the  illustrious  astronomer  of  Pulkova 
(whose  opinion,  if  we  here  seem  to  controvert,  it  is  with  the  utmost  possible 
deference  and  respect)  not  to  mention  that  at  the  time  of  his  writing  the  re- 
markable essay  already  more  than  once  cited,  in  which  the  views  in  question  are 
delivered,  he  could  not  have  been  awnre  of  the  important  facts  alluded  to  in  the 
text,  the  work  in  which  they  arc  described  being  then  unpublished. 


DISTANCE    OF    THE    FIXED    STARS.  581 

would  appear  to  follow,  also,  as  a  not  less  obvious  consequence, 
that  in  those  regions  where  that  zone  is  clearly  resolved  into 
stars  well  separated  and  seen  projected  on  a  black  ground, 
and  where  by  consequence  it  is  certain  if  the  foregoing  views 
be  correct  that  we  look  out  beyond  them  into  space,  the  smallest 
visible  stars  appear  as  such,  not  by  reason  of  excessive  distance, 
but  of  a  real  inferiority  of  size  or  brightness.* 

(799.)  When  we  speak  of  the  comparative  remoteness  of 
certain  regions  of  the  starry  heavens  beyond  others,  and  of 
our  owu  situation  in  them,  the  question  immediately  arises, 
what  is  the  distance  of  the  nearest  fixed  star?  What  is 
the  scale  on  which  our  visible  firmament  is  constructed? 
And  what  proportion  do  its  dimensions  bear  to  those  of  our 
own  immediate  system  ?  To  these  questions  astronomy  has 
at  length  been  enabled  to   afford  an  answer. 

(800.)  The  diameter  of  the  earth  has  served  us  for  the  base 
of  a  triangle,  in  the  trigonometrical  survey  of  our  system  (art. 
274.),  by  which  to  calculate  the  distance  of  the  sun  ;  but  the 
extreme  minuteness  of  the  sun's  parallax  (art.  357.)  renders  the 
calculation  from  this  "ill-conditioned"  triangle  (art.  275.)  so 
delicate,  that  nothing  but  the  fortunate  combination  of  favour- 
able circumstances,  afforded  by  the  transits  of  Venus  (art.  479.), 
could  render  its  results  even  tolerably  worthy  of  reliance.  But 
the  earth's  diameter  is  too  small  a  base  for  direct  triangulation 
to  the  verge  even  of  our  own  system  (art.  526.),  and  we  are, 
therefore,  obliged  to  substitute  the  annual  parallax  for  the 
diurnal,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  to  ground  our 
calculation  on  the  relative  velocities  of  the  earth  and  planets 
in  their  orbits  (art.  486.),  when  we  would  push  our  triangu- 
lation to  that  extent.  It  might  be  naturally  enough  expected, 
that  by  this  enlargement  of  our  base  to  the  vast  diameter  of 
the  earth's  orbit,  the  next  step  in  our  survey  (art.  275.) 
would  be  made  at  a  great  advantage ;  —  that  our  change  of 

•  Professor  I.oomis  (Progress  of  Astronomy,  1850,  p.  141.)  with  the 
facts  adduced  before  him,  arrives  at  a  contiary  conclusion.  Astronomers  will 
judge  of  the  validity  of  his  objection*  Prof.  Argclander  (  Astron.  Nachr.  99fi.) 
his  cited  niein  support  of  OIIkts'  theory,  in  direct  opposition  to  my  own  opinion, 
here,  (as  I  should  liave  thouglit  distinctly  enough,)  recorded. 


582  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

station,  from  side  to  side  of  it,  would  produce  a  considerable 
and  easily  measurable  amount  of  annual  parallax  in  tbe  stars, 
and  that  by  its  means  we  should  come  to  a  knowledge  of 
their  distance.  But,  after  exhausting  every  refinement  of 
observation,  astronomers  were,  up  to  a  very  late  period, 
unable  to  come  to  any  positive  and  coincident  conclusion 
upon  this  head;  and  the  amount  of  such  parallax,  even  for 
the  nearest  fixed  star  examined  with  the  requisite  attention, 
remained  mixed  up  with,  and  concealed  among,  the  errors 
incidental  to  all  astronomical  determinations.  The  nature  of 
these  errors  has  been  explained  in  the  earlier  part  of  this 
work,  and  we  need  not  remind  the  reader  of  the  difficulties 
which  must  necessarily  attend  the  attempt  to  disentangle  an 
element  not  exceeding  a  few  tenths  of  a  second  or  at  most  a 
whole  second  from  the  host  of  uncertainties  entailed  on  the 
results  of  observations  by  them :  none  of  them  individually 
perhaps  of  greater  magnitude,  but  embarrassing  by  their 
number  and  fluctuating  amount.  Nevertheless,  by  successive 
refinements  in  instrument  making,  and  by  constantly  pro- 
gressive approximation  to  the  exact  knowledge  of  the  Urano- 
graphical  corrections,  that  assurance  had  been  obtained,  even 
in  the  earlier  years  of  the  present  century,  viz.  that  no  star 
visible  in  northern  latitudes,  to  which  attention  had  been 
directed,  manifested  an  amount  of  parallax  exceeding  a  single 
second  of  arc.  It  is  worth  while  to  pause  for  a  moment  to 
consider  what  conclusions  would  folio  «v  from  the  admission  of 
a  parallax  to  this  amount. 

(801.)  .Radius  is  to  the  sine  of  1"  as  206265  to  1.  In  this 
proportion  then  at  least  must  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars 
from  the  sun  exceed  that  of  the  sun  from  the  earth.  Again, 
the  latter  distance,  as  we  have  already  seen  (art.  357.),  exceeds 
the  earth's  radius  in  the  proportion  of  23984  to  1.  Taking 
therefore  the  earth's  radius  for  unity,  a  parallax  of  \"  supposes 
a  distance  of  4947059760  or  nearly  five  thousand  millions  of 
such  units :  and  lastly,  to  descend  to  ordinary  standards, 
since  the  earth's  radius  may  be  taken  at  4000  of  our  miles, 
we  find  19788239040000  or  about  twenty  billions  of  miles 
for  our  resulting  distance. 

(802  )  In  such  numbers  the  imagination  is  lost.     The  only 


DISTANCE   OF    THE    FIXED    STARS.  583 

mode  we  have  of  conceiving  such  intervals  at  all  is  by 
the  time  which  it  would  require  for  light  to  traverse 
them.  Light,  as  we  know  (art.  545.),  travels  at  the 
rate  of  a  semidiameter  of  the  earth's  orbit  in  8m  138-3. 
It  would,  therefore,  occupy  206205  times  this  interval 
or  3  years  and  83  days  to  traverse  the  distance  in  ques- 
tion. Now  as  this  is  an  inferior  limit  which  it  is  already 
ascertained  that  even  the  brightest  and  therefore  pro- 
bably the  nearest  stars  exceed,  what  are  we  to  allow  for 
the  distance  of  those  innumerable  stars  of  the  smaller  mag- 
nitudes which  the  telescope  discloses  to  us  !  What  for  the 
dimensions  of  the  galaxy  in  whose  remoter  regions,  as  we 
have  seen,  the  united  lustre  of  myriads  of  stars  is  per- 
ceptible only  in  powerful  telescopes  as  a  feeble  nebulous 
gleam! 

(803.)  The  space-penetrating  power  of  a  telescope  or  the 
comparative  distance  to  which  a  given  star  would  require  to  be 
removed  in  order  that  it  may  appear  of  the  same  brightness  in 
the  telescope  as  before  to  the  naked  eye,  may  be  calculated  from 
the  aperture  of  the  telescope  compared  with  that  of  the  pupil 
of  the  eye,  and  from  its  reflecting  or  transmitting  power,  i.  e. 
the  proportion  of  the  incident  light  it  conveys  to  the  observer's 
eye.  Thus  it  has  been  computed  that  the  space-penetrating 
power  of  such  a  reflector  as  that  used  in  the  star-gauges  above 
referred  to  is  expressed  by  the  number  75.  A  star  then  of  the 
sixth  magnitude  removed  to  75  times  its  distance  would  still 
be  perceptible  as  a  star  with  that  instrument,  and  admitting 
such  a  star  to  have  1 00th  part  of  the  light  of  a  standard  star 
of  the  first  magnitude,  it  will  follow  that  such  a  standard 
star,  if  removed  to  750  times  its  distance,  would  excite  in  the 
eye,  when  viewed  through  the  gauging  telescope,  the  same 
impression  as  a  star  of  the  sixth  magnitude  does  to  the  naked 
eye.  Among  the  infinite  multitude  of  such  stars  in  the 
remoter  regions  of  the  galaxy,  it  is  but  fair  to  conclude  that 
innumerable  individuals  equal  in  intrinsic  brightness  to  those 
which  immediately  surround  us  must  exist.  The  light  of 
such  stars  then  must  have  occupied  upwards  of  2000  years 
in  travelling  over  the  distance  which  separates  them  from 
oar  own  system.     It  follows  then  that  when  we  observe  the 


584  OITLIXES    OF    ASTRONOMY 

places  and  note  the  appearances  of  such  stars,  we  are  only 
reading  their  history  of  two  thousand  years'  anterior  date 
thus  wonderfully  recorded.  We  cannot  escape  this  conclusion 
but  by  adopting  as  an  alternative  an  intrinsic  inferiority  of 
light  in  all  the  smaller  stars  of  the  galaxy.  We  shall  be 
better  able  to  estimate  the  probability  of  this  alternative 
when  we  shall  have  made  acquaintance  with  other  sidereal 
systems  whose  existence  the  telescope  discloses  to  us,  and 
whose  analogy  will  satisfy  us  that  the  view  of  the  subject 
here  taken  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  general  tenor  of 
astronomical  facts. 

(804.)  Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of  a  parallax  of  1"  as  a 
mere  limit  below  which  that  of  any  star  yet  examined  as- 
suredly, or  at  least  very  probably  falls,  and  it  is  not  without 
a  certain  convenience  to  regard  this  amount  of  parallax  as  a 
sort  of  unit  of  reference,  which,  connected  in  the  readers 
recollection  with  a  parallactic  unit  of  distance  from  our  system 
of  20  billions  of  miles,  and  with  a  3|  year's  journey  of  light, 
may  save  him  the  trouble  of  such  calculations,  and  ourselves 
the  necessity  of  covering  our  pages  with  such  enormous 
numbers,  when  speaking  of  stars  whose  parallax  has  actually 
been  ascertained  with  some  approach  to  certainty,  either  by 
direct  meridian  observation  or  by  more  refined  and  delicate 
methods.  These  we  shall  proceed  to  explain,  after  first 
pointing  out  the  theoretical  peculiarities  which  enable  us  to 
separate  and  disentangle  its  effects  from  those  of  the  Urano- 
graphical  corrections,  and  from  other  causes  of  error  which 
being  periodical  in  their  nature  add  greatly  to  the  difficulty 
of  the  subject.  The  effects  of  precession  and  proper  motion 
(see  art.  852.)  which  are  uniformly  progressive  from  year  to 
year,  and  that  of  nutation  which  runs  through  its  period  in 
nineteen  years,  it  is  obvious  enough,  separate  themselves  at 
once  by  these  characters  from  that  of  parallax ;  and,  being 
known  with  very  great  precision,  and  being  certainly  in- 
dependent, as  regards  their  causes,  of  any  individual  pecu- 
liarity in  the  stars  affected  by  them,  whatever  small  uncer- 
tainty may  remain  respecting  the  numerical  elements  which 
enter  into  their  computation  (or  in  mathematical  language 
their  co-efficients),  can  give  rise  to  no  embarrassment.     With 


PARALLAX    OF    THE    FIXED    STARS.  586 

regard  to  aberration  the  case  is  materially  different.  This 
correction  affects  the  place  of  a  star  by  a  fluctuation  annual 
in  its  period,  and  therefore,  so  far,  agreeing  with  parallax. 
It  is  also  very  similar  in  the  law  of  its  variation  at  different 
seasons  of  the  year,  parallax  having  for  its  apex  (see  art, 
343,  344.)  the  apparent  place  of  the  sun  in  the  ecliptic,  and 
aberration  a  point  in  the  same  great  circle  90°  behind  that, 
place,  so  that  in  fact  the  formulae  of  calculation  (the  co- 
efficients excepted)  are  the  same  for  both,  substituting  only 
for  the  sun's  longitude  in  the  expression  for  the  one,  that 
longitude  diminished  by  90°  for  the  other.  Moreover,  in  the 
absence  of  absolute  certainty  respecting  the  nature  of  the 
propagation  of  light,  astronomers  have  hitherto  considered  it 
necessary  to  assume  at  least  as  a  possibility  that  the  velocity 
of  light  may  be  to  some  slight  amount  dependent  on  in- 
dividual peculiarities  in  the  body  emitting  it.* 

(805.)  If  we  suppose  a  line  drawn  from  the  star  to  the 
earth  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  it  is  evident  that  this  line 
will  sweep  over  the  surface  of  an  exceedingly  acute,  oblique 
cone,  having  for  its  axis  the  line  joining  the  sun  and  star,  and 
for  its  base  the  earth's  annual  orbit,  which,  for  the  present 
purpose,  we  may  suppose  circular.  The  star  will  therefore 
appear  to  describe  each  year  about  its  mean  place  regarded 
as  fixed,  and  in  virtue  of  parallax  alone,  a  minute  ellipse, 
the  section  of  this  cone  by  the  surface  of  the  celestial  sphere, 
perpendicular  to  the  visual  ray.  But  there  is  also  another 
way  in  which  the  same  fact  may  be  represented.  The  ap- 
parent orbit  of  the  star  about  its  mean  place  as  a  center,  will 
be  precisely  that  which  it  would  appear  to  describe,  if  seen  from 
the  sun,  supposing  it  really  revolved  about  that  place  in  a 
circle  exactly  equal  to  the  earth's  annual  orbit,  in  a  plane 
parallel  to  the  ecliptic.  This  is  evident  from  the  equality 
and  parallelism  of  the  lines  and  directions  concerned.  Now 
the  effect  of  aberration  (disregarding  the  slight  variation  of 

•  In  the  actual  state  of  astronomy  and  photology  tins  necessity  can  haiuly 
be  considered  as  still  existing,  and  it  is  desirable,  therefore,  that  the  practice  of 
astronomers  of  introducing  an  unknown  correction  for  the  constant  of  aberration 
into  their  "equations  of  condition  "  for  the  determination  of  parallax,  should  be 
disused,  since  it  actually  tends  to  introduce  error  into  the  final  result. 


586 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


the  earth's  velocity  in  different  parts  of  its  orbit)  is  precisely 
similar  in  law,  and  differs  only  in  amount,  and  in  its  bearing 
reference  to  a  direction  90°  different  in  longitude.  Suppose, 
in  order  to  fix  our  ideas,  the  maximum  of  parallax  to  be  1" 
and  that  of  aberration  20*  5",  and  let  A  B,  a  b,  be  two  circles 
imagined  to  be  described  separately,  as  above,  by  the  star 
about  its  mean  place  S,  in  virtue  of  these  two  causes  respec- 
tively, S  T  being  a  line  parallel  to  that  of  the  line  of  equi- 
noxes. Then  if  in  virtue  of  parallax  alone,  the  star  would 
be  found  at  a  in  the  smaller  orbit,  it  would  in  virtue  of 
aberration  alone  be  found  at  A,  in  the  larger,  the  angle  a  S  A 
being  a  right  angle.  Drawing  then  A  C  equal  and  parallel 
to  S  a,  and  joining  S  C,  it  will  in  virtue  of  both  simulta- 
neously be  found  in  C,  i.  e.  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
whose  radius  is  S  C,  and  at  a  point  in  that  circle,  in  advance 
of  A,  the  aberrational  place,  by  the  angle  A  S  C.    Now  since 

S  A  :  AC  ::  20-5  :  1,  we  find  for  the  angle  A  SC  2°  47'  3  V, 

C 


and  for  the  length  of  the  radius  S  C  of  the  circle  representing 
the  compound  motion  20"'524.  The  difference  (0"-024) 
between  this  and  S  C,  the  radius  of  the  aberration  circle,  is 
quite  imperceptible,  and  even  supposing  a  quantity  so  minute 
to  be  capable  of  detection  by  a  prolonged  series  of  observa- 
tions, it  would  remain  a  question  whether  it  were  produced 
by  parallax  or  by  a  specific  difference  of  aberration  from  the 
general  average  20"*o  in  the  star  itself.  It  is  therefore  to 
the  difference  of  2°  48'  between  the  angular  situation  of  the 
displaced  star  in  this  hypothetical  orbit,  /.  c.  in  the  argument* 


PARALLAX   OF    THE    FIXED    STAIiS.  587 

(.is  they  are  called)  of  the  joint  correction  (  T  S  C)  and  that 
of  aberration  alone  (T  SA),  that  we  have  to  look  for  the  re- 
solution of  the  problem  of  parallax.  The  reader  may  easily 
figure  to  himself  the  delicacy  of  an  inquiry  which  turns 
wholly  (even  when  stripped  of  all  its  other  difficulties)  on 
the  precise  determination  of  a  quantity  of  this  nature,  and 
of  such  very  moderate  magnitude. 

(806.)  But  these  other  difficulties  themselves  are  of  no  trifling 
order.  All  astronomical  instruments  are  affected  by  differences 
of  temperature.  Not  only  do  the  materials  of  which  they  are 
composed  expand  and  contract,  but  the  masonry  and  solid  piers 
on  which  they  are  erected,  nay  even  the  very  soil  on  which 
these  are  founded,  participate  in  the  general  change  from  sum- 
mer warmth  to  winter  cold.  Hence  arise  slow  oscillatory 
movements  of  exceedingly  minute  amount,  which  levels  and 
plumblines  afford  but  very  inadequate  means  of  detecting, 
and  which  being  also  annual  in  their  period  (after  rejecting 
whatever  is  merely  casual  and  momentary)  mix  themselves 
intimately  with  the  matter  of  our  inquiry.  Refraction  too, 
besides  its  casual  variations  from  night  to  night,  which  a  long 
series  of  observations  would  eliminate,  depends  for  its  theo- 
retical expression  on  the  constitution  of  the  strata  of  our 
atmosphere,  and  the  law  of  the  distribution  of  heat  and 
moisture  at  different  elevations,  which  cannot  be  unaffected 
by  difference  of  season.  No  wonder  then  that  mere  meri- 
dional observations  should,  almost  up  to  the  present  time,  have 
proved  insufficient,  except  in  one  very  remarkable  instance, 
to  afford  unquestionable  evidence,  and  satisfactory  quantita- 
tive measurement  of  the  parallax  of  any  fixed  star. 

(807.)  The  instance  referred  to  is  that  of  a  Centauri,  one 
of  the  brightest  and  for  many  other  reasons,  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  of  the  southern  stars.  From  a  series  of  observa- 
tions of  this  star,  made  at  the  Royal  Observatory  of  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  in  the  years  1832  and  1833,  by  Professor 
Henderson,  with  the  mural  circle  of  that  establishment,  a 
parallax  to  the  amount  of  an  entire  second  was  concluded  on 
his  reduction  of  the  observations  in  question  after  his  return 
to   England.      Subsequent   observations   by  Mr.    Maclear, 


MS  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

partly  with  the  same,  and  partly  with  a  new  and  far  more 
efficiently  constructed  instrument  of  the  same  description 
made  in  the  years  1839  and  1840,  have  fully  confirmed  the 
reality  of  the  parallax  indicated  by  Professor  Henderson's  ob 
servations,  though  with  a  slight  diminution  in  its  concluded 
amount,  which  comes  out  equal  to  0"*9128  or  about  f^tha  of 
a  second ;  bright  stars  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  bring 
unaffected  by  a  similar  periodical  displacement,  and  thus 
affording  satisfactory  proof  that  the  displacement  indicated  in 
the  case  of  the  star  in  question  is  not  merely  a  result  of  annual 
variations  of  temperature.  As  it  is  impossible  at  present  to 
answer  for  so  minute  a  quantity  as  that  by  which  this  result 
differs  from  an  exact  second,  we  may  consider  the  distance  of 
this  star  as  approximately  expressed  by  the  parallactic  unit 
of  distance  referred  to  in  art.  804. 

(808.)  A  short  time  previous  to  the  publication  *  of  this 
important  result,  the  detection  of  a  sensible  and  measurable 
amount  of  parallax  in  the  star  N°  61  Cygni  of  Flamsteed's 
catalogue  of  stars  was  announced  by  the  celebrated  astro- 
nomer of  Konigsberg,  the  late  M.  Bessel.f  This  is  a 
small  and  inconspicuous  star,  hardly  exceeding  the  sixth 
magnitude,  but  which  had  been  pointed  out  for  especial  ob- 
servation by  the  remarkable  circumstance  of  its  being  affected 
by  a  proper  motion  (see  art.  852.),  i.  e.  a  regular  and  continu- 
ally progressive  annual  displacement  among  the  surrounding 
stars  to  the  extent  of  more  than  5"  per  annum,  a  quantity  so 
very  much  exceeding  the  average  of  similar  minute  annual 
displacements  which  many  other  stars  exhibit,  as  to  lead  to  a 
suspicion  of  its  being  actually  nearer  to  our  system.  It  is 
not  a  little  remarkable  that  a  similar  presumption  of  proxi- 
mity exists  also  in  the  case  of  a  Centauri,  whose  unusually 
large  proper  motion  of  nearly  4"  per  annum  is  stated  by 
Professor  Henderson  to  have  been  the  motive  which  induced 
him  to  subject  his  observations  of  that  star  to  that  severe  dis- 
cussion  which   led   to   the   detection   of  its   parallax.      M. 

"    Prof.    Henderson's    paper   was  read   before   the    Astronomical    Society   of 
London,  Jan.  3.  1839.      It  bears  date  Dec.  24.  1838. 
f  Astronomische  Nachrichtun,  Nos.  365,  366.  Dec.  13,  1838. 


PARALLAX    OF    THE    FIXED    STARS.  589 

Bessel's  observations  of  61  Cygni  were  commenced  in  August 
1837,  immediately  on  the  establishment  at  the  Konigsberg 
observatory  of  a  magnificent  heliometer,  the  workmanship 
of  the  celebrated  optician  Fraunhofer,  of  Munich,  an  instru- 
ment especially  fitted  for  the  system  of  observation  adopted  ; 
which  being  totally  different  from  that  of  direct  meridional 
observation,  more  refined  in  its  conception,  and  susceptible  of 
far  greater  accuracy  in  its  practical  application,  we  must  now 
explain. 

(809.)  Parallax,  proper  motion,  and  specific  aberration 
(denoting  by  the  latter  phrase  that  part  of  the  aberration  of 
a  star's  light  which  may  be  supposed  to  arise  from  its  inui- 
vidual  peculiarities,  and  which  we  have  every  reason  to  believe 
at  all  events  an  exceedingly  minute  fraction  of  the  whole,) 
are  the  only  uranographical  corrections  which  do  not  neces- 
sarily affect  alike  the  apparent  places  of  two  stars  situated  in, 
or  very  nearly  in,  the  same  visual  line.  Supposing  then  two 
stars  at  an  immense  distance,  the  one  behind  the  other,  but 
otherwise  so  situated  as  to  appear  very  nearly  along  the  same 
visual  line,  they  will  constitute  what  is  called  a  star  optically 
double,  to  distinguish  it  from  a  star  physically  double,  of  which 
more  hereafter.  Aberration  (that  which  is  common  to  all 
stars),  precession,  nutation,  nay,  even  refraction,  and  instru- 
mental causes  of  apparent  displacement,  will  affect  them  alike, 
or  so  very  nearly  alike  (if  the  minute  difference  of  their 
apparent  places  be  t;iken  into  account)  as  to  admit  of  the 
difference  being  neglected,  or  very  accurately  allowed  for, 
by  an  easy  calculation.  If  then,  instead  of  attempting  to 
determine  by  observation  the  place  of  the  nearer  of  two  very 
unequal  stars  (which  will  probably  be  the  larger)  by  direct 
observation  of  its  right  ascension  and  polar  distance,  we 
content  ourselves  with  referring  its  place  to  that  of  its  remoter 
and  smaller  companion  by  differential  observation,  i.  e.  by 
measuring  only  its  difference  of  situation  from  the  latter,  we 
are  at  once  relieved  of  the  necessity  of  making  these  cor- 
rections, and  from  all  uncertainty  as  to  their  influence  on  the 
result.  And  for  the  very  same  reason,  errors  of  adjustment 
(art    136.),  of  graduation,  and  a  host  of  instrumental  errors, 


590  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

which  would  for  this  delicate  purpose  fatally  affect  the 
absolute  determination  of  either  star's  place,  are  harmless 
when  only  the  difference  of  their  places,  each  equally  affected 
by  such  causes,  is  required  to  be  known. 

(810.)  Throwing  aside  therefore  the   considei'ation  of  all 
these  errors  and  corrections,  and  disregarding  for  the  present 


the  minute  effect  of  specific  aberration  and  the  uniformly  pro- 
gressive effect  of  proper  motion,  let  us  trace  the  effect  of  the 
differences  of  the  parallaxes  of  two  stars  thus  juxtaposed,  or 
their  apparent  relative  distance  and  position  at  various  seasons 
of  the  year.  Now  the  parallax  being  inversely  as  the  distance, 
the  dimensions  of  the  small  ellipses  apparently  described 
(art.  805.)  by  each  star  on  the  concave  surface  of  the  heavens 
by  parallactic  displacement  will  differ,  —  the  nearer  star 
describing  the  larger  ellipse.  But  both  stars  lying  very 
nearly  in  the  same  direction  from  the  sun,  these  ellipses  will 
be  similar  and  similarly  situated.  Suppose  S  and  s  to  be  the 
positions  of  the  two  stars  as  seen  from  the  sun,  and  let 
A  B  0  D,  abed,  be  their  parallactic  ellipses ;  then,  since 
they  will  be  at  all  times  similarly  situated  in  these  ellipses, 
when  the  one  star  is  seen  at  A,  the  other  will  be  seen  at  a. 
When  the  earth  has  made  a  quarter  of  a  revolution  in  its 
orbit,  their  apparent  places  will  be  B  b ;  when  another 
quarter,  C  c  ;  and  when  another,  D  d.  If,  then,  we  measure 
carefully,  with  micrometers  adapted  for  the  purpose,  their 
apparent  situation  with  respect  to  each  other,  at  different 
times  of  the  year,  we  should  perceive  a  periodical  change, 


PARALLAX    OF    THE    FIXED   STARS.  flUl 

both  in  the  direction  of  the  line  joining  them,  and  in  tho 
distance  between  their  centers.  For  the  lines  A  a  and  C  c 
cannot  be  parallel,  nor  the  lines  B  b  and  D  d  equal,  unless 
the  ellipses  be  of  equal  dimensions,  i.  e.  unless  the  two 
stars  have  the  same  parallax,  or  are  equidistant  from  the 
earth. 

(811.)  Now,  micrometers,  properly  mounted,  enable  us 
to  measure  very  exactly  both  the  distance  between  two 
objects  which  can  be  seen  together  in  the  same  field  of  a 
telescope,  and  the  position  of  the  line  joining  them  with 
respect  to  the  horizon,  or  the  meridian,  or  any  other  deter- 
minate direction  in  the  heavens.  The  double  image  micro- 
meter, and  especially  the  heliometer  (art.  200,  2ul.)  ia 
peculiarly  adapted  for  this  purpose.  The  images  of  the  two 
stars  formed  side  by  side,  or  in  the  same  line  prolonged, 
however  momentarily  displaced  by  temporary  refraction  or 
instrumental  tremor,  move  together,  preserving  their  relative 
situation,  the  judgment  of  which  is  no  way  disturbed  by  such 
irregular  movements.  The  heliometer  also,  taking  in  a 
greater  range  than  ordinary  micrometers,  enables  us  to  com- 
pare one  large  star  with  more  than  one  adjacent  small  one, 
and  to  select  such  of  the  latter  among  many  near  it,  as  shall 
be  most  favourably  situated  for  the  detection  of  any  motion 
in  the  large  one,  not  participated  in  by  its  neighbours. 

(812.)  The  star  examined  by  Bessel  has  two  such  neigh- 
bours, both  very  minute,  and  therefore  probably  very  distant, 
most  favourably  situated,  the  one  (.?)  at  a  distance  of  T  42", 
the  other  (s')  at  11'  46"  from  the  large  star,  and  so  situated, 
that  their  directions  from  that  star  make  nearly  a  right  angle 
with  each  other.  The  effect  of  parallax  therefore  would 
necessarily  cause  the  two  distances  Ss  and  Ss'  to  vary  so 
as  to  attain  their  maximum  and  minimum  values  alternately 
at  three-monthly  intervals,  and  this  is  what  was  actually 
observed  to  take  place,  the  one  distance  being  always  most 
rapidly  on  the  increase  or  decrease  when  the  other  was 
stationary  (the  uniform  effect  of  proper  motion  being  under- 
stood of  course  to  be  always  duly  accounted  for).  This 
alternation,  though  so  small  in  amount  as  to  indicate,  as  a  final 


592  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

l'esult,  a  parallax,  or  rather  a  difference  of  parallaxes  between 
the  large  and  small  stars  of  hardly  more  than  one  third  of  a 
second,  was  maintained  with  such  regularity  as  to  leave  no 
room  for  reasonable  doubt  as  to  its  cause,  and  having  been 
confirmed  by  the  further  continuance  of  these  observations, 
and  quite  recently  by  the  exact  coincidence  between  the  result 
thus  obtained,  and  that  deduced  by  M.  Peters  from  obser- 
vations of  the  same  star  at  the  observatory  of  Pulkova*,  is 
considered  on  all  hands  as  fully  established.  The  parallax 
of  this  star  finally  resulting  from  Bessel's  observation  is  0//#343 
so  that  its  distance  from  our  system  is  very  nearly  three 
parallactic  units.  (Art.  804.) 

(813.)  The  bright  star  a  Lyras  has  also  near  it,  at  only 
43"  distance  (and  therefore  within  the  reach  of  the  parallel 
wire  or  ordinary  double  image  micrometer)  a  very  minute 
star,  which  has  been  subjected  since  1835  to  a  severe  and 
assiduous  scrutiny  by  M.  Struve,  on  the  same  principle  of 
differential  observation.  He  has  thus  established  the  exis- 
tence of  a  measurable  amount  of  parallax  in  the  large  star, 
less  indeed  than  that  of  61  Cygni  (being  only  about  \  of 
a  second),  but  yet  sufficient  (such  was  the  delicacy  of  his 
measurements)  to  justify  this  excellent  observer  in  announcing 
the  result  as  at  least  highly  probable,  on  the  strength  of  only 
five  nights' observation,  in  1835  and  1836.  This  probability, 
the  continuation  of  the  measures  to  the  end  of  1838  and  the 
corroborative,  though  not  in  this  case  precisely  coincident, 
result  of  Mr.  Peters's  investigations  have  converted  into  a 
certainty.  M.  Struve  has  the  merit  of  being  the  first  to  bring 
into  practical  application  this  method  of  observation,  which, 
though  proposed  for  the  purpose,  and  its  great  advantages 
pointed  out  by  Sir  William  Herschel  so  early  as  1781  f, 
remained  long  unproductive  of  any  result,  owing  partly  to 
the    imperfection   of  micrometers    for   the   measurement   of 

•    With  the  great  vertical  circle  by  Ertel. 

|  It  has  been  referred  even  to  Galileo.  But  the  general  explanation  of 
Parallax  in  the  Systema  Cosmicum,  Dial.  iii.  p.  271  (Leyden  edit.  lo'99)  to 
which  the  reference  applies,  does  not  touch  any  of  the  peculiar  features  of  the 
case,  or  meet  any  of  its  difficulties. 


PARALLAX    OF    THE    FIXED    STAR9.  595 

distance,  aud  partly  to  a  reason  which  we  shall  presently 
have  occasion  to  refer  to. 

(814.)  If  the  component  individuals  S,  *  {Jig.  art.  810.y 
be  (as  is  often  the  case)  very  close  to  each  other,  the  pa- 
rallactic variation  of  their  angle  of  position,  or  the  extreme 
angle  included  between  the  lines  A  a,  C  c,  may  be  very  con- 
siderable, even  for  a  small  amount  of  difference  of  paral- 
laxes between  the  large  and  small  stars.  For  instance  in 
the  case  of  two  adjacent  stars  15"  asunder,  and  otherwise 
favourably  situated  for  observation,  an  annual  fluctuation  to 
and  fro  in  the  apparent  direction  of  their  line  of  junction  to 
the  extent  of  half  a  degree  (a  quantity  which  could  not 
escape  notice  in  the  means  of  numerous  and  careful  measure- 
ments) would  correspond  to  a  difference  of  parallax  of  only 
g  of  a  second.  A  difference  of  1"  between  two  stars  appa- 
rently situated  at  5"  distance  might  cause  an  oscillation  in 
that  line  to  the  extent  of  no  less  than  11°,  and  if  nearer  one 
proportionally  still  greater.  This  mode  of  observation  has 
oeen  applied  to  a  considerable  number  of  stars  by  Lord 
Wrottesley,  and  with  such  an  amount  of  success,  as  to  make 
its  further  application  desirable.     (Phil.  Trans.  1851.*) 

(815.)  The  following  are  some  of  the  principal  fixed  stars 
to  which  parallax  has  been  up  to  the  present  time  more  or 
less  probably  assigned : 

a     Centauri  -  -  0*976   (Henderson,  corrected  by  Peter*.) 

61   Cygni    -         -         -  0*:H8  (Bessel.) 

Lalande     212.58     -  0  260  (Kriiger.) 

Oeltzen-    17415-6  0-247  (Kriiger.) 

a    Lyrae     ...  0*155  (W.  Struve,  corrected  by  O.  Struve.) 

Sirius    ...  0*150  (Henderson,  corrected  by  Peters  ) 

70  p  Ophiuchi        -         -  0*16     'Kriiger.) 

i     Ur<ae  Majoris  -  0*188     Peters) 

Arcturus        -         -  0*127       ditto 

Polaris-         -         -  0*067       ditto 

Capelia  .         -  0f>46       ditto 

Although  the  extreme  minutenesss  of  the  last  four  of  these 
results  deprives  them  of  much  numerical  reliance,  it  is  at 
least  certain  that  the  parallaxes  by  no  means  follow  the  order 
of  magnitudes,  and  this  is  farther  shown  by  the  fact  that  a 
Cygni,  one  of  M.  Peters's  stars,  shows  absolutely  no  indica- 
tions of  any  measurable  parallax  whatever. 

*  See  Phil-  Trans.  1826,  p.  266,  et  uq.  and  1827,  for  a  li*-t  of  stars  well 
adapted  for  such  observation,  with  the  times  of  the  year  mo  .t  Uvourable.  —  Tbi- 
lisi in  Phil.  Trans.   1886,  it*  incorrect. 

QQ 


594  OUTLINES    OF    ASTROXOMV. 

(816.)  From  the  distance  of  the  stars  we  are  naturally  let) 
to  the  consideration  of  their  real  magnitudes.  But  here  a 
difficulty  arises,  which,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  of  what  optical 
instruments  are  capable  of  effecting,  must  always  remain 
insuperable.  Telescopes  afford  us  only  negative  information 
as  to  the  apparent  angular  diameter  of  any  star.  The  round, 
well-defined,  planetary  discs  which  good  telescopes  show 
when  turned  upon  any  of  the  brighter  stars  are  phaenomena 
of  diffraction,  dependent,  though  at  present  somewhat  enig- 
matically, on  the  mutual  interference  of  the  rays  of  light. 
They  are  consequently,  so  far  as  this  inquiry  is  concerned, 
mere  Optical  illusions,  and  have  therefore  been  termed  spurious 
discs.  The  proof  of  this  is  that  telescopes  of  different  aper- 
tures and  magnifying  powers,  when  applied  for  the  purpose 
of  measuring  their  angular  diameters,  give  different  results,  the 
greater  aperture  (even  with  the  same  magnifying  power) 
giving  the  smaller  disc.  That  the  true  disc  of  even  a  large 
and  bright  star  can  have  but  a  very  minute  angular  measure, 
appears  from  the  fact  that  in  the  occultation  of  such  a  star 
by  the  moon,  its  extinction  is  absolutely  instantaneous,  not  the 
smallest  trace  of  gradual  diminution  of  light  being  perceptible. 
The  apparent  or  spurious  disc  also  remains  perfectly  round  and 
of  its  full  size  up  to  the  instant  of  disappearance,  which  could 
not  be  the  case  were  it  a  real  object.  If  our  sun  were 
removed  to  the  distance  expressed  by  our  parallactic  unit 
(art.  804.),  its  apparent  diameter  of  32'  1"*5  would  be  reduced 
to  only  0'*0093,  or  less  than  the  hundredth  of  a  second,  a 
quantity  which  we  have  not  the  smallest  reason  to  hope  any 
practical  improvement  in  telescopes  will  ever  show  as  ho 
object  having  distinguishable  form. 

(817.)  There  remains  therefore  only  the  indication  which  the 
quantity  of  light  they  send  to  us  may  afford.  But  here  again 
another  difficulty  besets  us.  The  light  of  the  sun  is  so  im- 
mensely superior  in  intensity  to  that  of  any  star,  that  it  is 
impracticable  to  obtain  any  direct  comparison  between  them. 
But  by  using  the  moon  as  an  intermediate  term  of  comparison 
it  may  be  done,  not  indeed  with  much  precision,  but  sufficiently 
well  to  satisfy  in  some  degree  our  curiosity  on  the  subject. 


ABSOLUTE    LIGHT    OF    CERTAIN    STAKS.  595 

Now  a.  Centauri  has  been  directly  compared  with  the  moon  by 
the  method  explained  in  Art.  783.  By  a  mean  of  eleven  such 
comparisons  made  in  various  states  of  the  moon,  duly  reduced 
and  making  the  proper  allowance  on  photometric  principles 
for  the  moon's  light  lost  by  transmission  through  the  lens  and 
prism,  it  appears  that  the  mean  quantity  of  light  sent  to  the 
earth  by  a  full  moon  exceeds  that  sent  by  a.  Centauri  in  the 
proportion  of  27408  to  1.  Now  Wollaston,  by  a  method 
apparently  unobjectionable,  found  *  the  proportion  of  the 
eun's  light  to  that  of  the  full  moon  to  be  that  of  801072  to  I. 
Combining  these  results,  we  find  the  light  sent  us  by  the  sun 
to  be  to  that  sent  by  a  Centauri  as  21,955,000,000,  or  about 
twenty-two  thousand  millions  to  1.  Hence  from  the  parallax 
assigned  above  to  that  star,  it  is  easy  to  conclude  that  its 
intrinsic  splendour,  as  compared  with  that  of  our  sun  at  equal 
distances,  is  2*3247,  that  of  the  sun  being  unity.f 

(818.)  The  light  of  Sirius  is  four  times  that  of  a  Centauri, 
and  its  parallax  only  0"*15.  (Art.  230.)  This  in  effect 
ascribes  to  it  an  intrinsic  splendour  equal  to  169*35  times  that 
of  a  Centauri,  and  therefore  393*7  times  that  of  our  sun.  \ 

*  Wollaston,  Phil.  Trans.  1829.  p.  'J7. 

f  Results  of  Astronomical  Observations  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  $-c.  Art  278. 
p.  363.  Ifonly  the  results  obtained  near  the  quadrature"  of  the  moon  (which 
is  the  situation  most  favourable  to  exactness)  be  used,  the  resulting  value  of  the 
intrinsic  light  of  the  star  (the  sun  being  unity)  is  4  1586.  On  the  other 
hand,  ifonly  those  procured  near  the  full  moon  (the  worst  time  fcr  observation) 
be  employed,  the  result  is  14017.  Discordances  of  this  kind  will  startle  no  one 
conversant  with  Photometry.  That  a  Centauri  really  emits  more  light  than 
our  sun  must,  we  conceive,  be  regarded  as  an  established  fact.  To  those  who 
may  refer  to  the  work  cited  it  is  mcessary  to  mention  that  the  quantity  there 
designated  by  M,  expresses,  on  the  scale  there  adopted,  .500  times  the  actual 
illuminating  power  of  the  moon  at  the  time  of  observation,  that  of  the  mean 
full  moon  being  unity. 

i  See  the  work  above  cited,  p.  367 — Wollaston  makes  the  light  of  Sirius  one 
20.000-milliomh  of  the  sun's.  Steinheil  by  a  very  uncertain  method  found  •  — 
(3486500)*'  *  Arcturus. 


8Q9 


59g  OUTLINES    OF    ASTUONOMV. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

VARIABLE    AND    PERIODICAL     STARS.  —  LIST    OF    THOSE     ALREADY 

KNOWN. IRREGULARITIES  IN  THEIR  PERIODS  AND  LUSTRE  WHEN 

BRIGHTEST. HtREGULAR    AND     TEMPORARY     STARS. ANCIENT 

CHINESE  RECORDS  OP  SEVERAL. MISSING  STARS. — DOUBLE  STARS. 

THEIR   CLASSIFICATION. SPECIMENS  OF  EACH  CLASS. —  BINART 

SYSTEMS. REVOLUTION  ROUND  EACH  OTHER.  DESCRIBE  EL- 
LIPTIC ORBITS  UNDER  THE  NEWTONIAN  LAW  OF  GRAVITY. ELE- 
MENTS OF  ORBITS  OF    SEVERAL. ACTUAL    DIMENSIONS   OF    THEIR 

ORBITS. COLOURED  DOUBLE  STARS. PHENOMENON  OF  COMPLE- 
MENTARY COLOURS.  —  SANGUINE  STARS. PROPER  MOTION  OF  THE 

STARS.  — PARTLY  ACCOUNTED  FOR  BY  A  REAL  MOTION  OF  THE 
8UN. —  SITUATION  OF  THE  SOLAR  APEX. AGREEMENT  OF  SOUTH- 
ERN AND  NORTHERN  STARS  IN  GIVING  THE  SAME  RESULT. —  PRIN- 
CMPLES  ON  WHICH  THE  INVESTIGATION  OF  THE  SOLAR  MOTION 
DEPENDS.  —  ABSOLUTE  VELOCITY  OF  THE  SUN'S  MOTION. SUP- 
POSED REVOLUTION   OF    THE  WHOLE    SIDEREAL    SYSTEM   ROUND   A 

COMMON    CENTER. SYSTEMATIC   PAUALLAX    AND  ABERRATION. 

EFFECT  OF  THE  MOTION  OF  LIGHT  IN  ALTERING  THE  APPARENT 
PERIOD  OF  A  BINARY  STAR. 

v819.)  Now,  for  what  purpose  arc  we  to  suppose  such 
magnificent  bodies  scattered  through  the  abyss  of  space? 
Surelv  not  to  illuminate  our  nights,  which  an  additional  moon 
of  the  thousandth  part  of  the  size  of  our  own  would  do  much 
better,  nor  to  sparkle  as  a  pageant  void  of  meaning  and  rea- 
lity, and  bewilder  us  among  vain  conjectures.  Useful,  it  is 
true,  they  are  to  man  as  points  of  exact  and  permanent 
reference ;  but  he  must  have  studied  astronomy  to  little 
purpose,  who  can  suppose  man  to  be  the  only  object  of  his 
Creator's  care,  or  who  does  not  see  in  the  vast  and  wonderful 
apparatus  around  us  provision  for  other  races  of  animated 
beings.  The  planets,  as  we  have  seen,  derive  their  light  from 
the  sun ;  but  that  cannot  be  the  case  with  the  stars.  These 
doubtless,  then,  are  themselves  suns,  and  may,  perhaps,  each 


PERIODICAL    STARS.  597 

in  its  sphere,  be  the  presiding  center  round  which  other 
planets,  or  bodies  of  which  we  can  form  no  conception  from 
any  analogy  offered  by  our  own  system,  may  be  circulating. 

(820.)  Analogies,  however,  more  than  conjectural,  are  not 
wanting  to  indicate  a  correspondence  between  the  dynamical 
laws  which  prevail  in  the  remote  regions  of  the  stars  and  those 
winch  govern  the  motions  of  our  own  system.  Wherever  we 
can  trace  the  law  of  periodicity — the  regular  recurrence  of 
the  same  phenomena  in  the  same  times  —  we  are  strongly 
impressed  with  the  idea  of  rotatory  or  orbitual  motion. 
Among  the  stars  are  several  which,  though  no  way  distin- 
guishable from  others  by  any  apparent  change  of  place,  nor 
by  any  difference  of  appearance  in  telescopes,  yet  undergo 
a  more  or  less  regular  periodical  increase  and  diminution  of 
lustre,  involving  in  one  or  two  cases  a  complete  extinction 
and  revival.  These  are  called  periodical  stars.  The  longest 
known  and  one  of  the  most  remarkable  is  the  star  Omicron, 
in  the  constellation  Cetus  (sometimes  called  Mira  Ceti),  which 
was  first  noticed  as  variable  by  Fabricius  in  1596.  It  ap- 
pears about  twelve  times  in  eleven  years,  or  more  exactly  in 
a  period  of  33 ld  8h  4m  16s;  remains  at  its  greatest  bright- 
ness about  a  fortnight,  being  then  on  some  occasions  equal 
to  a  large  star  of  the  second  magnitude ;  decreases  during 
about  three  months,  till  it  becomes  completely  invisible  to 
the  naked  eye,  in  which  state  it  remains  about  five  months : 
and  continues  increasing  during  the  remainder  of  its  period. 
Such  is  the  general  course  of  its  phases.  It  does  not  always 
however  return  to  the  same  degree  of  brightness,  nor  increase 
and  diminish  by  the  same  gradations,  neither  are  the  successive 
intervals  of  its  maxima  equal.  From  the  recent  observations 
and  inquiries  into  its  history  by  M.  Argelander,  the  mean 
period  above  assigned  would  appear  to  be  subject  to  a  cyclical 
fluctuation  embracing  eighty-eight  such  periods,  and  having 
the  effect  of  gradually  lengthening  and  shortening  alternately 
those  intervals  to  the  extent  of  twenty -five  days  one  way  and 
the  other.*  The  irregularities  in  the  degree  of  brightness 
attained    at    the    maximum    are   probably   also   periodical. 

•    Astroliuni.   Narhr.   No.  tili4 


.*>98  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

Hevelius  relates*  that  during  the  four  years  between  October 
1672  and  December  1676  it  did  not  appear  at  all.  It  was 
unusually  bright  on  October  5.  1839  (the  epoch  of  its  maxi- 
mum for  that  year  according  to  M.  Argelander's  observations) 
Avhen  it  exceeded  a  Ceti  and  equalled  /3  Auriga?  in  lustre. 
When  near  its  minimum  its  colour  changes  from  white  to  a 
full  red. 

821.)  Another  very  remarkable  periodical  star  is  thaf 
called  Algol,  or  /3  Persei.  It  is  usually  visible  as  a  star  of 
the  second  magnitude,  and  such  it  continues  for  the  space 
of  2d  1 3^h,  when  it  suddenly  begins  to  diminish  in  splendour, 
and  in  about  3^  hours  is  reduced  to  the  fourth  magnitude,  at 
which  it  continues  about  15m.  It  then  begins  again  to  in- 
crease, and  in  3 1  hours  more  is  restored  to  its  usual  brightness, 
going  through  all  its  changes  in  2d  2Uh  48m  549*7.  This  re- 
markable, law  of  variation  certainly  appears  strongly  to 
suggest  the  revolution  round  it  of  some  opaque  body,  which 
when  interposed  between  us  and  Algol,  cuts  off  a  large 
portion  of  its  light ;  and  this  is  accordingly  the  view  taken  of 
the  matter  by  Goodricke,  to  whom  we  owe  the  discovery  of 
this  remarkable  fact  f,  in  the  vear  1782;  since  which  time 
the  same  phenomena  have  continued  to  be  observed,  but  with 
this  remarkable  additional  point  of  interest ;  viz.  that  the 
more  recent  observations  as  compared  with  the  earlier  ones 
indicate  a  diminution  in  the  periodic  time.  The  latest  ob- 
servations of  Argelander,  Heis,  and  Schmidt,  even  go  to  prove 
that  this  diminution  is  not  uniformly  progressive,  but  is  ac- 
tually proceeding  with  accelerated  rapidity,  which  however 
will  probably  not  continue,  but,  like  other  cyclical  combina- 
tions in  astronomy,  will  by  degrees  relax,  and  then  be 
changed    into  an  increase,  according  to  laws  of  periodicity 

•    l.nlande's  Astronomy.  Art.  794. 

f  The  same  discovery  appears  to  have  been  made  nearly  about  the  same  time 
by  Palitzch,  a  farmer  of  Prolitz,  near  Dresden,  —  a  peasant  by  station,  an  astro- 
nomer by  nature,  —  who,  from  his  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  aspect  of  the 
heavens,  had  been  led  to  notice  among  so  many  thousand  stars  this  one  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  rest  by  its  variation,  and  had  ascertained  its  period.  The 
same  Palitzch  whs  also  the  first  to  re-discover  the  predicted  comet  of  Halley  in 
1759,  which  he  saw  nearly  a  month  before  any  of  the  astronomers,  who,  armed 
with  their  telescopes,  were  anxiously  watching  its  return.  These  anecdotes 
carry  us  back  *o  the  era  of  the  Chaldean  shepherds.  Montanari  in  1669,  and 
Maraldi  in  169<»    had  already  noticed  a  fluctuation  of  brightness  in  A\gol. 


PERIODICAL    STARS.  599 

which,  as  well  as  their  causes,  remain' to  be  discovered.  The 
first  minimum  of  this  star  in  the  year  1844  occurred  on  Jan. 
8,  at  4h  14m  Greenwich  mean  time.* 

(822).  The  star  8  in  the  constellation  Cepheus  is  also  sub- 
ject to  periodical  variations,  which,  from  the  epoch  of  its  first 
observation  by  Goodricke  in  1784  to  the  present  time,  have 
been  continued  with  perfect  regularity.  Its  period  from 
minimum  to  minimum  is  5d  8h  47m  3  9s '5,  the  first  or  epochal 
minimum  for  1849  falling  on  Jan.  2.  3h  13m  37'  M.  T.  at 
Greenwich.  The  extent  of  its  variation  is  from  the  fifth  to 
between  the  third  and  fourth  magnitudes.  Its  increase  is 
more  rapid  than  its  diminution,  the  interval  between  the 
minimum  and  maximum  of  its  light  being  only  ld  14h,  while 
that  from  the  maximum  to  the  minimum  is  3d  19h. 

(823.)  The  periodical  star  /3  Lyra?,  discovered  by  Good- 
ricke also  in  1784,  has  a  period  which  has  been  usually  stated 
at  from  6d  9h  to  6d  1  lh,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  about 
this  interval  of  time  its  light  undergoes  a  remarkable  diminu- 
tion and  recovery.  The  more  accurate  observations  of  M. 
Argelander  however  have  led  him  to  conclude  f  the  true 
period  to  be  12d  21h  53m  10s,  and  that  in  this  period  a  double 
maximum  and  minimum  takes  place,  the  two  maxima  being 
nearly  equal  and  both  about  the  3*4  magnitude,  but  the 
minima  considerably  unequal,  viz.  4*3  and  4'5m.  In  addition 
to  this  curious  subdivision  of  the  whole  interval  of  change 
into  two  semi-periods,  we  are  presented  in  the  case  of 
this  star  with  another  instance  of  slow  alteration  of  period, 
which  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  itself  periodical.  From 
the  epoch  of  its  discovery  in  1784  to  the  year  1840  the  period 
was  continually  lengthening,  but  more  and  more  slowly, 
till  at  the  last-mentioned  epoch  it  ceased  to  increase,  and  has 
since  been  slowly  on  the  decrease.  As  an  epoch  for  the 
least  or  absolute  minimum  of  this  star,  M.  Argelander's  cal- 
culations enable  us  to  assign  1846  Januarv  3d  0h  9m  53' 
G.  M.  T. 


•   Ast    Nai-h.  No.  478. 

t    Astron.   Nadir.  No.  624.      Sw   also  the  valuable   }>«;ht»   by  this   excellent 
tutronointT  in  A.  N.  Nor.   417,  455,  &c. 


600 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


(824.)  The  following  list  comprises  most  of  the  variable 
stars  at  present  known : — 


1 

Star. 

R.A. 

ISftO. 

N.  P.  n. 

U»0. 

Magu. 

Period, 
Days. 

| 

Discovered  by 

h 

Max. 

Mill. 

m 

T  ?  PlSC.      - 

U 

24 

76° 

23' 

95 

11 

242  + 

Luther,  1855. 

a      Cass.    - 

0 

32 

34 

17 

2 

2-5 

7rf-l 

Mirt,  1831 

S?  Pise.    - 

1 

10 

81 

51 

9 

J3 

- 

Hind,  1851. 

R  ?  Pise.    - 

1 

23 

87 

54 

7-5 

9  5 

343 

Hind,  1850. 

o      Ceti    - 

2 

12 

93 

40 

2 

12 

331  -336 

Fahricius,  1596. 

$      Pers.    - 

2 

58 

49 

38 

2  3 

4-5 

2  8673 

Goodricke,  1782. 

\     Tuur.  - 

8 

52 

77 

56 

4 

5  4 

4± 

Baxendell,  1848. 

R  ?  Taur.  - 

4 

20 

80 

10 

8 

13-5 

- 

Hind,  1849. 

S?  Ta.ir.  - 

4 

22 

80 

22 

8-0 

12-5 

257 

11  ?  Oi  io.    - 

4 

51 

82 

6 

9 

12*5 

237  ? 

Hind,  1848. 

t       Auri.  - 

4 

51 

46 

24 

3 

4 

250  + 

Heis,  1840. 

4 

53 

105 

2 

7 

- 

- 

Schmidt,  l^.VV 

o      Orii).    - 

5 

47 

82 

38 

1 

1-5 

- 

J.  Herschel,  1 836. 

f      Gemi.  - 

6 

55 

69 

13 

3  7 

4-5 

10  15 

Schmidt,  1847. 

R  ?  Gemi.  - 

6 

58 

67 

4 

7 

11 

370 

Hind,  1848. 

R  ?  Can.  m. 

7 

0 

79 

44 

8 

. 

- 

Argclander,  1854. 

S  ?  Can.  m. 

7 

25 

81 

22 

81 

. 

. 

Hind,  1856. 

S  ?  Gemi.  - 

7 

Si 

66 

12 

9 

13  5 

295 

Hind,  1848. 

T  ?  Gemi.  - 

7 

40 

65 

54 

9 

13-5 

287 

Hind,  1848. 

U  ?  Gemi.  - 

7 

46 

67 

37 

9 

13  5 

100  ? 

Hind,  1855. 

R  ?  Cane.  - 

8 

8 

77 

51 

6 

10 

3x0 

Schwerd,  1829. 

S  ?  Cane.  - 

8 

35 

70 

25 

8 

105 

9484 

Hind,  1848. 

S?  Hyd.    - 

8 

46 

86 

22 

85 

13-5 

260 

Hind,  1848. 

8 

48 

69 

35 

8-5 

12 

. 

Hind,  1850. 

T?  Hyd.    - 

8 

49 

98 

39 

8-5 

10  5 

240  + 

Hind,  1851. 

a      Hyd.   - 

9 

20 

98 

0 

2-5 

3 

55 

J  Herschel,  1837. 

8      Leon.  - 

9 

21 

81 

10 

6 

0 

78 

Smyth,  —  ? 

•j/      Leon.  - 

9 

36 

75 

18 

6 

0 

Long. 

Montarmri,  1667. 

K  ?  Leon.  - 

9 

39 

77 

53 

5 

10 

313  ? 

Koch,  1782. 

R  ?  Urs.  M. 

10 

34 

20 

26 

7  5 

13 

30135 

Pogson,  1853. 

y      Argns  - 

10 

39 

148 

54 

1 

4 

46  years  ? 

Burchell,  1823. 

a      Urs.  11 

10 

54 

27 

26 

1-5 

2 

Long. 

Lalande,  1786. 

It  ?  Comas. 

11 

57 

70 

23 

8  0 

- 

- 

8      Urs.  M. 

12 

8 

32 

8 

2 

2  5 

Lung. 

21     Virg.  - 

12 

26 

98 

28 

- 

. 

R  ?  Virg.   - 

12 

31 

82 

11 

6  5 

11 

145724 

Harding,  1809. 

S  ?  Urs.  M. 

12 

37 

28 

5 

7 

12 

221750 

Pogson,  1853. 

U  ?  Virg.  - 

12 

43 

83 

38 

7-8 

- 

- 

v      Hydr.  - 

13 

22 

112 

20 

4 

10 

♦95 

Maraldi,  1704. 

S?  Virg.   - 

13 

25 

96 

25 

5  5 

11 

377? 

Hind,  1852. 

n      Urs.  M. 

13 

42 

39 

56 

1-5 

2 

Long. 

Lalande,  1786. 

Libr.    - 

14 

45 

101 

45 

8 

9  5 

- 

Schumacher.  — ? 

S      Urs.  m. 

14 

51 

15 

14 

2 

2  5 

Long. 

Strove.  1838. 

8       Librae  - 

14 

5S 

97 

55 

- 

- 

S  ?   Serp.    - 

15 

15 

75 

9 

8 

10 

367 

Harding,  1828. 

R?  Cor.  B. 

15 

42 

61 

23 

6 

- 

323 

Pigott,  1795. 

K  ?  Serp.    - 

15 

44 

74 

24 

6-5 

10 

359 

Harding,  1826. 

R  ?  Scorp. - 

16 

9 

112 

20 

9  0 

- 

- 

Chacornac,  — ? 

S  ?  Scorp. - 

16 

9 

112 

20 

9 

12 

- 

Chacoinac,  1  855. 

?0     Mess.  - 

16 

9 

112 

26 

- 

- 

1 

Pogson,  1860. 

VARIABLE    AND    PERIODICAL    STARS. 


601 


Matt"- 

| 

Star. 

n.\. 

i-  i.. 

N.  P.  D. 

1*>0. 

Period, 
Day*. 

I V viviTt'd  by 

1 

Max 

Min. 

I 

h 

in 

j  S?  Ophi.  - 

16 

26 

106° 

52' 

9  .< 

13  5 

•2-20  ? 

Pogson,  1854. 

!  *      Nova  - 

16 

51 

102 

39 

4  5 

13  5 

- 

Mind,  1848. 

|  R?()phi.  - 

16 

59 

105 

53 

8 

13 

396? 

Pogson,  1853. 

1  a      Here.  - 

17 

8 

75 

26 

3  1 

3  7 

66-3.J  ? 

W.  HerscheU795. 

k      Cor.  A. 

18 

23 

128 

50 

3 

6 

Long. 

Halley,  1676. 

R  ?  Si  at.    - 

18 

39 

95 

51 

5 

9 

61 

Pi-ott,  1795. 

j8      Lyra  - 

18 

45 

56 

49 

3  5 

4  5 

12-914 

Goodricke,  1784. 

IS    Lvra  - 

8 

51 

46 

15 

4  3 

4  6 

48 

Baxendell,  1856. 

R  ?  Aqui    - 

18 

59 

82 

0 

6  5 

- 

- 

R  ?  Cygn. - 

19 

33 

40 

8 

8 

14 

41550 

Pogson,  1812. 

X     Cygn.  - 

19 

45 

57 

28 

5 

11 

40606 

Kirch,  1687. 

tj      Aqui.  - 

19 

45 

89 

22 

3-3 

4  7 

71763 

Pigott,  1784. 

V      Cygn.  - 

19 

51 

55 

19 

4  5 

5  5 

Long. 

J.  Herschil.  1842. 

K  t  Capr.  - 

20 

3 

104 

42 

9  5 

13  5 

- 

Hind,  1848. 

34    Cygn.  - 

20 

12 

52 

26 

3 

6 

18  years  ? 

Janson,  1600. 

Delph. 

20 

33 

77 

49 

8 

8— 

274  ? 

Srruve,  1823. 

Urs.  m. 

20 

38 

1 

2') 

5 

11 

- 

Pogson,  1  $53. 

Aquar 

20 

42 

95 

42 

- 

- 

Goldschmidr. 

T?   Capr.  - 

21 

15 

105 

47 

9  0 

- 

274 

B AC  7582- 

21 

39 

31 

54 

3 

6 

Long. 

W  Herschel,  1782. 

S  ?   Pega.  - 

22 

15 

82 

44 

8-5 

13  5 

. 

Hind,  1848. 

8       Ceph.  - 

22 

24 

32 

21 

3-7 

4-7 

5-3664 

Goodricke,  1784. 

0       Pega.  < 

22 

57 

62 

44 

2 

2-5 

41 

Srlimidt,  1848. 

R?  Pega.  - 

22 

59 

80 

16 

8-5 

135 

350 

Hind,  1848. 

R  ?  Aqua.  - 

23 

37 

106 

6 

6-5 

10 

388  50 

Harding.  1810. 

1    H?  Cass     - 

2:5 

51 

39 

26 

6 

14 

4*4? 

Pogson,  1853. 

(826.)  Irregularities  similar  to  those  which  have  been 
noticed  in  the  case  of  o  Ceti,  in  respect  of  the  maxima  and 
minima  of  brightness  attained  in  successive  periods,  have  been 
also  observed  in  several  others  of  the  stars  in  the  foregoing 
list,  x  Cygni,  for  example,  is  stated  by  Cassini  to  have  been 
scarcely  visible  throughout  the  years  1699,  1700,  1701,  at 
those  times  when  it  was  expected  to  be  most  conspicuous. 
No.  59  Scuti  is  sometimes  visible  to  the  naked  eye  at  its 
minimum,  and  sometimes  n  jt  so,  and  its  maximum  is  also  very 
irregular.  Pigott's  variable  star  in  Corona  is  stated  by  M. 
Argelander  to  vary  for  the  most  part  so  little  that  the  unaided 
eye  can  hardly  decide  on  its  maxima  and  minima,  while  yet 
after  the  lapse  of  whole  years  of  these  slight  fluctuations,  they 
suddenly  become  so  great  that  the  star  completely  vanishes. 
The  variations  of  a  Orionis,  which  were  most  striking  and  un- 
equivocal in  the  years  1836—  1840,  within  the  years  since 
elapsed  became  much  less  conspicuous.     In  Jan.   1849  they 


602  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

had  recommenced;  and  on  Dec.  5th,  1852,  Mr.  Fletcher  ob- 
served «  Orionis  brighter  than  Capella,  and  actually  the 
largest  star  in  the  Northern  hemisphere.  The  star  called  U 
Geminorum,  in  the  list  above  given,  is  stated  by  Mr.  Pogson 
to  be  subject  to  alternations  or  twinklings  of  light  from  the 
ninth  to  the  thirteenth  magnitude,  in  intervals  from  nine  to 
fifteen  seconds,  neighbouring  stars  of  equal  brightness  re- 
maining steady ! 

(827.)  These  irregularities  prepare  us  for  other  phenomena 
of  stellar  variation,  which  have  hitherto  been  reduced  to  no 
law  of  periodicity,  and  must  be  looked  upon,  in  relation  to 
our  ignorance  and  inexperience,  as  altogether  casual ;  or,  if 
periodic,  of  periods  too  long  to  have  occurred  more  than  once 
within  the  limits  of  recorded  observation.  The  phamomena 
we  allude  to  are  those  of  Temporary  Stars,  which  have  ap- 
peared, from  time  to  time,  in  different  parts  of  the  heavens, 
blazing  forth  with  extraordinary  lustre  ;  and  after  remaining 
awhile  apparently  immovable,  have  died  away,  and  left  no 
trace.  Such  is  the  star  which,  suddenly  appearing  some  time 
about  the  year  125  B  C,  and  which  was  visible  in  the  day- 
time, is  said  to  have  attracted  the  attention  of  Hipparchus, 
and  led  him  to  draw  up  a  catalogue  of  stars,  the  earliest  on 
record.  Such,  too,  was  the  star  which  appeared,  a.  d. 
389,  near  a  Aquilae,  remaining  for  three  weeks  as  bright  as 
Venus,  and  disappearing  entirely.  In  the  years  945,  1264, 
and  1572,  brilliant  stars  appeared  in  the  region  of  the  hea- 
vens between  Cepheus  and  Cassiopeia ;  and,  from  the  im- 
perfect account  we  have  of  the  places  of  the  two  earlier,  as 
compared  with  that  of  the  last,  which  was  well  determined, 
as  well  as  from  the  tolerably  near  coincidence  of  the  intervals 
of  their  appearance,  we  may  suspect  thein,  with  Goodricke, 
to  be  one  and  the  same  star,  with  a  period  of  ."512  or  perhaps 
of  156  years.  The  appearance  of  the  star  of  1572  was  so 
sudden,  that  Tycho  Brahe,  a  celebrated  Danish  astronomer, 
returning  one  evening  (the  11th  of  November)  from  his  la- 
boratory to  his  dwelling-house,  was  surprised  to  find  a  group 
of  country  people  gazing  at  a  star,  which  he  was  sure  did  not 
exist  half  an  hour  before.      This  was  the  star  in  question.      It 


IRKEGl'LAR    AND    TEMPORARY    STARS.  603 

was  then  as  bright  as  Sirius,  and  continued  to  increase  till 
it  surpassed  Jupiter  when  brightest,  and  was  visible  at  mid- 
day. It  began  to  diminish  in  December  of  the  same  year, 
and  in  March,  1574,  had  entirely  disappeared.  So,  also,  on 
the  10th  of  October,  1604,  a  star  of  this  kind,  and  not  less 
brilliant,  burst  forth  in  the  constellation  of  Serpentarius, 
which  continued  visible  till  October,  1605. 

(828.)  Similar  phenomena,  though  of  a  less  splendid  cha- 
racter, have  taken  place  more  recently,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
star  of  the  third  magnitude  discovered  in  1670,  by  Anthelm, 
in  the  head  of  the  Swan ;  which,  after  becoming  completely 
invisible,  re-appeared,  and,  after  undergoing  one  or  two  sin- 
gular fluctuations  of  light,  during  two  years,  at  last  died  away 
entirely,  and  has  not  since  been  seen. 

(829.)  On  the  night  of  the  28th  of  April,  1848,  Mr.  Hind 
observed  a  star  of  the  fifth  magnitude  or  5*4  (very  conspi- 
cuous to  the  naked  eye)  in  a  part  of  the  constellation  Ophiu- 
chus  (R.A.  16h  51m  ls-5.  N.P.D.  102°  39'  14"),  where,  from 
perfect  familiarity  with  that  region,  he  was  certain  that  up  to 
the  5th  of  that  month  no  star  so  bright  as  9*10  m.  previously 
existed.  Neither  has  any  record  been  discovered  of  a  star 
being  there  observed  at  any  previous  time.  From  the  time  of 
its  discovery  it  continued  to  diminish,  without  any  alteration 
of  place,  and  before  the  advance  of  the  season  rendered  further 
observation  impracticable,  was  nearly  extinct.  Its  colour 
was  ruddy,  and  was  thought  by  many  observers  to  undergo 
remarkable  changes,  an  effect  probably  of  its  low  situation. 

(830.)  The  alterations  of  brightness  in  the  southern  stai 
rj  Argus,  which  have  been  recorded,  are  very  singular  and 
surprising.  In  the  time  of  Halley  (1677)  it  appeared  as  a 
star  of  the  fourth  magnitude.  Lacaille,  in  1751,  observed 
it  of  the  second.  In  the  interval  from  1811  to  1815,  it  was 
again  of  the  fourth;  and  again  from  1822  to  1826  of  the  se- 
cond. On  the  1st  of  February,  1827,  it  was  noticed  by 
Mr.  Burchell  to  have  increased  to  the  first  magnitude,  and  to 
equal  a  Crucis.  Thence  again  it  receded  to  the  second  ;  and 
so  continued  until  the  <md  of  1837.  All  at  once  in  the  be- 
ginning of  1838  it  suddenly  increased  in  lustre  so  as  to 
surpass  all  the  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  except   Sirius, 


604  OUTLINES    OF    ASTKoNOMV. 

Canopus,  and  a  Centauri,  which  last  star  it  nearly  equalled. 
Thence  it  again  diminished,  but  this  time  not  below  the  1st 
magnitude  until  April,  1843,  when  it  had  again  increased  so 
as  to  surpass  Canopus,  and  nearly  equal  Sirius  in  splendour. 
In  May,  1863  [as  well  as  in  the  years  1866-68],  according  to 
Mr.  Abbott  [and  Mr.  John  Tebbutt,  jun.],  it  was  only  of  the 
6th  magnitude.*  Professor  Loomis  considers  it  as  periodica^ 
the  interval  of  the  minima  being  about  seventy  years.f  "  A 
strange  field  of  speculation,"  it  has  been  remarked,  "  is 
opened  by  this  phenomenon.  The  temporary  stars  here- 
tofore recorded  have  all  become  totally  extinct.  Variable 
stars,  so  far  as  they  have  been  carefully  attended  to,  have 
exhibited  periodical  alternations,  in  some  degree  at  least  re- 
gular, of  splendour  and  comparative  obscurity.  But  here 
we  have  a  star  fitfully  variable  to  an  astonishing  extent,  and 
whose  fluctuations  are  spread  over  centuries,  apparently  in 
no  settled  period,  and  with  no  regularity  of  progression. 
What  origin  can  we  ascribe  to  these  sudden  flashes  and 
relapses?  What  conclusions  are  we  to  draw  as  to  the 
habitability  of  a  system  depending  for  its  supply  of  light 
and  heat  on  so  uncertain  a  source  ?  "  Speculations  of  this 
kind  can  hardly  be  termed  visionary,  when  we  consider  that, 
from  what  has  before  been  said,  we  are  compelled  to  admit 
a  community  of  nature  between  the  fixed  stars  and  our  own 
sun ;  and  reflect  that  geology  testifies  to  the  fact  of  extensive 
changes  having  taken  place  at  epochs  of  the  most  remote 
antiquity  in  the  climate  and  temperature  of  our  globe  difficult 
to  reconcile  with  the  operation  of  secondary  causes,  such  as 
a  different  distribution  of  sea  and  land,  but  which  would  find 
an  easy  and  natural  explanation  in  a  slow  variation  of  the 
tupply  of  light  and  heat  afforded  by  the  sun  itself. 

C83 1 .)  The  Chinese  annals  of  Ma-touan-lin \,  in  which  stand 
officially  recorded,  though  rudely,  remarkable  astronomical 
phenomena,  supply  a  long  list  of  "  strange  stars,"  among 
which,  though  the  greater  part  are  evidently  comets,  some 
may  be  recognized  as  belonging  in  all  probability  to  the  class 
of  Temporary  Stars  M  above  characterized.      Such  is  that 

*    Notices  of  ft.  Ast.  Soc.  xxiv.  p.  6.  ;  xxv.  p   19'i. ;  xxviii.  p.  '200.  and  p.  266. 

t    Ibid.,  xxix.  p.  '2<»8. 

J  Tnundated  by  M.  Edward  Biot,  Connoumnce  dea  Temps.  184o'. 


MISSING    STARS.  605 

which  is  recorded  to  have  appeared  in  a.d.  173,  between  a 
and  /9  Centauri,  which  (no  doubt,  scintillating  from  its  low 
situation)  exhibited  "the  five  colours,"  and  remained  visible 
from  December  in  that  year  till  July  in  the  next.  And 
another  which  these  annals  assign  to  a.d.  1011,  and  which 
would  seem  to  be  identical  with  a  star  elsewhere  referred  tc 
a.d.  1012,  "which  was  of  extraordinary  brilliancy,  and  re- 
mained visible  in  the  southern  part  of  the  heavens  during 
three  months,"  *  a  situation  agreeing  with  the  Chinese  re- 
cord, which  places  it  low  in  Sagittarius.  Among  several  less 
unequivocal  is  one  referred  to  B.C.  134,  in  Scorpio,  which 
may  possibly  have  been  Hipparchus's  star.  [Lastly,  on 
May  12,  1866,  a  star  of  the  second  magnitude  was  unex- 
pectedly noticed  by  Mr.  Birmingham  (at  Tuam)  near  s  Co- 
ronje.  It  diminished  rapidly,  having  been  seen  by  Mr. 
Huggins  on  May  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20  respectively  as  3*6, 
4-2,  4-9,  5-3,  5-7,  and  6-2  m.  After  dwindling  to  10  m.  it 
again  recovered  so  far  as  to  have  been  seen  on  October  5  by 
M.  Schmidt  as  7  m.  Its  place  for  1866  was  K.A.  161'  54m; 
N.P.D.  63°  42'.  Its  spectrum  was  twofold,  exhibiting  both 
positive  and  negative  lines,  indicating  at  once  the  presence 
of  flame  and  absorptive  vapours.] 

(832.)  On  a  careful  re-examination  of  the  heavens,  and  a 
comparison  of  catalogues,  many  stars  are  now  found  to  be 
missing ;  and  although  there  is  no  doubt  that  these  losses 
have  arisen  in  the  great  majority  of  instances  from  mistaken 
entries,  and  in  some  from  planets  having  been  mistaken  for 
stars,  yet  in  some  it  is  equally  certain  that  there  is  no 
mistake  in  the  observation  or  entry,  and  that  the  star  has 
really  been  observed,  and  as  really  has  disappeared  from 
the  heavens.  The  whole  subject  of  variable  stars  is  a 
branch  of  practical  astronomy  which  has  been  too  little 
followed  up,  and  it  is  precisely  that  in  which  amateurs  of 
the  science,  and  especially  voyagers  at  sea,  provided  with 
only  good  eyes,  or  moderate  instruments,  might  employ 
their  time  to  excellent  advantage.     Catalogues  of  the  com- 

*  Hind,  Notices  of  the  Astronomical  Society,  viii.  156..  firing  Hepidannu*. 
He  places  the  Chinese  star  of  17:1  A.I).  In-tween  a  and  B  Canig  Minoris,  but  If, 
Biol  distinctly  says  a,  &  pied  orientul  dm  Cntaurt. 


606  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

parative  brightness  of  the  stars  in  each  constellation  have 
been  constructed  by  Sir  Wm.  Herschel,  with  the  express 
object  of  facilitating  these  researches,  and  the  reader  will 
find  them,  and  a  full  account  of  his  method  of  comparison,  in 
the  Phil.  Trans.  1796,  and  subsequent  years. 

(833.)  We  come  now  to  a  class  of  phenomena  of  quite  a 
different  character,  and  which  give  us  a  real  and  positive 
insight  into  the  nature  of  at  least  some  among  the  stars,  and 
enable  us  unhesitatingly  to  declare  them  subject  to  the  same 
dynamical  laws,  and  obedient  to  the  same  power  of  gravita- 
tion, which  governs  our  own  system.  Many  of  the  stars, 
when  examined  with  telescopes,  are  found  to  be  double,  i.  e. 
to  consist  of  two  (in  some  cases  three  or  more)  individuals 
placed  near  together.  This  might  be  attributed  to  accidental 
proximity,  did  it  occur  only  in  a  few  instances  ;  but  the  fre- 
quency of  this  companionship,  the  extreme  closeness,  and,  in 
many  cases,  the  near  equality  of  the  stars  so  conjoined,  would 
alone  lead  to  a  strong  suspicion  of  a  more  near  and  intimate 
relation  than  mere  casual  juxtaposition.  The  bright  star 
Castor,  for  example,  when  much  magnified,  is  found  to  con- 
sist of  two  stars  of  nearly  the  third  magnitude,  within  5"  of 
each  other.  Stars  of  this  magnitude,  however,  are  not  so 
common  in  the  heavens  as  to  render  it  otherwise  than  exces- 
sively improbable  that,  if  scattered  at  random,  they  would 
fall  so  near.  But  this  improbability  becomes  immensely  in- 
creased by  a  consideration  of  the  fact,  that  this  is  only  one  out 
of  a  great  many  similar  instances.  Michell,  in  1 767,  applying 
the  rules  for  the  calculation  of  probabilities  to  the  case  of  the 
six  brightest  stars  in  the  group  called  the  Pleiades,  found 
the  odds  to  be  500000  to  1  against  their  proximity  being 
the  mere  result  of  a  random  scattering  of  1500  stars  (which 
he  supposed  to  be  the  total  number  of  stars  of  that  magnitude, 
in  the  celestial  sphere  *)  over  the  heavens.  Speculating 
further  on  this,  as  an  indication  of  physical  connexion  rather 
than  fortuitous  assemblage,  he  was  led  to  surmise  the  possi- 
bility (since  converted  into  a  certainty,  but  at  that  time, 

*  This  number  is  considerably  too  small,  and  in  consequence,  Michel I's  odds 
in  this  case  materially  overrated.  But  enough  will  remain,  if  this  be  rectified, 
fully  to  bear  out  his  argument.      Phil.  Trans,  vol.  57. 


DOUBLE    STAK3.  fi07 

antecedent  to  any  observation)  of  the  existence  of  compound 
■fan  revolving  about  one  another,  or  rather  about  their  com- 
mon center  of  gravity.  M.  Struve,  pursuing  the  same  train 
of  thought  as  applied  specially  to  the  cases  of  double  and 
triple  combinations  of  stars,  and  grounding  his  computations 
on  a  more  perfect  enumeration  of  the  stars  visible  down  to 
the  7th  magnitude,  in  the  part  of  the  heavens  visible  at  Dor- 
pat,  calculates  that  the  odds  are  125  to  1  against  any  two 
stars,  from  the  1st  to  the  7th  magnitude  inclusive,  out  of  the 
whole  possible  number  of  binary  combinations  then  visible, 
falling  (if  fortuitously  scattered)  within  4"  of  each  other. 
Now  the  number  of  instances  of  such  binary  combinations 
actually  observed  at  the  date  of  this  calculation  was  already 
91,  and  many  more  have  since  been  added  to  the  list.  Again, 
he  calculates  that  the  odds  against  any  such  stars  fortuitously 
scattered,  falling  within  32"  of  a  third,  so  as  to  constitute  a 
triple  star,  is  not  less  than  4340  to  1.  Now,  four  such  com- 
binations occur  in  the  heavens ;  viz.  6  Orionis,  <r  Orionis, 
1 1  Monocerotis,  and  £  Cancri.  The  conclusion  of  a  physical 
connexion  of  some  kind  or  other  is  therefore  unavoidable. 

(834.)  Presumptive  evidence  of  another  kind  is  furnished 
by  the  following  consideration.  Both  a  Centauri  and  61 
Cygni  are  "  Double  Stars."  Both  consist  of  two  individuals^ 
nearly  equal,  and  separated  from  each  other  by  an  interval 
of  about  a  quarter  of  a  minute.  In  the  case  of  61  Cygni,  the 
stars  exceeding  the  7th  magnitude,  there  is  already  a  prima 
facie  probability  of  9  to  1  against  their  apparent  proximity. 
The  two  stars  of  a  Centauri  are  both  at  least  of  the  2nd 
magnitude,  of  which  altogether  not  more  than  about  50  or 
60  exist  in  the  whole  heavens.  But,  waving  this  considera- 
tion, both  these  stars,  as  we  have  already  seen,  have  a  proper 
motion  so  considerable  that,  supposing  the  constituent  indi- 
viduals unconnected,  one  would  speedily  leave  the  other  be- 
hind. Yet  at  the  earliest  dates  at  which  they  were  respec- 
tively observed  these  stars  were  not  perceived  to  be  double, 
and  it  is  only  to  the  employment  of  telescopes  magnifying  at 
least  8  or  10  times,  that  we  owe  the  knowledge  we  now 
possess  of  their  being  so.      With  such  a  telescope  Lacaillc,  in 


608  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

1751,  was  barely  able  to  perceive  the  separation  of  the  two 
constituents  of  a  Centauri,  whereas,  had  one  of  them  only 
been  affected  with  the  observed  proper  motion,  they  should 
then  have  been  6'  asunder.  In  these  cases  then  some  phy- 
sical connexion  may  be  regarded  as  proved  by  this  fact  alone. 
(835.)  Sir  William  Herschel  has  enumerated  upwards  of 
500  double  stars,  of  which  the  individuals  are  less  than  32" 
asunder.  M.  Struve,  prosecuting  the  inquiry  with  instru- 
ments more  conveniently  mounted  for  the  purpose,  and 
wrought  to  an  astonishing  pitch  of  optical  perfection,  has 
added  more  than  five  times  that  number.  And  other  ob- 
servers have  extended  still  further  the  catalogue  of  "  Double 
Stars,"  without  exhausting  the  fertility  of  the  heavens. 
Among  these  are  a  great  many  in  which  the  distance  between 
the  component  individuals  does  not  exceed  a  single  second. 
They  are  divided  into  classes  by  M.  Struve  (the  first  living 
authority  in  this  department  of  Astronomy;  according  to  the 
proximity  of  their  component  individuals.  The  first  class 
comprises  those  only  in  which  the  distance  does  not  exceed 
1";  the  2nd  those  in  which  it  exceeds  \"  but  falls  short  of  2" ; 
the  3rd  class  extends  from  2''  to  4"  distance ;  the  4th  from 
4"  to  8";  the  5th  from  8"  to  12";  the  6th  from  12"  to  16"; 
the  7th  from  16"  to  24",  and  the  8th  from  24"  to  32".  Each 
class  he  again  subdivides  into  two  sub-classes  of  which  the 
one  under  the  appellation  of  conspicuous  double  stars  (duplices 
lucidae)  comprehends  those  in  which  both  individuals  exceed 
the  8^  magnitude,  that  is  to  say,  are  separately  bright  enough 
to  be  easily  seen  in  any  moderately  good  telescope.  All 
others,  in  which  one  or  both  the  constituents  are  below  this 
limit  of  easy  visibility,  are  collected  into  another  sub-class, 
which  he  terms  residuary  {Duplices  reliquai).  This  arrange- 
ment is  so  far  convenient,  that  after  a  little  practice  in  the 
use  of  telescopes  as  applied  to  such  objects,  it  is  easy  to  judge 
what  optical  power  will  probably  suffice  to  resolve  a  star  of 
any  proposed  class  and  either  sub-class,  or  would  at  least  be 
so  if  the  second  or  residuary  sub-class  were  further  subdivided 
by  placing  in  a  third  sub-class  "  delicate  "  double  stars,  or 
tiiose  in  which  the  companion  star  is  so  very  minute  as  to 


DOUBLE    STARS. 


609 


require  a  high  degree  of  optical  power  to  perceive  it,  of  which 
instances  will  presently  be  given. 

(836.)  The  following  may  be  taken  as  specimens  of  each 
class.  They  are  all  taken  from  among  the  lucid,  or  conspi- 
cuous stars,  and  to  such  of  our  readers  as  may  be  in  possession 
of  telescopes,  and  may  be  disposed  to  try  them  on  such  ob- 
jects,  will  afford  him  a  ready  test  of  their  degree  of  efficiency. 


Class  I.,  0"  to  1". 


7  Coronae  Ror. 

7  Centauri. 

7  Lupi. 

e    Arietis. 

(,"   Herculis. 

~   2   Andromcdae. 


7  Circini. 

8  Cygni. 

<  Chamaleontis. 


a  Piscium. 
/S  Hydrae. 
7  Ceti. 
7  Leonis. 
7  Coronae  A  us. 


a  Cruris. 
a  Herculis. 
a  Geminorum. 
8  Geminorum. 
C  Coronae  Bor. 


B  Orionis. 
7  Arietis. 
7  Delphini. 


a  Centauri. 
/3  Cephei. 
0  Scorpii. 


a  Canum  Ven. 
«  Normae. 
(  Piscium. 


S  Herculis. 
v  Ljr«. 


tj  Coronae. 
i)  Herculis. 
A  Cassiopeia-. 
A   Ophiuchi. 
it  Lupi. 
A  Cygni. 

Class  II., 

C  Bootis. 
i  Cassiopeia;. 
«  2   Cancri. 


1  Ophiuchi. 

<p  Draconis. 

<p  Ursae  Majoris. 

X   Aquilae. 

u  Leonis. 

0  Andromed*. 


1"  to  2". 

£  Ursae  Majoris. 

it  Aquilae. 

<r  Coronae  Bor. 


Class  III.,  2"  to  4". 

7  Virginis.  f  Aquarii. 

8  Serpentis.  £  Orionis. 
c  Bootis.  <  Leonis. 

e  Draconis.  i  TriangulL 

€  Hydrae.  k  Leporis. 

Class  IV.,  4"  to  8". 

8  Phoenicis.  {  Cephei. 

k  Cephei.  ir  Bootis. 

A  Orionis.  p  Capricorni. 

fi  Cygni.  v  Argus. 

£  Bootis.  a)  Aurigae. 

Class  V.,  8"  to  12". 

(  Antliae. 

7}  Cassiopeia?. 

8  Eridani. 


Atlas  Pleiadum. 

4  Aquarii. 

5  Aquarii. 
42  Comae. 
52  Arietis. 
66  Piscium. 


2  Camelopard?. 
32  Orionis. 
52  Orionis- 


fi  Draconis. 
fi  Canis. 
p  Herculis. 
<r  Cassiopeia:. 
44  Bootis. 


fi  Eridani. 
70  Ophiuchi. 
12  Eridani. 
32  Eridani. 
95  Herculis 


i  Orionis. 
f  Eridani. 
2  Canum  Yea 


Class  VI.,  12"  to  16". 

7  Volantis. 

V  Lupi. 

£  Ursae  Major. 


x  Bootis. 

8  Monocerotis. 

61  Cygni 


Class  VII.,  16"  to  24". 

24  Comae. 
41   Draconis. 


8  Serpentis. 
k  Coronae  A  us. 


X  Tauri. 


61  Ophiuchi. 


Class  VIII.,  24"  to  32". 

k  Herculis.  %  Cygni. 

4,  Draconis.  23  Orionis. 

R  R 


610  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(837.)  Among  the  most  remarkable  triple,  quadruple,  or 
multiple  stars  (for  such  also  occur),  may  be  enumerated, 


7  Anilromedae. 

6  Ononis. 

£  Scorpii. 

f  Lyrae. 

a  Lupi. 

1 1  Monocerotis. 

£  Cancri. 

ix  Bootis. 

12  Lyncis. 

Of  these,  y  Andromeda?,  ju,  Bootis,  and  ju,  Lupi  appear  in 
telescopes,  even  of  considerable  optical  power,  only  as  ordi- 
nary double  stars ;  and  it  is  only  when  excellent  instruments 
are  used  that  their  smaller  companions  are  subdivided  and  found 
to  be,  in  fact,  extremely  close  double  stars,  e  Lyne  offers 
the  remarkable  combination  of  a  double-double  star.  Viewed 
with  a  telescope  of  low  power  it  appears  as  a  coarse  and  easily 
divided  double  star,  but  on  increasing  the  magnifying  power, 
each  individual  is  perceived  to  be  beautifully  and  closely 
double,  the  one  pair  being  about  2~",  the  other  about  3" 
asunder.  Each  of  the  stars  £  Cancri,  £  Scorpii,  1 1  Monoce- 
rotis, and  12  Lyncis  consists  of  a  principal  star,  closely  double, 
and  a  smaller  and  more  distant  attendant,  while  0  Orionis 
presents  the  phenomenon  of  four  brilliant  principal  stars,  of 
the  respective  4th,  6th,  7th,  and  8th  magnitudes,  forming  a 
trapezium,  the  longest  diagonal  of  which  is  21  "*4,  and  ac- 


companied by  two  excessively  minute  and  very  close  com- 
panions (as  in  the  annexed  figure),  to  perceive  both  which  it) 
one  of  the  severest  tests  which  can  be  applied  to  a  telescope. 
(838.)  Of  the  "delicate"  sub-class  of  double  stars,  or  those 
consisting  of  very  large  and  conspicuous  principal  stars,  ac- 
companied by  very  minute  companions,  the  following  speci- 
mens may  suffice : 


a  2   Cancri. 

a   Polaris. 

t   LJrsae  Majoris. 

1  Bootis. 

a  2   Capricorni. 

<x  Scorpii. 

k  Circini. 

<p   Vir^inis. 

a   Indi. 

8   Aquarii. 

k    Geminorum. 

X   Eridani. 

i  Lyrae. 

V   Hydra.. 

■  u    t'ersei. 

16   Auriga*. 

OF    HINAKY    STAKS.  611 

(839.)  To  the  amateur  of  Astronomv  the  double  stars  offer 
a  subject  of  very  pleasing  interest,  as  tests  of  the  performance 
of  his  telescopes,  and  by  reason  of  the  finely  contrasted 
colours  which  many  of  them  exhibit,  of  which  more  hereafter. 
But  it  is  the  high  degree  of  physical  interest  which  attaches 
to  them,  which  assigns  them  a  conspicuous  place  in  modern 
Astronomy,  and  justifies  the  minute  attention  and  unwearied 
diligence  bestowed  on  the  measurement  of  their  angles  of 
position  and  distances,  and  the  continual  enlargement  of  our 
catalogues  of  them  by  the  discovery  of  new  ones.  It  was, 
as  we  have  seen,  under  an  impression  that  such  combinations, 
if  diligently  observed,  might  attbrd  a  measure  of  parallax 
through  the  periodical  variations  it  might  be  expeeted  to 
produce  in  the  relative  situation  of  the  small  attendant  star, 
that  Sir  W.  Herschel  was  induced  (between  the  years  1779 
and  1784)  to  form  the  first  extensive  catalogues  of  them, 
under  the  scrutiny  of  higher  magnifying  powers  than  had 
ever  previously  been  applied  to  such  purposes.  In  the  pur- 
suit of  this  object,  the  end  to  which  it  was  instituted  as  a 
means  was  necessarily  laid  aside  for  a  time,  until  the  accu- 
mulation of  more  abundant  materials  should  have  afforded  a 
choice  of  stars  favourably  circumstanced  for  systematic  ob- 
servation. Epochal  measures  however,  of  each  star,  were 
secured,  and,  on  resuming  the  subject,  his  attention  was 
altogether  diverted  from  the  original  object  of  the  inquiry 
by  phamomena  of  a  very  unexpected  character,  which  at  one: 
engrossed  his  whole  attention.  Instead  of  finding,  as  he  ex 
pected,  that  annual  fluctuation  to  and  fro  of  one  star  of  a 
double  star  with  respect  to  the  other,  —  that  alternate  annual 
increase  and  decrease  of  their  distance  and  angle  of  position, 
which  the  parallax  of  the  earth's  annual  motion  would  pro- 
duce,— he  observed,  in  many  instances,  a  regular  progressive 
change;  in  some  cases  bearing  chiefly  on  their  distance,  —  in 
others  on  their  position,  and  advancing  steadily  in  one  direc- 
tion, so  as  clearly  to  indicate  either  a  real  motion  of  the  stars 
themselves,  or  a  general  rectilinear  motion  of  the  sun  and 
whole  solar  system,  producing  a  parallax  of  a  higher  order 
than  would  arise  from  the  earth's  orbitual  motion,  and  which 
might  be  called  systematic  parallax. 


612  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMT 

(840.;  Supposing  the  two  stars,  and  also  the  sun,  in  motion 
independently  of*  each  other,  it  is  clear  that  for  the  interval 
of  several  years,  these  motions  must  be  regarded  as  rectilinear 
and  uniform.  Hence,  a  very  slight  acquaintance  with  geo- 
metry will  suffice  to  show  that  the  apparent  motion  of  one 
star  of  a  double  star,  referred  to  the  other  as  a  center,  and 
mapped  down,  as  it  were,  on  a  plane  in  which  that  other  shall 
be  taken  for  a  fixed  or  zero  point,  can  be  no  other  than  a 
right  line.  This,  at  least,  must  be  the  case  if  the  stars  be 
independent  of  each  other ;  but  it  will  be  otherwise  if  they 
have  a  physical  connexion,  such  as,  for  instance,  real  proxi- 
mity and  mutual  gravitation  would  establish.  In  that  case, 
they  would  describe  orbits  round  each  other,  and  round  their 
common  center  of  gravity  ;  and  therefore  the  apparent  path 
of  either,  referred  to  the  other  as  fixed,  instead  of  being  a 
portion  of  a  straight  line,  would  be  bent  into  a  curve  concave 
towards  that  other.  The  observed  motions,  however,  were 
so  slow,  that  many  years'  observation  was  required  to  ascer- 
tain this  point ;  and  it  was  not,  therefore,  until  the  year 
1803,  twenty- five  years  from  the  commencement  of  the  in- 
quiry, that  any  thing  like  a  positive  conclusion  could  be  come 
to  respecting  the  rectilinear  or  orbitual  character  of  the  ob- 
served changes  of  position. 

(841.)  In  that,  and  the  subsequent  year,  it  was  distinctly 
announced  by  him,  in  two  papers,  which  will  be  found  in  the 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  for  those  years*,  that  there 
exist  sidereal  systems,  composed  of  two  stars  revolving  about 
each  other  in  regular  orbits,  and  constituting  what  may  be 
termed  birarj  stars,  to  distinguish  them  from  double  stars 
generally  so  called,  in  which  these  physically  connected  stars 
are  confounded,  perhaps,  with  others  only  optically  double,  or 
casually  juxtaposed  in  the  heavens  at  different  distances  from 
the  eye ;  whereas  the  individuals  of  a  binary  star  are,  of 
course,  equidistant  from  the  eye,  or,  at  least,  cannot  differ 
more  in  distance  than  the  semi-diameter  of  the  orbit  they 
describe  about  each  other,  whicli  is  quite  insignificant  com- 
pared with  the  immense  distance  between  them  and  the  earth. 

*  The  anno'incement  was  in  tact  ms^e  in  1802,  but  unaccompanied  by  tin 
observations  establishing  the  fact. 


OF    BINARY    STAR8.  613 

Between  fifty  and  sixty  instances  of  changes,  to  a  greater  or 
less  amount,  in  the  angles  of  position  of  double  stars,  are 
adduced  in  the  memoirs  above  mentioned;  many  of  which 
are  too  decided,  and  too  regularly  progressive,  to  allow  of 
their  nature  being  misconceived.  In  particular,  among  the 
more  conspicuous  stars,  —  Castor,  y  Virginis,  £  Ursa?,  70 
Ophiuchi,  <r  and  >j  Coronas,  £  Bootis,  >j  Cassiopeia?,  y  Leonis, 
£  Herculis,  8  Cygni,  ju.  Bootis,  e  4  and  e  5  Lyra,  A  Ophiuchi, 
ft  Draconis,  anil  £  xVquarii,  are  enumerated  as  among  the 
most  remarkable  instances  of  the  observed,  motion ;  and  to 
some  of  them  even  periodic  times  of  revolution  are  assigned ; 
approximative  only,  of  course,  and  rather  to  be  regarded  as 
rough  guesses  than  as  results  of  any  exact  calculation,  tor 
which  the  data  were  at  the  time  quite  inadequate.  For  in- 
stance, the  revolution  of  Castor  is  set  down  at  334  years,  that 
of  y  Virginis  at  708,  and  that  of  y  Leonis  at  1200  years. 

(842.)  Subsequent  observation  has  fully  confirmed  these 
results.  Of  all  the  stars  above  named,  there  is  not  one  which 
is  not  found  to  be  fully  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  binary  ; 
and,  in  fact,  this  list  comprises  nearly  all  the  most  considerable 
visible  in  our  latitudes  which  have  yet  been  detected, 
though  (as  attention  has  been  closely  drawn  to  the  subject, 
and  observations  have  multiplied)  it  has,  of  late,  received 
large  accessions.  Upwards  of  a  hundred  double  stars,  cer- 
tainly known  to  possess  this  character,  were  enumerated  by 
M.  Madler  in  1841  *,  and  more  are  emerging  into  notice  with 
every  fresh  mass  of  observations  which  come  before  the 
public.  They  require  excellent  telescopes  for  their  effective 
observation,  being  for  the  most  part  so  close  as  to  necessitate 
the  use  of  very  high  magnifiers  (such  as  would  be  considered 
extremely  powerful  microscopes  if  employed  to  examine 
objects  within  our  reach),  to  perceive  an  interval  between 
the  individuals  which  compose  them. 

(843.)  It  may  easily  be  supposed,  that  phaenomena  of  this 
kind  would  not  pass  without  attempts  to  connect  them  with 
dynamical  theories.  From  their  first  discovery,  they  were 
naturally  referred  to  the  agency  cf  some  power,  like  that  of 

*    Dorpat  Observations,  vol    ix.  1840  and  1  «4I . 


614  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

gravitation,  connecting  the  stars  thus  demonstrated  to  be  in 
a  state  of  circulation  about  each  other ;  and  the  extension  of 
the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation  to  these  remote  systernb 
was  a  step  so  obvious,  and  so  well  warranted  by  our  experi- 
ence of  its  all-sufficient  agency  in  our  own,  as  to  have  been 
expressly  or  tacitly  made  by  every  one  who  has  given  the 
subject  any  share  of  his  attention.  We  owe,  however,  the 
first  distinct  system  of  calculation,  by  which  the  elliptic 
elements  of  the  orbit  of  a  binary  star  could  be  deduced  from 
observations  of  its  angle  of  position  and  distance  at  different 
epochs,  to  M.  Savary,  who  showed*,  that  the  motions  of  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  among  them  (£  Ursae)  were  explicable, 
within  the  limits  allowable  for  error  of  observation,  on  the 
supposition  of  an  elliptic  orbit  described  in  the  short  period 
of  58 \  years.  A  different  process  of  computation  conducted 
Professor  Enckef  to  an  elliptic  orbit  for  70  Ophiuchi,  de- 
scribed in  a  period  of  seventy-four  years.     M.  Madler   has 

ccially  signalized  himself  in  this  line  of  inquiry  (see  Table). 
nil  orbits  have  also  been  calculated  by  Mr.  Hind,  Ad- 
min,1  Smyth,  Mr.  Jacob,  Mr.  Powell,  M.  Villarceau,  Pro- 
>rs  Winnecke  and  Klinkerfues ;  and  the  author  of  these 

cs  has  himself  attempted  to  contribute  his  mite  to  these 
interesting  investigations.!  The  following  may  be  stated  as 
the  chief  results  which  have  been  hitherto  obtained  in  this 
branch  of  astronomy  §  :  — 

*   Connoiss.  des  Temps,  1830.  \    Berlin  Ephem.  1832. 

1   Mem.  It.  Ast.  Soc.  vols.  v.  and  xviii. 

§  Tlie  "position  of  the  node"  in  col.  4.  expresses  the  angle  of  position  (sea 
art.  '204.)  of  the  line  of  intersection  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  with  the  plane  ol 
the  heavens  on  which  it  is  seen  projected.  The  •*  inclination  "  in  col.  6.  is  the 
inclination  of  these  two  planes  to  one  another.  Col.  5.  shows  tbe  angle  ac- 
tually included  in  I  he  plane  of  the  orbit,  between  the  line  of  nodes  (defined  as 
above)  and  the  line  of  apsides.  Theelerrents  assigned  in  this  table  to  »  Leonis, 
{  Bootis,  and  Castor  must  be  considered  as  very  doubtful.  Some  cause  of  per- 
turbatio  lias  been  suspected  to  exist  in  the  movements  of  p.  Ophiuchi.  Mr. 
Jacob,  c  tvparing  some  old  (and  no  doubt  very  rude)  observations  by  Richaud 
and  Feuille,  in  1690  and  1709,  draws  a  similar  conclusion  in  the  case  of  the 
system  of  a  Centauri.  Comparing  the  more  modern  (and  only  reliable  obser- 
vations) however,  this  opinion  seems  hardly  entitled  to  the  confidence  with  which 
he  insists  on  it.  A  very  few  years'  additional  observation  will  decide  the  ques- 
tion. This  magnificent  double  star  well  merits  the  most  careful  and  tiiligi  nt 
attention  of  astronomers. 


OP    BINARY    STARS. 


615 


1 

^                             k             ta"      ti 

3 

.2                     .2          S     .o 

O. 

C                                 S       _j  S         fl                               _-2                    ^ 

E 

0S^a8j4-r;0S«^        T>         C  T,        "^                                 O                     O 

E 
o 

1 

.•o.'uoa    •Jl"       >-       2     q_2       2      £      £      —              Oi 

a>   u    «   -   C   2   t^  w   «   i.    v  JS   ®   «3  *<     .    y     .    sS   ^   «     •«     •     .  J3   ^     •     . 
:c3  —  :rf  ;-  —  —    >    <jj  :e4  —  .—  -^   g   <u -jj         m  .5.   <u  .t2  :cs  .~  :e8  .s     #   g  .~  .=     . 

>> 

m 

B 

t^              «C                                           vs              — i 

2  rf 

«e-KNO«5«'tcfflOoo(pc»iM»snno(DOfloosono 

—  to 

—  « 

ooi^-o  «5>ob»6tb6o}  —  ;oi^oG6oi<fi6>beo6i«o<bas  —  ^a  » 

(ooo|oO'<--<--^'f'00oON(0(,)io-i«'N(N(Nnioiai'j 

i« 

00  00  00  xooxooao»oo»ooxiooxxt--.ooooMOicoooooooooxoooo 

.5    . 

©NOS-         -MO-fOSO         (NOOtOOOOOtOOO               O 

o  s 

-«iaONO,tS(NONnNO-*N^1lOfl(OIMNi.100ClNQOO 

8  6- 

oi>^>eociao»0  —  ~cNt^«©^ab^oo;N<N<N4*oo<b6>b«>>'—  >o 

nW't'ttfiO«5C0a(DX'MNXC)CS'-N00iO«)WOc<5^O>N00N 

cu 

<M                                       r-l«rH(Mff)tO(aN(Mrt 

v3n«cro(oO!C(Ccs««i'5«5,C!oion(onxi|c»ei<ostoMO 

'i'JlTrt  M  ■*         <C  •*  CO  —  ?<         «5«5        (Nn        "O  i-i  <N  CO        ■<*  «o  »o  »<o 

^  .2 

o 

'f«O>OiO«Ot0*1lf)CO500NciO(DnOOnC>iOV5«0N'NN 

M 

c    u     . 

Ci«5»—  C.OJ        OOcNOCt^t^         'NtO-f010)^"OC)NCMX'JiMSNCN 

3  "0  ." 

«iO"CN           t    CO  CM  -*  >0  ©J     1CN-t-1,S^>OCN'*CNC0CNe0CN>OVSCN           • 

1*1 

o 

.6  _  o 

CO  •«*  «C  «0  *^         wt  O  *>0         l'5i(5i(5NpnnNNCC'<fC»CO--tO 

t^  ©  ~  —  <N       co  co  co  <N  ao       oi  T  vs       vi'-aaoxiiowffiOacM 

'~.   -  - 

^    3    c 

5u>  o 

N->(N(S«     i    mmh^h    i    HF.M         rtflM               00                     ^-  CN           i 

0  -3 

".5   0 

v)<-!OX««(MN(NO-IM(NJI'NOO)1,MtOi(5'JlNn«SN«0 

CNCN        '"e0CNCN"*>OiO"^,*-«        wn«3  V5C0              CN                    «c        cn>o 

o 

n°<~ 

—  CO  CN  CN  — .^CiCS05CT>e0;O"*,C0<NCi>OCN         «OCN»-'CNCN               00  ~  t- 

B«  o 

«„„„_NM                                                                        _ 

O  —  C'MO     i    OOOJOXXSOO)         ■"I'r^.'HOVOOaOOOOOOC 
O  (N  C  O  t!         -3"f>-'.Or*,SO-*Ob»-r         NUXMNCM'ONONXOOIO 

C    »s 

s  • - 

c-i  »  ci  »  ^      <ONn-"C3(NO<c-enoc»»NOOJiooo«0'oc 

i.  a 

W  i: 

K  'f  X  »N         i-N-«'1'IS«i(OCJT)iO>ON>OC»'*aiiM«0>ONC 

^f  ^f  <n  cn  ■*»«       •<!tW'^'**cDt^rj<Tj<'»f>o>o«)oor>-t>.cN<rit^eoectJ3t>-c; 

66606   «  66066066606666066666606 

id 

W'fWffiWONXNaN    .«?!■♦     iO-O<0»OX't         t^OOO 
?  11  O  «5  -"  S  '?  N  -  K  '1     ,'N3i©         C-XXOO-CR-t-ONO 

?•  fi  3509  9  »(N  i"*  x       wot-      ipyppona  -asionso 

53  § 

C-2 

El 

v    -o6«-«Bn(NJtO   i^-^^r   ■<N~cocfci^6c'5»bcNCN»bco6 

<  a! 

E 

1 

■ 

till 1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     t     1     1  _  1     t     1     1     1     1     1     . 

1     1     I     1     I     ■     1     1      1     1     ■     1     1     1      1     1      I     I     1     I     1     1     1     1     1     I           II 

m             .                                                               I3                                      «•                           .                      "E 

^cBJOtS      S  2  3-2  2  3  5  3  S.2-f  S2SB23S3SS 

4>g  oS  §5  2  55c  S'c"c-cca  °  >l~  Sec  ccab  Sao 

JO,         p-       JU»       v/                     3          c.                   m*«o    ?■                     b                      8 

L 

^^s<CNeori'^'t-*'*«o«d«s~«o~t^ooci666<—  —  —  —  ©JoSei 

616  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(844.)  Of  the  stars  in  the  above  list,  that  which  has  been 
most  assiduously  watched,  and  has  offered  phenomena  of  the 
greatest  interest,  is  7  Virginis.  It  is  a  star  of  the  vulgar 
3rd  magnitude  (3'08-=Photom.  3*494),  and  its  component 
individuals  are  very  nearly  equal,  and  as  it  would  seem  in 
some  slight  degree  variable,  since,  according  to  the  observa- 
tions of  M.  Struve,  the  one  is  alternately  a  little  greater 
and  a  little  less  than  the  other,  and  occasionally  exactly 
equal  to  it  It  has  been  known  to  consist  of  two  stars  since 
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  ;  the  distance  being 
then  between  six  and  seven  seconds,  so  that  any  tolerably 
good  telescope  would  resolve  it.  When  observed  by  Herschel 
in  1780,  it  was  5"'66,  and  continued  to  decrease  gradually 
and  regularly  till  at  length,  in  1836,  the  two  stars  had  ap- 
proached so  closely  as  to  appear  perfectly  round  and  single 
under  the  highest  magnifying  power  which  could  be  ap- 
plied to  most  excellent  instruments — the  great  refractor  at 
Pulkowa  alone,  with  a  magnifying  power  of  1000,  continuing 
to  indicate  by  the  wedge-shaped  form  of  the  disc  of  the  star 
its  composite  nature.  By  estimating  the  ratio  of  its  length 
to  its  breadth  and  measuring  the  former,  M.  Struve  concludes 
that,  at  this  epoch  (1836*41),  the  distance  of  the  two  stars, 
center  from  center,  might  be  stated  at  0"*22.  From  that 
time  the  star  again  opened,  and  is  now  again  a  perfectly 
easily  separable  star.  This  very  remarkable  diminution  and 
subsequent  increase  of  distance  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
corresponding  and  equally  remarkable  increase  and  subse- 
quent diminution  of  relative  angular  motion.  Thus,  in  the 
year  1783  the  apparent  angular  motion  hardly  amounted  to 
half  a  degree  per  annum,  while  in  1830  it  had  increased  to 
5°,  in  1834  to  20°,  in  1835  to  40°,  and  about  the  middle  of 
1836  to  upwards  of  70°  per  annum,  or  at  the  rate  of  a  degree 
in  five  days.  This  is  in  entire  conformity  with  the  principles 
of  Dynamics,  which  establish  a  necessary  connexion  between 
the  angular  velocity  and  the  distance,  as  well  in  the  apparent 
as  in  the  real  orbit  of  one  body  revolving  about  another 
under  the  influence  of  mutual  attraction;  the  former  varying 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  latter,  in  both  orbits,  what 


ORBITS   OF    BIN  A  BY    STARS.  617 

ever  be  the  curve  described  and  whatever  the  law  of  the 
attractive  force.  It  fortunately  happens  that  Bradley,  in 
1718,  had  noticed  and  recorded  in  the  margin  of  one  of  his 
observation  books,  the  apparent  direction  of  the  line  of  junc- 
tion of  the  two  stars,  as  seen  on  the  meridian  in  his  transit 
telescope,  viz.,  parallel  to  the  line  joining  two  conspicuous  stars 
a  and  8  of  the  same  constellation,  as  seen  by  the  naked  eye. 
This  note,  rescued  from  oblivion  by  the  late  Professor  Rigaud, 
has  proved  of  singular  service  in  the  verification  of  the  elements 
above  assigned  to  the  orbit,  which  represent  the  whole  series 
of  recorded  observations  that  date  up  to  the  end  of  1846 
(comprising  an  angular  movement  of  nearly  nine- tenths  of 
a  complete  circuit),  both  in  angle  and  distance,  with  a  degree 
of  exactness  fully  equal  to  that  of  observation  itself.  No 
doubt  can,  therefore,  remain  as  to  the  prevalence  in  this 
remote  system  of  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation. 

(845.)  The  observations  of  f  Ursae  Majoris  are  equally 
well  represented  by  M.  Madler's  elements  (4  c  of  our  table), 
thus  fully  justifying  the  assumption  of  the  Newtonian  law 
as  that  which  regulates  the  motions  of  their  binary  systems. 
And  even  should  it  be  the  case,  as  M.  Madler  appears  to 
consider,  that  in  one  instance  at  least  (that  of  p  Ophiuchi), 
deviations  from  elliptic  motion,  too  considerable  to  arise  from 
mere  error  of  observation,  exist  (a  position  we  are  by  no 
means  prepared  to  grant*),  we  should  rather  be  disposed  to 
look  for  the  cause  of  such  deviations  in  perturbations  arising 
(as  Bessel  has  suggested)  from  the  large  or  central  star  itself 
being  actually  a  close  and  hitherto  unrecognized  double  star 
than  in  any  defect  of  generality  in  the  Newtonian  law. 

(846.)  If  the  great  length  of  the  periods  of  some  of  these 
bodies  be  remarkable,  the  shortness  of  those  of  others  is 
hardly  less  so.     $  Herculis  has  already  completed  two  revo- 

•  p  Ophiuchi  belongs  to  the  class  of  very  unequal  double  stars,  the  magni- 
tudes of  the  individuals  being  4  and  7.  Such  stars  present  difficulties  in  the 
exact  measurement  of  their  angles  of  position  which  even  yet  continue  to  em- 
barrass the  observer,  though,  owing  to  later  improvements  in  the  art  of  executing 
such  measurements  their  influence  is  confined  within  much  narrower  limits  than 
in  the  earlier  history  of  the  subject.  In  simply  placing  a  fine  single  wire  parallel 
to  the  line  of  junction  of  two  such  stars  it  is  easily  possible  to  commit  an  error 
of  3°  or  4°.  By  placing  them  between  two  parallel  thick  wires  such  errors  are 
In  great  measure  obviated.  [The  elements  by  Schur,  in  our  table,  Art.  MS, 
represent  with  the  exactness  of  observation  itself  the  whole  series  of  position! 
wd  distances  observed  from  1779  to  ]S6o".J 


618  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

lutions  since  the  epoch  of  its  first  discovery,  exhibiting  in  its 
course  the  extraordinary  spectacle  of  a  sidereal  occultation,  the 
small  star  having  twice  been  hidden  behind  or  before  the 
large  one.  rj  Coronae,  £  Cancri,  £  Ursae  and  a.  Centauri  have 
each  performed  more  than  one  entire  circuit,  and  70  Ophiuchi 
and  7  Virginia  have  accomplished  by  far  the  larger  portion  ol 
one  in  angular  motion.  If  any  doubt,  therefore,  could  remain 
as  to  the  reality  of  their  orbitual  motions,  or  any  idea  of  ex- 
plaining them  by  mere  parallactic  changes,  or  by  any  other 
hypothesis  than  the  agency  of  centripetal  force,  these  facts 
must  suffice  for  their  complete  dissipation.  We  have  the 
same  evidence,  indeed,  of  their  rotations  about  each  other, 
that  we  have  of  those  of  Uranus  and  Neptune  about  the 
sun;  and  the  correspondence  between  their  calculated  and 
observed  places  in  such  very  elongated  ellipses,  must  be 
admitted  to  carry  with  it  proof  of  the  prevalence  of  the 
Newtonian  law  of  gravity  in  their  systems,  of  the  very  same 
nature  and  cogency  as  that  of  the  calculated  and  observed 
places  of  comets  round  the  central  body  of  our  own. 

(847.)  But  it  is  not  with  the  revolutions  of  bodies  of  a 
planetary  or  cometary  nature  round  a  solar  center  that  we 
are  now  concerned;  it  is  with  that  of  sun  round  sun  —  each, 
perhaps,  at  least  in  some  binary  systems  where  the  individuals 
are  very  remote  and  their  period  of  revolution  very  long, 
accompanied  with  its  train  of  planets  and  their  satellites, 
closely  shrouded  from  our  view  by  the  splendour  of  their 
respective  suns,  and  crowded  into  a  space  bearing  hardly 
a  greater  proportion  to  the  enormous  interval  which  separates 
them,  than  the  distances  of  the  satellites  of  our  planets  from 
their  primaries  bear  to  their  distances  from  the  sun  itself. 
A  less  distinctly  characterized  subordination  would  be  in- 
compatible with  the  stability  of  their  systems,  and  with 
the  planetary  nature  of  their  orbits.  Unless  closely  nestled 
under  the  protecting  wing  of  their  immediate  superior,  the 
sweep  of  their  other  sun  in  its  perihelion  passage  round  their 
own  might  carry  them  off,  or  whirl  them  into  orbits  utterly 
incompatible  with  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  existence 
of  their  inhabitants.     It   must   be   confessed,  that   we  have 


DIMENSIONS    OF    ORBITS   Of    DOUBLE    STAKS.  619 

here  a  strangely  wide  and  novel  field  lor  speculative  excur- 
sions, and  one  which  it  is  not  easy  to  avoid  luxuriating  in. 

(848.)  The  discovery  of  the  parallaxes  of  a  Centauri  and  61 
Cygni,  both  which  are  above  enumerated  among  the  "  conspi- 
cuous "  double  stars  of  the  6th  class  (a  distinction  fully  merited 
in  the  case  of  the  former  by  the  brilliancy  of  both  its  con- 
stituents), enables  us  to  speak  with  an  approach  to  certainty 
as  to  the  absolute  dimensions  of  both  their  orbits,  and  thence 
to  form  a  probable  opinion  as  to  the  general  scale  on  which 
these  astonishing  systems  are  constructed.  The  distance  of 
the  two  stars  of  61  Cygni  subtends  at  the  earth  an  angle 
which,  since  the  earliest  micrometrical  measures  in  1781,  has 
varied  hardly  1"  either  way  from  a  mean  value  16"*5.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  angle  of  position  has  altered  since  the 
same  epoch  by  nearly  50°,  so  that  it  would  appear  probable 
that  the  true  form  of  the  orbit  is  not  far  from  circular,  its 
bituation  at  right  angles  to  the  visual  line,  and  its  periodio 
time  probably  not  short  of  500  years.  Now,  as  the  as- 
certained parallax  of  this  star  is  0"*348,  which  is,  therefore, 
the  angle  the  radius  of  the  earth's  orbit  would  subtend  if 
equally  remote,  it  follows  that  the  mean  distance  between 
the  stars  is  to  that  radius,  as  16"*5  :  0"'348,  or  as  47'41  :  1. 
The  orbit  described  by  these  two  stars  about  each  other  un- 
doubtedly, therefore,  greatly  exceeds  in  dimensions  that 
described  by  Neptune  about  the  sun.  Moreover,  supposing 
the  period  to  be  five  centuries  (and  the  distance  being  ac- 
tually on  the  increase,  it  can  hardly  be  less)  the  general  pro- 
positions laid  down  by  Newton*,  taken  in  conjunction  with 
Kepler's  third  law,  enable  us  to  calculate  the  sum  of  the 
masses  of  the  two  stars,  which,  on  these  data,  we  find  to  be 
0*353,  the  mass  of  our  sun  being  1.  The  snn,  therefore,  is 
neither  vastly  greater  nor  vastly  less  than  the  stars  com- 
posing 61  Cygni. 

(849.)  The  data  in  the  case  of  a  Centauri  are  more  un- 
certain. Since  the  year  1822,  the  distance  has  been  steadilv 
and  pretty  rapidly  decreasing  at  an  average  rate  of  about  half  a 
second  per  annum,  and  that  with  little  change  till  lately  in  the 

•   I'rincipia,  1.  i.      Prop,  57,  .58,  59. 


620  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

angle  of  position.*  Hence,  it  follows  evidently  that  the 
plane  of  its  orbit  passes  nearly  through  the  earth,  and  (the 
distance  about  the  middle  of  1834  having  been  17|")  it 
is  very  probable  that  either  an  occultation,  like  that  ob- 
served in  f  Herculis,  or  a  close  appulse  of  the  two  stars,  wih 
take  place  about  the  year  1859.  As  the  observations  we 
possess  afford  no  sufficient  grounds  for  a  satisfactory  calcula- 
tion of  elliptic  elements  we  must  be  content  to  assume  what, 
at  all  events,  they  fully  justify,  viz.,  that  the  major  semiaxis 
must  exceed  12",  and  is  very  probably  considerably  greater. 
Now  this  with  aparallax  of  0"'913  would  give  for  the  real  value 
of  the  semiaxis  13*15  radii  of  the  earth's  orbit,  as  a  minimum. 
The  real  dimensions  of  their  ellipse,  therefore,  cannot  be  so 
small  as  the  orbit  of  Saturn  ;  in  all  probability  exceeds  that  of 
Uranus;  and  may  possibly  be  much  greater  than  cither. 

(850.)  The  parallel  between  these  two  double  stars  is  a 
remarkable  one.  Owing  no  doubt  to  their  comparative  prox- 
imity to  our  system,  their  apparent  proper  motions  are  both 
unusually  great,  and  for  the  same  reason  probably  rather 
than  owing  to  unusually  large  dimensions,  their  orbits  appear 
to  us  under  what,  for  binary  double  stars,  we  must  call  un- 
usually large  angles.  Each  consists,  moreover,  of  stars,  not 
very  unequal  in  brightness,  and  in  each  both  the  stars  are  of 
a  high  yellow  approaching  to  orange  colour,  the  smaller 
individual,  in  each  case,  being  al?o  of  a  deeper  tint.  What- 
ever the  diversity,  therefore,  which  may  obtain  among  other 
sidereal  objects,  these  would  appear  to  belong  to  the  same 
family  or  genus. f 

(851.)  Many  of  the  double  stars  exhibit  the  curious  and 
beautiful  phenomenon  of  contrasted  or  complementary 
colours.  \     In   such  instances,  the  larger  star  is  usually  of  a 

*  In  tlie  70  years  between  Laeaille's  observations  and  1822.  tbere  exists  nr 
record  of  any  observed  angle  of  position. 

t  Similar  combinations  are  very  numerous.  Many  reniaikable  instances 
oecur  among  the  double  stars  catalogued  by  the  author  in  the  2nd,  3rd.  4th, 
6th  and  9th  volumes  of  Trans.  Roy.  Ast.  Soc  and  in  the  volume  of  Southern 
observations  already  cited.  See  Nos.  121,375,  1066,  I  907,  2030,  2146,  224-1, 
i'772,  3853,  3395,  3998,  4000,  4055,  4196,  4210,  4615,4649,  4765,  500f?,  5012, 
of  these  catalogues.  The  fine  binary  star.  B.  A.  C.  No.  4923,  has  its  constituent! 
IS"  apart  (he  one  6m.  yellow,  the  ot^er  7m.  orange. 

{   « other  suns  pernaps. 

With  their  attendant  mooit*  tfxiu  wilt  descry. 


COLOURED    DOUBLE   STARS.  621 

ruddy  or  orange  hue,  while  the  smaller  one  appears  blue  or 
green,  probably  in  virtue  of  that  general  law  of  optics,  which 
provides,  that  when  the  retina  is  under  the  influence  of 
excitement  by  any  bright,  coloured  light ;  feebler  lights, 
which  seen  alone  would  produce  no  sensation  but  of  white- 
ness, shall  for  the  time  appear  coloured  with  the  tint  com- 
plementary to  that  of  the  brighter.  Thus  a  yellow  colour 
predominating  in  the  light  of  the  brighter  star,  that  of  the 
less  bright  one  in  the  same  field  of  view  will  appear  blue  ; 
while,  if  the  tint  of  the  brighter  star  verge  to  crimson,  that 
of  the  other  will  exhibit  a  tendency  to  green — or  even 
appear  as  a  vivid  green,  under  favourable  circumstances. 
The  former  contrast  is  beautifully  exhibited  by  »  Cancri  — 
the  latter  by  y  Andromeda?*,  both  fine  double  stars.  If, 
however,  the  coloured  star  be  much  the  less  bright  of  the 
two,  it  will  not  materially  affect  the  other.  Thus,  for  in- 
stance, 7]  Cassiopeia?  exhibits  the  beautiful  combination  of 
a  large  white  star,  and  a  small  one  of  a  rich  ruddy  purple. 
It  is  by  no  means,  however,  intended  to  say,  that  in  all  such 
leases  one  of  the  colours  is  a  mere  effect  of  contrast,  and  it 
may  be  easier  suggested  in  words,  than  conceived  in  imagi- 
nation, what  variety  of  illumination  two  suns — a  red  and  a 
green,  or  a  yellow  and  a  blue  one  —  must  afford  a  planet 
circulating  about  either ;  and  what  charming  contrasts  and 
"  grateful  vicissitudes," — a  red  and  a  green  day,  for  instance, 
alternating  with  a  white  one  and  with  darkness, — might 
arise  from  the  presence  or  absence  of  one  or  other,  or  both, 
above  the  horizon.  Insulated  stars  of  a  red  colour,  almost 
as  deep  as  that  of  blood  f,  occur  in  many  parts  of  the  heavens, 

Communicating  male  and  female  light, 
(Which  two  great  sexes  animate  the  world,) 
Stored  in  each  orb,  perhaps,  with  some  that  live." 

l'aradine  Lout,  viii.   148. 

•  The  small  star  of  7  Andromeda?  is  close  double.  Both  its  individuals  are 
green:  a  similar  combination,  with  even  more  decided  colours,  is  presented  by 
the  doubli*  star,  h.  881. 

f  The  following  are  the  H,  ascerr ions  and  N.  P.  distances  for  1 830,  of  some 
of  the  most  remarkable  of  thes<-  sanguine  or  ruby  stars  :  — 


622  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

but  no  green  or  blue  star  (of  any  decided  hue)  has,  we  believe, 
ever  been  noticed  unassociated  with  a  companion  brighter 
than  itself.     Many  of  the  red  stars  are  variable. 

(852.)  Another  very  interesting  subject  of  inquiry,  in  the 
physical  history  of  the  stars,  is  their  proper  motion.  It  was 
first  noticed  by  Halley,  that  three  principal  stars,  Sirius, 
Arcturus,  and  Aldebaran,  are  placed  by  Ptolemy,  on  the 
strength  of  observations  made  by  Hipparchus,  130  years  B.C., 
in  latitudes  respectively  20',  22',  and  33'  more  northerly  than 
he  actually  found  them  in  1717.*  Making  due  allowance  for 
the  diminution  of  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  in  the  interval 
(1847  years)  they  ought  to  have  stood,  if  really  fixed,  re- 
spectively 10',  14',  and  0'  more  southerly.  As  the  circum- 
stances of  the  statement  exclude  the  supposition  of  error  of 
transcription  in  the  MSS.,  we  are  necessitated  to  admit  a 
southward  motion  in  latitude  in  these  stars  to  the  very  con- 
siderable extent,  respectively,  of  37',  42',  and  33',  and  this  is 
corroborated  by  an  observation  of  Aldebaran  at  Athens,  in 
the  year  A.  d.  509,  which  star,  on  the  11th  of  March  in  that 
year,  was  seen  immediately  after  its  emergence  from  occul- 
tation  by  the  moon,  in  such  a  position  as  it  could  not  have 
had  if  the  occupation  were  not  nearly  central.  Now,  from  the 
knowledge  we  have  of  the  lunar  motions,  this  could  not  have 
been  the  case  had  Aldebaran  at  that  time  so  much  southern 
latitude  as  at  present.  A  priori,  it  might  be  expected  that 
apparent  motions  of  some  kind  or  other  should  be  detected 
among  so  great  a  multitude  of  individuals  scattered  through 
apace,  and  with  nothing  to  keep  them  fixed.  Their  mutual 
attractions  even,  however  inconceivably  enfeebled  by  dis- 
tance, and  counteracted  by  opposing  attractions  from  op- 
posite quarters,  must  in  the  lapse  of  countless  nges  produce 

It.  A.  N.  P.  D.    R.  A.  N.  P.  D  R.  A.  N.  P.  D. 

h.  in.  s.  °   '  "  h.  m.  s.  °   '  "  h.  m.  s.  °      '     " 

4   40  53  61  46  21  10  .52  10  107  24  40  21  37  18  31  59   47 

4  51  51  105  2  4  12  37  31  148  45  47  21  37  20  52  54  47 


N. 

P. 

D. 

o 

/ 

ii 

61 

46 

21 

105 

2 

4 

136 

32 

15 

152 

2 

48 

ISO 

47 

12 

N. 

P.  D 

0 

/  ii 

107 

24  40 

148 

45  47 

122 

2  0 

111 

50  11 

48 

22  40 

5  38  29   136  32  15   16  29  41    122  2  0   21  15  37    48  8  1! 
9  27  56        152  2  48   20  7  8 
9  18  81    ISO  47  12   2J  15  36 

Of  tho'e  No.  6.  (in  order  of  right  ascension)  is  in  the  same  field  of  view  with 
a  Ilyi'ra'  et  Crateris,  and  No.  7.  witli  $  Crucis.  No.  2.  (in  the  same  order)  is 
vumble 

*   Phil.  Trans.  1717,  vol.  xxx.  fo.  736. 


PROPER  MOTIONS  OF  THE  STARS.         623 

home  movements  —  some  change  of  internal  arrangement 
—  resulting  from  the  difference  of  tne  opposing  actions. 
And  it  is  a  fact,  that  such  apparent  motions  are  really  proved 
to  exist  by  the  exact  observations  of  modern  astronomy. 
Thus,  as  we  have  seen,  the  two  stars  of  61  Cygni  have 
remained  constantly  at  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same, 
distance,  of  15",  for  at  least  fifty  years  past,  although 
they  have  shifted  their  local  situation  in  the  heavens,  in 
this  interval  of  time,  through  no  less  than  4'  23'',  the 
annual  proper  motion  of  each  star  being  5"*3;  by  which 
quantity  (exceeding  a  third  of  their  interval)  this  system  is 
every  year  carried  bodily  along  in  some  unknown  path,  by 
a  motion  which,  for  many  centuries,  must  be  regarded  as 
uniform  and  rectilinear.  Among  stars  not  double,  and  no 
way  differing  from  the  rest  in  any  other  obvious  particular, 
£  Indi*,  Grooinb.  1830,  and  /t  Cassiopeia?  are  to  be  remarked 
as  having  the  greatest  proper  motions  of  any  yet  ascertained, 
amounting  respectively  to  7"*74,  7"'75  and  3"*74  of  annual 
displacement.  And  a  great  many  others  have  been  observed 
to  be  thus  constantly  carried  away  from  their  places  by 
smaller,  but  not  less  unequivocal  motions,  t 

(853.)  Motions  which  require  whole  centuries  to  accumu- 
late before  they  produce  changes  of  arrangement,  such  as 
the  naked  eye  can  detect,  though  quite  sufficient  to  destroy  that 
idea  of  mathematical  fixity  which  precludes  speculation,  are 
yet  too  trifling,  as  far  as  practical  applications  go,  to  induce 
a  change  of  language,  and  lead  us  to  speak  of  the  stars  in 
common  parlance  as  otherwise  than  fixed.  Small  as  they 
are,  however,  astronomers,  once  assured  of  their  reality,  have 
not  been  wanting  in  attempts  to  explain  and  reduce  them 
to  general  laws.  No  one,  who  reflects  with  due  attention 
on  the  subject,  will  be  inclined  to  deny  the  high  probability, 
nay  certainty,  that  the  sun  as  well  as  the  stars  must  have  a 
proper  motion  in  some  direction  ;  and  the  inevitable  conse- 
quence of  such  a  motion,  if  unparticipated  by  the  rest,  muflt 

♦   D' Arrest.  Astr.  Nachr.,  No.  618.;   Argi-lanoYr,  Do.  No.  475. 

I  The  reader  may  consult  "a  list  of  314  stars  having,  or  supposed  to  have, 
■\  proper  motion  of  not  less  than  about  0"'5  of  a  great  circle  "  (y«r  annum)  by 
the  late  F.  Baily,  Esq.      Traits.  Att.  Soc.  v.  p.  158. 


624  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

be  a  slow  average  apparent  tendency  of  all  the  stars  to  the 
vanishing  point  of  lines  parallel  to  that  direction,  and  to  the 
region  which  he  is  leaving,  however  greatly  individual  stars 
might  differ  from  such  average  by  reason  of  their  own  pecu- 
liar proper  motion.  This  is  the  necessary  effect  of  perspec- 
tive ;  and  it  is  certain  that  it  must  be  detected  by  observa- 
tion, if  we  knew  accurately  the  apparent  proper  motions  of 
all  the  stars,  and  if  we  were  sure  that  they  were  independent, 
i.e.  that  the  whole  firmament,  or  at  least  all  that  part  which 
we  see  in  our  own  neighbourhood,  were  not  drifting  along 
together,  by  a  general  set  as  it  were,  in  one  direction,  the 
result  of  unknown  processes  and  slow  internal  changes  going 
on  in  the  sidereal  stratum  to  which  our  system  belongs,  as  we 
see  motes  sailing  in  a  current  of  air,  and  keeping  nearly  the 
same  relative  situation  with  respect  to  one  another. 

(854.)  It  was  on  this  assumption,  tacitly  made  indeed, 
but  necessarily  implied  in  every  step  of  his  reasoning,  that 
Sir  William  Herschel,  in  1783,  on  a  consideration  of  the 
apparent  proper  motions  of  such  stars  as  could  at  that  period 
be  considered  as  tolerably  (though  still  imperfectly)  ascer- 
tained, arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  a  relative  motion  of  the 
sun,  among  the  fixed  stars  in  the  direction  of  a  point  or 
parallactic  apex,  situated  near  A,  Herculis,  that  is  to  say,  in 
R  A.  17h  22m  =  260°  34',  N.P.D.  63°  43'  (1790),  would 
account  for  the  chief  observed  apparent  motions,  leaving, 
however,  some  still  outstanding  and  not  explicable  by  this 
cause ;  and  in  the  same  year  Prevost,  taking  nearly  the  same 
view  of  the  subject,  arrived  at  a  conclusion  as  to  the  solar 
apex  (or  point  of  the  sphere  towards  which  the  sun  relatively 
advances),  agreeing  nearly  in  polar  distance  with  the  fore- 
going, but  differing  from  it  about  27°  in  right  ascension. 
Since  that  time  methods  of  calculation  have  been  improved 
and  concinnated,  our  knowledge  of  the  proper  motions  of 
the  stars  has  been  rendered  more  precise,  and  a  greater 
number  of  cases  of  such  motions  have  been  recorded.  The 
subject  has  been  resumed  by  several  eminent  astronomers 
and  mathematicians:  viz.  1st,  by  M.  Argelander,  who,  from 
the  consideration  of  the  proper  motions  of  21  stars  exceeding 


MOTION    OF    THE    SUN    IN    SPACE.  625 

1"  per  annum  in  arc,  has  placed  the  solar  apex  in  li.  A. 
256°  25',  N.P.D.  51°  23';  from  those  of  50  stars  between. 
0"-5  and  l"-0,  in  255°  10',  51°  26';  and  from  those  of  319 
stars  having  motions  between  0"*1  and  0"*5  per  annum,  iu 
261°  11',  59°  2':  2ndly,  by  M.  Luhndahl,  whose  calculations, 
founded  on  the  proper  motions  of  147  stars,  give  252°  53', 
75°  34':  and  3rdly,  by  M.  Otto  Struve,  whose  result  261°  22', 
62°  24',  emerges  from  a  very  elaborate  discussion  of  the 
proper  motions  of  392  stars.  All  these  places  are  for  a.  d. 
1790. 

(855.)  The  most  probable  mean  of  the  results  obtained  by 
these  three  astronomers,  is  (for  the  same  epoch)  R.  A.  =  259° 
9',  N.  P.  D.  55°  23'.  Their  researches,  however,  extending 
only  to  stars  visible  in  European  observatories,  it  became  a 
point  of  high  interest  to  ascertain  how  far  the  stars  of  the 
southern  hemisphere  not  so  visible,  treated  independently 
on  the  same  system  of  procedure,  would  corroborate  or  con- 
trovert their  conclusion.  The  observations  of  Lacaille,  at  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  1751  and  1752,  compared  with  those 
of  Mr.  Johnson  at  St.  Helena,  in  1829-33,  and  of  Henderson 
at  the  Cape  in  1830  and  1831,  have  afforded  the  means  of 
deciding  this  question.  The  task  has  been  executed  in 
a  masterly  manner  by  Mr.  Galloway,  in  a  paper  published 
in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1841  (to  which  we 
may  also  refer  the  reader  for  a  more  particular  account  of 
the  history  of  the  subject  than  our  limits  allow  us  to  give). 
On  comparing  the  records,  Mr.  Galloway  finds  eighty-one 
southern  stars  not  employed  in  the  previous  investiga- 
tions above  referred  to,  whose  proper  motions  in  the  inter- 
vals elapsed  appear  considerable  enough  to  assure  us  that 
they  have  not  originated  in  error  of  the  earlier  observa- 
tions. Subjecting  these  to  the  same  process  of  computation 
he  concludes  for  the  place  of  the  solar  apex,  for  1790,  as 
follows:  viz.  R.A.  260°  1',  N.P.D.  55°  37',  a  result  so 
nearly  identical  with  that  afforded  by  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere, as  to  alFord  a  full  conviction  of  its  near  approach  pa 
truth,  and  what  may  fairly  be  considered  a  demonstration  of 

the  physical  cause  assigned. 

II 


026  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(856.)  Of  the  mathematical  conduct  of  this  inquiry  the 
nature  of  this  work  precludes  our  giving  any  account ;  but 
as  the  philosophical  principle  on  which  it  is  based  has  been 
misconceived,  it  is  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  in  explana- 
tion of  it.  Almost  all  the  greatest  discoveries  in  astronomy 
have  resulted  from  the  consideration  of  what  we  have  else- 
where termed  residual  phenomena*,  of  a  quantitative  or 
numerical  kind,  that  is  to  say,  of  such  portions  of  the  nume- 
rical or  quantitative  results  of  observation  as  remain  out- 
standing and  unaccounted  for  after  subducting  and  allowing 
for  all  that  would  result  from  the  strict  application  of  known 
principles.  It  was  thus  that  the  grand  discovery  of  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  resulted  as  a  residual  phenome- 
non, from  the  imperfect  explanation  of  the  return  of  the 
seasons  by  the  return  of  the  sun  to  the  same  apparent  place 
among  the  fixed  stars.  Thus,  also,  aberration  and  nutation 
resulted  as  residual  phenomena  from  that  portion  of  the 
changes  of  the  apparent  places  of  the  fixed  stars  which  was 
left  unaccounted  for  by  precession.  And  thus  again  the 
apparent  proper  motions  of  the  stars  are  the  observed  residues 
of  their  apparent  movements  outstanding  and  unaccounted 
for  by  strict  calculation  of  the  effects  of  precession,  nutation, 
and  aberration.  The  nearest  approach  which  human  theories 
can  make  to  perfection  is  to  diminish  this  residue,  this  caput 
mortuum  of  observation,  as  it  may  be  considered,  as  much  as 
practicable,  and,  if  possible,  to  reduce  it  to  nothing,  either 
by  showing  that  something  has  been  neglected  in  our  estima- 
tion of  known  causes,  or  by  reasoning  upon  it  as  a  new  fact, 
and  on  the  principle  of  the  inductive  philosophy  ascending 
from  the  effect  to  its  cause  or  causes.  On  the  suggestion  of 
any  new  cause  hitherto  unresorted  to  for  its  explanation,  our 
first  object  must  of  course  be  to  decide  whether  such  a  cause 
would  produce  such  a  result  in  kind :  the  next,  to  assign  to 
it  such  an  intensity  as  shall  account  for  the  greatest  possible 
amount  of  the  residual  matter  in  hand.  The  proper  motion 
of  the  sun  being  suggested  as  such  a  cause,  we  have  two 

*  Discourse  on  the  Stud v  of  Natural  Philosophy.    (IH'iii.)     Cub.  Cyclopadiq, 
No.  14. 


PROPER   MOTION    OF    THE   SUN.  627 

things  disposable  —  its  direction  and  velocity,  both  which  it 
is  evident,  if  they  ever  became  known  to  us  at  all,  can  only 
be  so  by  the  consideration  of  the  very  phenomenon  in  ques- 
tion. Our  object,  of  course,  is  to  account,  if  possible,  for 
the  whole  of  the  observed  proper  motions  by  the  proper 
assumption  of  these  elements.  If  this  be  impracticable,  what 
remains  unaccounted  for  is  a  residue  of  a  more  recondite 
kind,  but  which,  so  long  as  it  is  unaccounted  for,  we  must 
regard  as  purely  casual,  seeing  that,  for  anything  we  can 
perceive  to  the  contrary,  it  might  with  equal  probability  be 
one  way  as  the  other.  The  theory  of  chances,  therefore, 
necessitates  (as  it  does  in  all  such  cases)  the  application  of 
a,  general  mathematical  process,  known  as  "  the  method  of 
least  squares,"  which  leads,  as  a  matter  of  strict  geometrical 
conclusion,  to  the  values  of  the  elements  sought,  which,  under 
■all  the  circumstances,  are  the  most  probable. 

(857.)  This  is  the  process  resorted  to  by  all  the  geometers 
we  have  enumerated  in  the  foregoing  articles  (art.  854,855). 
It  gives  not  only  the  direction  in  space,  but  also  the  velocity 
of  the  solar  motion,  estimated  on  a  scale  conformable  to  that 
in  which  the  velocity  of  the  sidereal  motions  to  be  explained 
are  given  ;  i.e.  in  seconds  of  arc  as  subtended  at  the  average 
distance  of  the  stars  concerned,  by  its  annual  motion  in  space. 
But  here  a  consideration  occurs  which  tends  materially  to 
complicate  the  problem,  and  to  introduce  into  its  solution  an 
element  depending  on  suppositions  more  or  less  arbitrary. 
The  distance  of  the  stars  being,  except  in  two  or  three  in- 
stances, unknown,  we  are  compelled  either  to  restrict  our 
inquiry  to  these,  which  are  too  few  to  ground  any  result  on, 
or  to  make  some  supposition  as  to  the  relative  distances  of 
the  several  stars  employed.  In  this  we  have  nothing  but 
general  probability  to  guide  us,  and  two  courses  only  present 
themselves,  either,  1st,  To  class  the  distances  of  the  stars 
according  to  their  magnitudes,  or  apparent  brightnesses,  and 
to  institute  separate  and  independent  calculations  for  each 
class,  including  stars  assumed  to  be  equidistant,  or  nearly  so: 
or,  2dly,  To  class  them  according  to  the  observed  amount 
of  their  apparent  proper  motions,  on  the  presumption  that 

8  H  '2 


t>28  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMIC 

those  which  appear  to  move  fastest  are  really  nearest  to  lis 
The  former  is  the  course  pursued  by  M.  Otto  Struve,  the 
latter  by  M.  Argelander.  With  regard  to  this  latter  principle 
of  classification,  however,  two  considerations  interfere  with 
its  applicability,  viz.  1st,  that  we  see  the  real  motion  of  the 
stars  foreshortened  by  the  effect  of  perspective ;  and  2dlv,  that 
that  portion  of  the  total  apparent  proper  motion  which  arises 
from  the  real  motion  of  the  sun  depends,  not  simply  on  the 
absolute  distance  of  the  star  from  the  sun,  but  also  on  its 
angular  apparent  distance  from  the  solar  apex,  being,  catena 
paribus,  as  the  sine  of  that  angle.  To  execute  such  a  clas- 
sification correctly,  therefore,  we  ought  to  know  both  these 
particulars  for  each  star.  The  first  is  evidently  out  of  our 
reach.  We  are  therefore,  for  that  very  reason,  compelled  to 
regard  it  as  casual,  and  to  assume  that  on  the  average  of  a 
great  number  of  stars  it  would  be  uninfluential  on  the  result. 
But  the  second  cannot  be  so  summarily  disposed  of.  By  the 
aid  of  an  approximate  knowledge  of  the  solar  apex,  it  is  true, 
approximate  values  may  be  found  of  the  simply  apparent 
portions  of  the  proper  motions,  supposing  all  the  stars  equi- 
distant, and  these  being  subducted  from  the  total  observed 
motions,  the  residues  might  afford  ground  for  the  classification 
in  question.*  This,  however,  would  be  a  long,  and  to  a  cer- 
tain extent  precarious  system  of  procedure.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  classification  by  apparent  brightness  is  open  to  no 
such  difficulties,  since  we  are  fully  justified  in  assuming  that, 
on  a  general  average,  the  brighter  stars  are  the  nearer,  and 
that  the  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  casual  in  that  sense  of 
the  word  which  it  always  bears  in  such  inquiries,  expressing 
solely  our  ignorance  of  any  ground  for  assuming  a  bias  one 
way  or  other  on  either  side  of  a  determinate  numerical  rule. 
In  Mr.  Galloway's  discussion  of  the  southern  stars  the  con- 
sideration of  distance  is  waived  altogether,  which  is  equivalent 
to  an  admission  of  complete  ignorance  on  this  point,  as  well 

•  M.  Argelander's  classes,  however,  are  constructed  without  reference  to  this 
consideration,  on  the  sole  basts  of  the  total  apparent  amount  of  proper  motion, 
and  are,  therefore,  pro  tanto,  questionable.  It  is  the  more  satisfactory  then  M 
find  so  considerable  an  agreement  among  his  partial  results  as  actually  obtains. 


PBdPfcB   MOTION   OF    THE    SUN.  629 

as  respecting  the  real  directions  and  velocities  of  the  indi- 
vidual motions. 

(858.)  The  velocity  of  the  solar  motion  which  results  from 
M.  Otto  Struve's  calculations  is  such  as  would  carry  it  over 
an  angular  subtense  of  0"'3392  if  seen  at  right  angles  from 
the  average  distance  of  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude.  If  we 
take,  with  M.  Struve,  senior,  the  parallax  of  such  a  star  as 
probably  equal  to  0'/#209*,  we  shall  at  once  be  enabled  to 
compare  this  annual  motion  with  the  radius  of  the  earth's 
orbit,  the  result  being  1-623  of  such  units.  The  sun  then 
advances  through  space  (relatively,  at  least,  among  the  stars), 
carrying  with  it  the  whole  planetary  and  cometary  system 
with  a  velocity  of  1*623  radii  of  the  earth's  orbit  f,  or 
154,185,000  miles  per  annum,  or  422,000  miles  (that  is  to 
say,  nearly  its  own  semi-diameter) per  diem:  in  other  words, 
with  a  velocity  a  very  little  greater  than  one-fourth  of  the 
earth's  annual  motion  in  its  orbit. 

(859.)  Another  generation  of  astronomers,  perhaps  many, 
must  pass  away  before  we  are  in  a  condition  to  decide  from 
a  more  precise  and  extensive  knowledge  of  the  proper  motions 
of  the  stars  than  we  at  present  possess,  how  far  the  directiop 
and  velocity  above  assigned  to  the  solar  motion  deviates  from 
exactness,  whether  it  continue  uniform,  and  whether  it  show 
any  sign  of  deflection  from  rectilinearity ;  so  as  to  hold  out 
a  prospect  of  one  day  being  enabled  to  trace  out  an  arc  of 
the  solar  orbit,  and  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the 
preponderant  gravitation  of  the  sidereal  firmament  is  urging 
the  central  body  of  our  system.  An  analogy  for  such  devia- 
tion from  uniformity  would  seem  to  present  itself  in  the 
alleged  existence  of  a  similar  deviation  in  the  proper  motions 
of  Sirius  and  Procyon,  both  which  stars  are  considered  to 
have  varied  sensibly  in  this  respect  within  the  limits  of  au- 
thentic and  dependable  observation.  Such,  indeed,  would 
appear  to  be  the  amount  of  evidence  for  this  as  a  matter  of 
fact  as  to  have  given  rise  to  a  speculation  on  the  probable 
circulation  of  these  stars  round  opaque  (and  therefore  in- 

•    Etudes  d'Astronomie  Stcllaire,  p.  107. 

f  Mr.  Airy  (Mem.  Ast  Soc.    xxviii)  makes   thii  velocity  materially  greater. 
See.  |i"uvver,   Note  (  L). 


630  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

visible)  bodies  at  no  great  distances  from  them  respectively,  in 
the  manner  of  binary  stars :  [and  it  has  been  recently  shown 
by  M.  Peters  (Ast.  Nachr.  748.)  that,  in  the  case  of  Sirius, 
such  a  circulation,  performed  in  a  period  of  50*093  years 
in  an  ellipse  whose  excentricity  is  0*7994,  the  perihelion 
passage  taking  place  at  the  epoch  a.  d.  1791*431,  would 
reconcile  the  observed  anomalies,  and  reduce  the  residual 
motion  to  uniformity.      See  Note  J.] 

(860.)  The  whole  of  the  reasoning  upon  which  the  deter- 
mination of  the  solar  motion  in  space  rests,  is  based  upon  the 
entire  exclusion  of  any  law  either  derived  from  observation 
or  assumed  in  theory,  aifecting  the  amount  and  direction  of 
the  real  motions  both  of  the  sun  and  stars.  It  supposes  an 
absolute  non-recognition,  in  those  motions,  of  any  general 
directive  cause,  such  as,  for  example,  a  common  circulation 
of  all  about  a  common  center.  Any  such  limitation  intro- 
duced into  the  conditions  of  the  problem  of  the  solar  motion 
would  alter  in  toto  both  its  nature  and  the  form  of  its  solution. 
Suppose  for  instance  that,  conformably  to  the  speculations  of 
several  astronomers,  the  whole  system  of  the  Milky  Way, 
including  our  sun,  and  the  stars,  our  more  immediate  neigh- 
bours, which  constitute  our  sidereal  firmament,  should  have  a 
general  movement  of  rotation  in  the  plane  of  the  galactic  circle 
(any  other  would  be  exceedingly  improbable,  indeed  hardly 
reconcilable  with  dynamical  principles),  being  held  together  in 
opposition  to  the  centrifugal  force  thus  generated  by  the  mutual 
gravitation  of  its  constituent  stars.  Except  we  at  the  same 
time  admitted  that  the  scale  on  which  this  movement  pro- 
ceeds is  so  enormous  that  all  the  stars  whose  proper  motions 
we  include  in  our  calculations  go  together  in  a  body,  so  far 
as  that  movement  is  concerned  (as  forming  too  small  an  in- 
tegrant portion  of  the  whole  to  differ  sensibly  in  their  re- 
lation to  its  central  point) ;  we  stand  precluded  from  drawing 
any  conclusion  whatever,  not  only  respecting  the  absolute 
motion  of  the  sun,  but  respecting  even  its  relative  movement 
among  those  stars,  until  we  have  established  some  law,  or  at 
all  events  framed  some  hypothesis  having  the  provisional  force 
of  a  law,  connecting  the  whole,  or  a  part  of  the  motion  of 
each  individual  with  its  situation  in  space. 


SPECULATIONS   ON    A   CENTRAL    SUN.  631 

(861.)  Speculations  of  this  kind  have  not  been  wanting 
in  astronomy,  and  recently  an  attempt  has  been  made  by 
M.  Madler  to  assign  the  local  center  in  space,  round  which 
the  sun  and  stars  revolve,  which  he  places  in  the  group  of  the 
Pleiades,  a  situation  in  itself  utterly  improbable,  lying  as  it 
does  no  less  than  26°  out  of  the  plane  of  the  galactic 
circle,  out  of  which  plane  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  any 
general  circulation  can  take  place.  In  the  present  defective 
state  of  our  knowledge  respecting  the  proper  motion  of  the 
smaller  stars,  especially  in  right  ascension,  (an  element  for  the 
most  part  far  less  exactly  ascertainable  than  the  polar  dis- 
tance, or  at  least  which  has  been  hitherto  far  less  accurately 
ascertained,)  we  cannot  but  regard  all  attempts  of  the  kind 
as  to  a  certain  extent  premature,  though  by  no  means  to  be 
discouraged  as  forerunners  of  something  more  decisive.  The 
question,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  whether  a  rotation  of  the 
galaxy  in  its  own  plane  exist  or  not  might  be  at  once  re- 
solved by  the  assiduous  observation  both  in  R.  A.  and  polar 
distance  of  a  considerable  number  of  stars  of  the  Milky  Way, 
judiciously  selected  for  the  purpose,  and  including  all  mag- 
nitudes, down  to  the  smallest  distinctly  identifiable,  and 
capable  of  being  observed  with  normal  accuracy:  and  we 
would  recommend  the  inquiry  to  the  special  attention  of 
directors  of  permanent  observatories,  provided  with  adequate 
instrumental  means,  in  both  hemispheres.  Thirty  or  forty 
years  of  observation  perseveringly  directed  to  the  object  in 
view,  could  not  fail  to  settle  the  question.* 

(862.)  The  solar  motion  through  space,  if  real  and  not 
simply  relative,  must  give  rise  to  uranographical  corrections 
analogous  to  parallax  and  aberration.  The  solar  or  systematic 
parallax  i3  no  other  than  that  part  of  the  proper  motion  of 
each  star  which  is  simply  apparent,  arising  from  the  sun's 
motion,  and  until  the  distances  of  the  stars  be  known,  must 

*  An  examination  of  the  proper  motions  of  the  stars  of  the  B.  Assoc.  Cata). 
in  the  portion  of  the  Milky  Way  nearest  either  pole  (where  the  motion  should 
be  almost  wholly  in  It  A)  indicates  no  distinct  symptom  of  such  a  rotation.  It 
the  question  be  taken  up  fundamentally,  it  will  involve  a  redetermination  from 
the  recorded  proper  motions  hoth  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  and  the 
change  of  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic. 


tf32  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

remain  inextricably  mixed  up  with  the  other  or  real  portion. 
The  systematic  aberration,  amounting  at  its  maximum  (for 
stars  90°  from  the  solar  apex)  to  about  5"  displaces  all  the 
ntars  in  great  circles  diverging  from  that  apex  through  angles 
proportional  to  the  sines  of  their  respective  distances  from  it. 
This  displacement,  however,  is  permanent,  and  therefore 
uncognizable  by  any  phenomenon,  so  long  as  the  solar  motion 
remains  invariable ;  but  should  it,  in  the  course  of  ages, 
alter  its  direction  and  velocity,  both  the  direction  and  amount 
of  the  displacement  in  question  would  alter  with  it.  The 
change,  however,  would  become  mixed  up  with  other  changes 
in  the  apparent  proper  motions  of  the  stars,  and  it  would 
seem  hopeless  to  attempt  disentangling  them. 

(863.)  A  singular,  and  at  first  sight  paradoxical  effect  of 
the  progressive  movement  of  light,  combined  with  the  proper 
motion  of  the  stars,  is,  that  it  alters  the  apparent  periodic 
time  in  which  the  individuals  of  a  binary  star  circulate  about 
each  other.*  To  make  this  apparent,  suppose  them  to  cir- 
culate round  each  other  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the 
visual  ray  in  a  period  of  10,000  days.  Then  if  both  the  sun 
and  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  binary  system  remained  fixed 
in  space,  the  relative  apparent  situation  of  the  stars  would 
he  exactly  restored  to  its  former  state  after  the  lapse  of  this 
interval,  and  if  the  angle  of  position  were  0°  at  first,  after 
10,000  days  it  would  again  be  so.  But  now  suppose  that 
the  center  of  gravity  of  the  star  were  in  the  act  of  receding 
in  a  direct  line  from  the  sun  with  a  velocity  of  one-tenth 
part  of  the  radius  of  the  earth's  orbit  per  diem.  Then  at  the 
expiration  of  10,000  days  it  would  be  more  remote  from  us 
by  1000  such  radii,  a  space  which  light  would  require  5*7  days 
to  traverse.  Although  really,  therefore,  the  stars  would 
have  arrived  at  the  position  0°  at  the  exact  expiration  of 
10,000  days,  it  would  require  5'7  days  more  for  the  notice 
of  that  fact  to  reach  our  system.  In  other  words,  the  period 
would  appear  to  us  to  be  10,005*7  days,  since  we  could  only 
conclude  the  period  to  be  completed  when  to  us  as  observers 
the  original  angle  of  position  was  again  restored.  A  contrary 
motion  would  produce  a  contrary  effect. 

•    Astronomische  Naehrichten,  No.  .520.  by  the  Author. 


CLUSTERS   OF    S^AUS   AND   NEBULA.  633 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

OF    CLUSTERS   OF    STARS   AND    NEBULiE. 

Or  CLUSTERING  GROUPS  OF    STARS. GLOBULAR  CLUSTERS.  —  THEIR 

STABILITY  DYNAMICALLY  POSSIBLE. LIST  OF  THE  MOST  REMARK- 
ABLE  CLASSIFICATION    OF    NEBULiE    AND    CLUSTERS.  —  THEIR 

DISTRIBUTION    OVER  THE     HEAVENS. IRREGULAR    CLUSTERS. 

RESOLVABILITY    OF    NEBULAE. THEORY    OF    THE    FORMATION   OF 

CLUSTERS    BY    NEBULOUS    SUBSIDENCE.  —  OF    ELLIPTIC    NEBULAE. 

THAT    OF   ANDROMEDA. ANNULAR    AND   PLANETARY  NEBULA. 

DOUBLE  NEBULAE.  — NEBULOUS  STARS. — CONNEXION  OF  NEBULJS 

WITH     DOUBLE     STARS.  —  INSULATED     NEBULAE     OF     FORMS    NOT 

WHOLLY    IRREGULAR.  —  OF    AMORPHOUS    NEBULAE. THEIR   LAW 

OF    DISTRIBUTION    MARKS    THEM   AS    OUTLIERS    OF     THE    GALAXY. 

—  NEBULiE,    AND   NEBULOUS    GROUP   OF    ORION  —  OF   ARGO OF 

SAGITTARIUS  —  OF  CYGNUS. THE  MAGELLANIC  CLOUDS. SIN- 
GULAR NEBULA  IN  THE  GREATER  OF  THEM VARIABLE  NE- 
BULAE.  THE  ZODIACAL  LIGHT. — SHOOTING  STARS. SPECULA- 
TIONS   ON    THE    DYNAMICAL    ORIGIN    OF    THE    SUN'S    HEAT. 

(864.)  When  we  cast  our  eyes  over  the  concave  of  the 
heavens  in  a  clear  night,  we  do  not  fail  to  observe  that  here 
and  there  are  groupa  of  stars  which  seem  to  be  compressed 
together  in  a  more  condensed  manner  than  in  the  neighbour- 
ing parts,  forming  bright  patches  and  clusters,  which  attract 
attention,  as  if  they  were  there  brought  together  by  some 
general  cause  other  than  casual  distribution.  There  is  a 
group,  called  the  Pleiades,  in  which  six  or  seven  stars  may  be 
noticed,  if  the  eye  be  directed  full  upon  it ;  and  many  more 
if  the  eye  be  turned  carelessly  aside,  while  the  attention  is  kept 
directed*  upon   the  group.     Telescopes  show   fifty  or  sixty 

*  It  is  a  very  remarkable  fait,  that  the  center  of  the  visual  area  is  far  leas 
sensible  to  feeble  impressions  of  light,  than  the  exterior  portions  of  the  retina. 
Few  persons  are  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  this  comparative  insensibility 
extends  previous  to  trial.  To  estimate  it,  let  the  reader  look  alternately 
full  at  a  star  of  the  filth  magnitude,  and  beside  it;  or  choose  two,  equally 
bright,  and  about  H°  or  4°  apart,  and  look  full  at  one  of  them,  the  probability 
is.  he  will  see  only  the.  oihrr.  The  fact  accounts  for  the  multitude  of  stars  with 
which  we  are  impressed  by  a  general  view  of  the  heavens;  their  paucity  when  w« 
:<>mc  to  count  tliciu. 


634  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

large  stars  thus  crowded  together  in  a  very  moderate  space, 
comparatively  insulated  from  the  rest  of  the  heavens.  The 
constellation  called  Coma  Berenices  is  another  such  group, 
more  diffused,  and  consisting  on  the  whole  of  larger  stars. 

(865.)  In  the  constellation  Cancer,  there  is  a  somewhat 
eimilar,  but  less  definite,  luminous  spot,  called  Praesepe,  or 
the  bee  hive,  which  a  very  moderate  telescope,  —  an  ordinary 
night-glass  for  instance, — resolves  entirely  into  stars.  In 
the  sword-handle  of  Perseus,  also,  is  another  such  spot, 
crowded  with  stars,  which  requires  rather  a  better  telescope  to 
resolve  into  individuals  separated  from  each  other.  These 
are  called  clusters  of  stars  ;  and,  whatever  be  their  nature,  it 
is  certain  that  other  laws  of  aggregation  subsist  in  these  spots, 
than  those  which  have  determined  the  scattering  of  stars  over 
the  general  surface  of  the  sky.  This  conclusion  is  still  more 
strongly  pressed  upon  us,  when  we  come  to  bring  very 
powerful  telescopes  to  bear  on  these  and  similar  spots.  There 
are  a  great  number  of  objects  which  have  been  mistaken  for 
comets,  and,  in  fact,  have  very  much  the  appearance  of  comets 
without  tails :  small  round,  or  oval  nebulous  specks,  which 
telescopes  of  moderate  power  only  show  as  such.  Messier 
has  given,  in  the  Connois.  des  Temps  for  1784,  a  list  of  the 
places  of  103  objects  of  this  sort ;  which  all  those  who  search 
for  comets  ought  to  be  familiar  with,  to  avoid  being  misled 
by  their  similarity  of  appearance.  That  they  are  not,  however, 
comets,  their  fixity  sufficiently  proves ;  and  when  we  come 
to  examine  them  with  instruments  of  great  power,  —  such  as 
reflectors  of  eighteen  inches,  two  feet,  or  more  in  aperture, — 
any  such  idea  is  completely  destroyed.  They  are  then,  for 
the  most  part,  perceived  to  consist  entirely  of  stars  crowded 
together  so  as  to  occupy  almost  a  definite  outline,  and  to  run 
up  to  a  blaze  of  light  in  the  centre,  where  their  condensation 
is  usually  the  greatest.  (See  Jig.  1.  pi.  II.,  which  represents 
(somewhat  rudely)  the  thirteenth  nebula  of  Messier's  list 
(described  by  him  as  nebuleuse  sans  etoiles),  as  seen  in  a 
reflector  of  18  inches  aperture  and  20  feet  focal  length.) 
Many  of  them,  indeed,  are  of  an  exactly  round  figure,  and 
convey  the  complete  idea  of  a  globular  space  filled   full  ot 


CLUSTERS   OP    8TAR8.  635 

stars,  insulated  in  the  heavens,  and  constituting  in  itself  a 
family  or  society  apart  from  the  rest,  and  subject  only  to  its 
own  internal  laws.  It  would  be  a  vain  task  to  attempt  to 
counc  the  stars  in  one  of  these  globular  clusters.  They 
are  not  to  be  reckoned  by  hundreds;  and  on  a  rough  cal- 
culation, grounded  on  the  apparent  intervals  between  them 
at  the  borders,  and  the  angular  diameter  of  the  whole  group, 
it  would  appear  that  many  clusters  of  this  description  must 
contain,  at  least,  five  thousand  stars,  compacted  and  wedged 
together  in  a  round  space,  whose  angular  diameter  does  not 
exceed  eight  or  ten  minutes ;  that  is  to  say,  in  an  area  not 
more  than  a  tenth  part  of  that  covered  by  the  moon. 

(866.)  Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  to  savour  of  the  gigun- 
tesque  to  look  upon  the  individuals  of  such  a  group  as  suns 
like  our  own,  and  their  mutual  distances  as  equal  to  those 
which  separate  our  sun  from  the  nearest  fixed  star :  yet, 
when  we  consider  that  their  united  lustre  affects  the  eye  with 
a  less  impression  of  light  than  a  star  of  the  fourth  magnitude, 
(for  the  largest  of  these  clusters  is  barely  visible  to  the  naked 
eye,)  the  idea  we  are  thus  compelled  to  form  of  their  distance 
from  us  may  prepare  us  for  almost  any  estimate  of  their 
dimensions.  At  all  events,  we  can  hardly  look  upon  a  group 
thus  insulated,  thus  in  seipso  totus,  teres,  atque  rotundus,  as 
not  forming  a  system  of  a  peculiar  and  definite  character. 
Their  round  figure  clearly  indicates  the  existence  of  some 
general  bond  of  union  in  the  nature  of  an  attractive  force ; 
and,  in  many  ot  them,  there  is  an  evident  acceleration  in 
the  rate  of  condensation  as  we  approach  the  center,  which 
is  not  referable  to  a  merely  uniform  distribution  of  equidistant 
stars  through  a  globular  space,  but  marks  an  intrinsic  density 
in  their  state  of  aggregation,  greater  in  the  center  than  at 
the  surface  of  the  mass.  It  is  difficult  to  form  any  concep- 
tion of  the  dynamical  state  of  such  a  system.  On  the  one 
hand,  without  a  rotatory  motion  and  a  centrifugal  force,  it  is 
hardly  possible  not  to  regard  them  as  in  a  state  of  progressive 
collapse.  On  the  other,  granting  such  a  motion  and  such  a 
force,  we  find  it  no  less  difficult  to  reconcile  the  apparent 
sphericity  of  their  form  with  a  rotation  of  the  whole  system 


636  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

round  any  single  axis,  without  which  internal  collisions  might 
st  first  sight  appear  to  be  inevitable.  If  we  suppose  a 
globular  space  filled  with  equal  stars,  uniformly  dispersed 
through  it,  and  very  numerous,  each  of  them  attracting 
every  other  with  a  force  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 
distance,  the  resultant  force  by  which  anyone  of  them  (those 
at  the  surface  alone  excepted)  will  be  urged,  in  virtue  of 
their  joint  attractions,  will  be  directed  towards  the  common 
center  of  the  sphere,  and  will  be  directly  as  the  distance 
therefrom.  This  follows  from  what  Newton  has  proved  of 
the  internal  attraction  of  a  homogeneous  sphere.  (See  also 
note  on  Art.  735.)  Now,  under  such  a  law  of  force,  each 
particular  star  would  describe  a  perfect  ellipse  about  the 
common  center  of  gravity  as  its  center,  and  that,  in  whatever 
plane  and  whatever  direction  it  might  revolve.  The  con- 
dition, therefore,  of  a  rotation  of  the  cluster,  as  a  mass,  about 
a  single  axis  would  be  unnecessary.  Each  ellipse,  whatever 
might  be  the  proportion  of  its  axis,  or  the  inclination  of  its 
plane  to  the  others,  would  be  invariable  in  every  particular, 
and  all  would  be  described  in  one  common  period,  so  that  at 
the  end  of  every  such  period,  or  annua  magnus  of  the  system, 
every  star  of  the  cluster  (except  the  superficial  ones)  would 
be  exactly  re-established  in  its  original  position,  thence  to  set 
out  afresh,  and  run  the  same  unvarying  round  for  an  in- 
definite succession  of  ages.  Supposing  their  motions,  there- 
fore, to  be  so  adjusted  at  any  one  moment  as  that  the  orbits 
should  not  intersect  each  other,  and  so  that  the  magnitude  of 
each  star,  and  the  sphere  of  its  more  intense  attraction,  should 
bear  but  a  small  proportion  to  the  distance  separating  the 
individuals,  such  a  system,  it  is  obvious,  might  subsist,  and 
realize,  in  great  measure,  that  abstract  and  ideal  harmony, 
which  Newton,  in  the  89th  Proposition  of  the  First  Book 
of  the  Principia,  has  shown  to  characterize  a  law  of  force 
directly  as  the  distance.* 

(867.)  The  following  are  the  places,  for  1830,  of  the 
principal  of  these  remarkable  objects,  as  specimens  of  their 
class :  — 

•   See  alio  Quartet  fy  Rifle*',  No.  94.  p.   .'.  10- 


CLASSIFICATION    OF    NEBUL2F.. 


637 


R.  A. 

N.  P 

D. 

R.  A. 

N.  P 

D. 

R  A. 

N.  P.  D. 

h.  m. 

-. 

o 

/ 

h. 

m. 

8. 

0 

/ 

h. 

in. 

8. 

o     ' 

0  16 

'25 

163 

S 

15 

9 

56 

87 

16 

17 

2T 

51 

143  34 

9   8 

33 

154 

10 

15 

34 

56 

127 

13 

17 

28 

42 

93   8 

12  47 

41 

159 

57 

16 

6 

55 

112 

33 

11 

26 

4 

114   2 

13   4 

30 

70 

55  1 

16 

23 

2 

102 

40 

18 

55 

49 

150   14 

13   16 

38 

136 

35 

16 

35 

37 

53 

13 

21 

21 

48 

78  34 

13  34 

10 

60 

46  | 

16 

50 

24 

119 

51 

•21 

24 

40 

91   34 

Of  these,  by  far  the  most  conspicuous  and  remarkable  is 
to  Centauri  the  fifth  of  the  list  in  order  of  Right  Ascension. 
It  is  visible  to  the  naked  eye  as  a  dim  round  cometic  object 
about  equal  to  a  star  4*5  m.,  though  probably  if  concentered 
in  a  single  point,  the  impression  on  the  eye  would  be  much 
greater.  Viewed  in  a  powerful  telescope  it  appears  as  a  globe 
of  fully  20'  in  diameter,  very  gradually  increasing  in  brightness 
to  the  center,  and  composed  of  innumerable  stars  of  the  13th 
and  15th  magnitudes  (the  former  probably  being  two  or  more 
of  the  latter  closely  juxtaposed).  The  11th  in  order  of  the 
list  (R.  A.  16h  35m)  is  also  visible  to  the  naked  eye  in  very 
6ne  nights,  between  77  and  £  Herculis,  and  is  a  superb  object 
in  a  large  telescope.  Both  were  discovered  by  Halley,  the 
former  in  1677,  and  the  latter  in  1714. 

(868.)  It  is  to  Sir  William  Herschel  that  we  owe  the  most 
complete  analysis  of  the  great  variety  of  those  objects  which 
are  generally  classed  under  the  common  head  of  Nebulae,  but 
which  have  been  separated  by  him  into — 1st.  Clusters  of 
stars,  in  which  the  stars  are  clearly  distinguishable  ;  and  these, 
again,  into  globular  and  irregular  clusters ;  2d.  Resolvable 
nebulae,  or  such  as  excite  a  suspicion  that  they  consist  of  stars, 
and  which  any  increase  of  the  optical  power  of  the  telescope 
may  be  expected  to  resolve  into  distinct  stars;  3d.  Nebula?, 
properly  so  called,  in  which  there  is  no  appearance  whatever 
of  stars;  which,  again,  have  been  subdivided  into  subordinate 
classes,  according  to  their  brightness  and  size;  4th.  Planetary 
nebulae ;  5th.  Stellar  nebulae ;  and,  6th.  Nebulous  stars. 
The  great  power  of  his  telescopes  disclosed  the  existence 
of  an  immense  number  of  these  objects  before  unknown,  and 
showed  them  to  be  distributed  over  the  heavens,  not  by  any 


638  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

means  uniformly,  but  with  a  marked  preference  for  a  certain 
district,  extending  over  the  northern  pole  of  the  galactic 
circle,  and  occupying  the  constellations  Leo,  Leo  Minor,  the 
body,  tail,  and  hind  legs  of  Ursa  Major,  Canes  Venatici, 
Coma  Berenices,  the  preceding  leg  of  Bootes,  and  the  head, 
wings,  and  shoulder  of  Virgo.  In  this  region,  occupying 
about  one-eighth  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  sphere,  one-third 
of  the  entire  nebulous  contents  of  the  heavens  are  con- 
gregated. On  the  other  hand,  they  are  very  sparingly 
scattered  over  the  constellations  Aries,  Taurus,  the  head  and 
shoulders  of  Orion,  Auriga,  Perseus,  Camelopardalus,  Draco, 
Hercules,  the  northern  part  of  Serpentarius,  the  tail  of 
Serpens,  that  of  Aquila,  and  the  whole  of  Lyra.  The  hours 
3,  4,  5,  and  16,  17,  18,  of  right  ascension  in  the  northern 
hemisphere  are  singularly  poor,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
hours  10,  11,  and  12  (but  especially  12),  extraordinarily  rich 
in  these  objects.  In  the  southern  hemisphere  a  much  greater 
uniformity  of  distribution  prevails,  and  with  exception  of 
two  very  remarkable  centers  of  accumulation,  called  the 
Magellanic  clouds  (of  which  more  presently),  there  is  no 
very  decided  tendency  to  their  assemblage  in  any  particular 
region. 

(869.)  Clusters  of  stars  are  either  globular,  such  as  we 
have  already  described,  or  of  irregular  figure.  These  latter 
are,  generally  speaking,  less  rich  in  stars,  and  especially  less 
condensed  towards  the  center.  They  are  also  less  definite  in 
outline;  so  that  it  is  often  not  easy  to  say  where  they 
terminate,  or  whether  they  are  to  be  regarded  otherwise  than 
as  merely  richer  parts  of  the  heavens  than  those  around 
them.  Many,  indeed  the  greater  proportion  of  them,  are 
Bituated  in  or  close  on  the  borders  of  the  Milky  Way. 
In  some  of  them  the  stars  are  nearly  all  of  a  size,  in 
others  extremely  different ;  and  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  to 
find  a  very  red  star  much  brighter  than  the  rest,  occupying 
a  conspicuous  situation  in  them.  Sir  William  Herschcl 
regards  these  as  globular  clusters  in  a  less  advanced  state  of 
condensation,  conceiving  all  such  groups  as  approaching,  by 
their  mutual  attraction,  to  the  globular  figure,  and  assembling 


RESOLVABLE    NEBULJC.  639 

themselves  together  from  all  the  surrounding  region,  under 
laws  of  which  we  have,  it  is  true,  no  other  proof  than  the 
observance  of  a  gradation  by  which  their  characters  shade 
into  one  another,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  where 
one  species  ends  and  the  other  begins.  Among  the  most 
beautiful  objects  of  this  class  is  that  which  surrounds  the  star 
x  Crucis,  set  down  as  a  nebula  by  Lacaille.  It  occupies  an 
area  of  about  one  48th  part  of  a  square  degree,  and  consists 
of  about  110  stars  from  the  7th  magnitude  downwards,  eight 
of  the  more  conspicuous  of  which  are  coloured  with  various 
shades  of  red,  green,  and  blue,  so  as  to  give  to  the  whole  the 
appearance  of  a  rich  piece  of  jewellery. 

(870.)  Resolvable  nebulae  can,  of  course,  only  be  con- 
sidered as  clusters  either  too  remote,  or  consisting  of  stars 
intrinsically  too  faint  to  affect  us  by  their  individual  light, 
unless  where  two  or  three  happen  to  be  close  enough  to  make 
a  joint  impression,  and  give  the  idea  of  a  point  brighter  than 
the  rest.  They  are  almost  universally  round  or  oval — their 
loose  appendages,  and  irregularities  of  form,  being  as  it  were 
extinguished  by  the  distance,  and  the  only  general  figure  of 
the  more  condensed  parts  being  discernible.  It  is  under  the 
appearance  of  objects  of  this  character  that  all  the  greater 
globular  clusters  exhibit  themselves  in  telescopes  of  insufficient 
optical  power  to  show  them  well ;  and  the  conclusion  is 
obvious,  that  those  which  the  most  powerful  can  barely  render 
resolvable,  and  even  those  which,  with  such  powers  as  are 
usually  applied,  show  no  sign  of  being  composed  of  stars, 
would  be  completely  resolved  by  a  further  increase  of  optical 
power.  In  fact,  this  probability  has  almost  been  converted 
into  a  certainty  by  the  magnificent  reflecting  telescope  con- 
structed by  Lord  Rosse,  of  six  feet  in  aperture,  which  has 
resolved  or  rendered  resolvable  multitudes  of  nebula?  which 
had  resisted  all  inferior  powers.  The  sublimity  of  the  spec- 
tacle afforded  by  that  instrument  of  some  of  the  larger  globular 
and  other  clusters  enumerated  in  the  list  given  in  Art.  867. 
is  declared  by  all  who  have  witnessed  it  to  be  such  as  no 
words  can  express. 

(871.)  Although,  therefore,  nebula}  do  exist,  which  even  in 


640  OUTLINES    OK    ASTRONOMY. 

this  powerful  telescope  appear  as  nebulae,  without  any  .sign  of 
resolution,  it  may  very  reasonably  be  doubted  whether  theie 
be  really  any  essential  physical  distinction  between  nebulua 
and  clusters  of  stars,  at  least  in  the  nature  of  the  matter  of 
which  they  consist,*  and  whether  the  distinction  between  such 
nebula?  as  are  easily  resolved,  barely  resolvable  with  excellent 
telescopes,  and  altogether  irresolvable  with  the  best,  be  any- 
thing else  than  one  of  degree,  arising  merely  from  the  ex- 
cessive minuteness  and  multitude  of  the  stars,  of  which  the 
latter,    as    compared    with   the    former,    consist.     The    first 
impression    which    Halley,    and    other   early    discoverers   of 
nebulous  objects  received  from  their  peculiar  aspect,  so  dif- 
ferent from  the  keen,  concentrated  light  of  mere  stars,  wan 
that  of  a  phosphorescent  vapour  (like  the  matter  of  a  comet's 
tail)  or  a  gaseous  and  (so  to  speak)  elementary  form  of  lumi- 
nous sidereal  matter. f     Admitting  the  existence  of  such  a 
medium,  dispersed    in  some   cases    irregularly  through    vast 
regions  in  space,  in  others  confined  to  narrower  and   more 
definite  limits,  Sir  W.  Herschel  was  led  to  speculate  on  its 
gradual  subsidence  and  condensation  by  the  effect  of  its  own 
gravity,   into   more  or   less  regular  spherical  or  spheroidal 
forms,  denser  (as  they  must   in  that    case  be)  towards  the 
center.     Assuming  that  in  the  progress  of  this  subsidence, 
local   centers    of  condensation,   subordinate   to  the   general 
tendency,  would  not  be  wanting,  he  conceived  that  in  this 
way  solid  nuclei  might   arise,  whose  local   gravitation   still 
further  condensing,  and  so  absorbing  the  nebulous  matter, 
each  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood,  might  ultimately  become 
^tars,  and  the  whole  nebula   finally  take  on  the  state  of  a 
cluster  of  stars.     Among  the  multitude  of  nebulae  revealed 
by  hi 8  telescopes,  every  stage  of  this  process  might  be  con- 
sidered as  displayed  to  our  eyes,  and  in  every  modification  of 
form  to  which  the  general  principle  might  be  conceived  to 
sipply.     The  more  or  less  advanced  state  of  a  nebula  towards 
its  segregation  into  discrete  stars,  and  of  these  stars  them- 
selves towards  a  denser  state  of  aggregation  round  a  central 
nucleus,  would  thus  be  in  some  sort  an  indication  of  age. 

*  See  Note  K.  t  flalley.  Pliil.  Trans,  xxix    p.  390. 


THEORY    OF    THE    FORMATION    OF    CLUSTERS.        641 

Neither,  is  there  any  variety  of  aspect  which  nebula?  offer, 
which  stands  at  all  in  contradiction  to  this  view.  Even 
though  we  should  feel  ourselves  compelled  to  reject  the  idea 
of  a  gaseous  or  vaporous  "  nebulous  matter,"  it  loses  little 
or  none  of  its  force.  Subsidence,  and  the  central  aggregation 
consequent  on  subsidence,  may  go  on  quite  as  well  among  a 
multitude  of  discrete  bodies  under  the  influence  of  mutual 
attraction,  and  feeble  or  partially  opposing  projectile  motions 
as  among  the  particles  of  a  gaseous  fluid. 

(872.)  The  " nebular  hypothesis"  as  it  has  been  termed, 
and  the  theory  of  sidereal  aggregation  stand,  in  fact,  quite 
independent  of  each  other,  the  one  as  a  physical  conception 
of  processes  which  may  yet,  for  aught  we  know,  have 
formed  part  of  that  mysterious  chain  of  causes  and  effects 
antecedent  to  the  existence  of  separate  self-luminous  solid 
bodies;  the  other,  as  an  application  of  dynamical  principles  to 
cases  of  a  very  complicated  nature  no  doubt,  but  in  which 
the  possibility  or  impossibility,  at  least,  of  certain  general 
results  may  be  determined  on  perfectly  legitimate  principles. 
Among  a  crowd  of  solid  bodies  of  whatever  size,  animated 
by  independent  and  partially  opposing  impulses,  motions 
opposite  to  each  other  must  produce  collision,  destruction  of 
velocity,  and  subsidence  or  near  approach  towards  the  center 
of  preponderant  attraction ;  while  those  which  conspire,  or 
which  remain  outstanding  after  such  conflicts,  must  ultimately 
give  rise  to  circulation  of  a  permanent  character.  Whatever 
we  may  think  of  such  collisions  as  events,  there  is  nothing 
in  this  conception  contrary  to  sound  mechanical  principles. 
It  will  be  recollected  that  the  appearance  of  central  con- 
densation among  a  multitude  of  separate  bodies  in  motion, 
by  no  means  implies  permanent  proximity  to  the  center  in 
each;  any  more  than  the  habitually  crowded  state  of  a 
market  place,  to  which  a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants 
of  a  town  must  frequently  or  occasionally  resort,  implies  the 
permanent  residence  of  each  individual  within  its  area.  It 
is  a  fact  that  clusters  thus  centrally  crowded  do  exist,  and 
therefore  the  conditions  of  their  existence  must  be  dynamically 
possible,  and  in  what  has  been  said  we  may  at  least  perceive 

TT 


642  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

some  glimpses  of  the  manner  in  which  they  are  so.  Tin? 
actual  intervals  between  the  stars,  even  in  the  most  crowded 
parts  of  a  resolved  nebula,  to  be  seen  at  all  by  us,  must  be 
enormous.  Ages,  which  to  us  may  well  appear  indefinite, 
may  easily  be  conceived  to  pass  without  a  single  instance  of 
collision,  in  the  nature  of  a  catastrophe.  Such  may  have 
gradually  become  rarer  as  the  system  has  emerged  from  what 
must  be  considered  its  chaotic  state,  till  at  length,  in  the 
fulness  of  time,  and  under  the  pre-arranging  guidance  of  that 
Design  which  pervades  universal  nature,  each  individual 
may  have  taken  up  such  a  course  as  to  annul  the  possibility 
of  further  destructive  interference. 

(873.)  But  to  return  from  the  regions  of  speculation  t« 
the  description  of  facts.  Next  in  regularity  of  form  to  the 
globular  clusters,  whose  consideration  has  led  us  into  this 
digression,  are  elliptic  nebulae,  more  or  less  elongated.  And 
of  these  it  may  be  generally  remarked,  as  a  fact  undoubtedly 
connected  in  some  very  intimate  manner  with  the  dynamical 
conditions  of  their  subsistence,  that  such  nebulae  are,  for  the 
most  part,  beyond  comparison  more  difficult  of  resolution 
than  those  of  globular  form.  They  are  of  all  degrees  of 
excentricity,  from  moderately  oval  forms  to  ellipses  so  elon- 
gated as  to  be  almost  linear,  which  are,  no  doubt,  edge-views 
of  very  flat  ellipsoids.  In  all  of  them  the  density  in- 
creases towards  the  centre,  and  as  a  general  law  it  may  be 
remarked  that,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  their  telescopic 
appearance,  their  internal  strata  approach  more  nearly  to  the 
spherical  form  than  their  external.  Their  resolvability,  too, 
is  greater  in  the  central  parts,  whether  owing  to  a  real 
superiority  of  size  in  the  central  stars  or  to  the  greater 
frequency  of  cases  of  close  juxta-position  of  individuals,  so 
that  two  or  three  united  appear  as  one.  In  some  the  con- 
densation is  slight  and  gradual,  in  others  great  and  sudden ; 
so  sudden,  indeed,  as  to  offer  the  appearance  of  a  dull  and 
blotted  star,  standing  in  the  midst  of  a  faint,  nearly  equable 
elliptic  nebulosity,  of  which  two  remarkable  specimens  occur 
in  R.  A.  12h  10m  33s,  N.P.D.  41°  46',  and  in  13h  27ra  28% 
119°  0'  (1830). 


NEBULA   OF    AXDROMKDA.  6J.3 

v874.)  The  largest  and  finest  specimens  of  elliptic  nebula* 
which  the  heavens  afford  are  that  in  the  girdle  of  Andromeda 
(near  the  star  v  of  that  constellation)  and  that  discovered  in 
1783,  by  Miss  Carolina  Herschel,  in  R.  A.  0h  39m  12%  !N.P.D. 
116°  13'.  The  nebula  in  Andromeda  (Plate  II.  fig.  3.) 
is  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  is  continually  mistaken  for 
a  comet  by  those  unacquainted  with  the  heavens.  Simon 
Marius,  who  noticed  it  in  1612  (though  it  appears  also  to 
have  been  seen  and  described  as  oval,  in  995),  describes  its 
appearance  as  that  of  a  candle  shining  through  horn,  and  the 
resemblance  is  not  inapt.  Its  form,  as  seen  through  ordinary 
telescopes,  is  a  pretty  long  oval,  increasing  by  insensible 
gradations  of  brightness,  at  first  very  gradually,  but  at  last 
more  rapidly,  up  to  a  central  point,  which,  though  very  much 
brighter  than  the  rest,  is  decidedly  not  a  star,  but  nebula 
of  the  same  general  character  with  the  rest  in  a  state  of 
extreme  condensation.  Casual  stars  are  scattered  over  it, 
but  with  a  reflector  of  18  inches  in  diameter,  there  is  nothing 
to  excite  any  suspicion  of  its  consisting  of  stars.  Examined 
with  instruments  of  superior  defining  power,  however,  the 
evidence  of  its  resolvability  into  stars,  may  be  regarded 
as  decisive.  Mr.  G.  P.  Bond,  assistant  at  the  observatory 
of  Cambridge,  U.  S.,  describes  and  figures  it  as  extending 
nearly  2^°  in  length,  and  upwards  of  a  degree  in  breadth  (so 
as  to  include  two  other  smaller  adjacent  nebulae),  of  a  form, 
generally  speaking,  oval,  but  with  a  considerably  protube- 
rant irregularity  at  its  north  following  extremity,  very 
suddenly  condensed  at  the  nucleus  almost  to  the  semblance 
of  a  star,  and  though  not  itself  clearly  resolved,  yet  thickly 
sown  over  with  visible  minute  stars,  so  numerous  as  to  allow 
of  200  being  counted  within  a  field  of  20'  diameter  in  the 
richest  parts.  But  the  most  remarkable  feature  in  his 
description  is  that  of  two  perfectly  straight,  narrow,  and  com- 
paratively or  totally  obscure  streaks  which  run  nearly  the 
whole  length  of  one  side  of  the  nebula,  and  (though  slightly 
divergent  from  each  other)  nearly  parallel  to  its  longer 
axis.  These  streaks  (which  obviously  indicate  a  stratified 
structure  in  the  nebula,  if,  indeed,  they  do  not  originate  in 

■•  f  2 


644  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  interposition  of  imperfectly  transparent  matter  between 
us  and  it)  are  not  seen  on  a  general  and  cursory  view  of  the 
nebula ;  they  require  attention  to  distinguish  them,*  and  this 
circumstance  must  be  borne  in  mind  when  inspecting  the  very 
extraordinary  engraving  which  illustrates  Mr.  Bond's  account. 
The  figure  given  in  our  Plate  II.  fig.  3,  is  from  a  rather 
hasty  sketch,  and  makes  no  pretensions  to  exactness.  A 
similar,  but  much  more  strongly  marked  case  of  parallel 
arrangement  than  that  noticed  by  Mr.  Bond  in  this,  is  one  in 
which  the  two  semi-ovals  of  an  elliptically  funned  nebula 
appear  cut  asunder  and  separated  by  a  broad  obscure  band 
parallel  to  the  longer  axis  of  the  nebula,  in  the  midst  of 
which  a  faint  streak  of  light  parallel  to  the  sides  of  the  cut 
appears:  it  is  seen  in  the  southern  hemisphere  in  R.A.  13h 
15m31%  N.P.D.  132°  8'  (1830).  The  nebulas  hi  12h  27m  3s, 
63°  5',  and  12b  31m  1 18,  100°  40'  present  analogous  features. 

(875.)  Annular  nebula?  also  exist,  but  are  among  the  rarest 
objects  in  the  heavens.  The  most  conspicuous  of  this  class 
is  to  be  found  almost  exactly  half  way  between  /3  and  7  Lyra, 
and  may  be  seen  with  a  telescope  of  moderate  power.  It  is 
small  and  particularly  well  defined,  so  as  to  have  more  the 
appearance  of  a  flat  oval  solid  ring  than  of  a  nebula.  The  axes 
of  the  ellipse  are  to  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  about 
4  to  5,  and  the  opening  occupies  about  half  or  rather  more 
than  half  the  diameter.  The  central  vacuity  is  not  quite 
dark,  but  is  filled  in  with  faint  nebula,  like  a  gauze  stretched 
over  a  hoop.  The  powerful  telescopes  of  Lord  Rosse  resolve 
this  object  into  excessively  minute  stars,  and  show  filaments 
of  stars  adhering  to  its  edges,  f 

(87  6.  ^  Planetary  nebulae  are  very  extraordinary  ob- 
jects. They  have,  as  their  name  imports,  a  near,  in  some 
instances,  a  perfect  resemblance  to  planets,  presenting  discs 
round,  or  slightly  oval,  in  some  quite   sharply  terminated, 

•   Tjans.  American  Acad.,  vol.  iii.  p.  80. 

f   The  places  of  some  remarkable  annular  nebulne  (for  1830)  are, 


R.A. 

N.P.D. 

R  A. 

N.P.D. 

1. 

10" 

16"  S6» 

107°  48' 

4. 

1 7h 

19™ 

2* 

113°  37 

f. 

12 

42   9-2 

47   57 

5. 

18 

47 

13 

57   11 

3. 

17 

10   39 

128   18 

b". 

;:o 

9 

S3 

59   A7 

PLANETARY    NEBULiE. 


645 


in  others  a  little  hazy  or  softened  at  the  borders.  Their 
light  is  in  some  perfectly  equable,  in  others  mottled  and  of 
a  very  peculiar  texture,  as  if  curdled.  They  are  compara- 
tively rare  objects,  not  above  four  or  five  and  twenty  having 
been  hitherto  observed,  and  of  these  nearly  three  fourths  are 
situated  in  the  southern  hemisphere.  Being  very  interesting 
objects  we  subjoin  a  list  of  the  most  remarkable.  *  Among 
these  may  be  more  particularly  specified  the  sixth  in  order, 
situated  in  the  Cross.  Its  light  is  about  equal  to  that  of  a 
star  of  the  6*7  magnitude,  its  diameter  about  12",  its  disc 
circular  or  very  slightly  elliptic,  and  with  a  clear,  sharp,  well- 
defined  outline,  having  exactly  the  appearance  of  a  planet 
with  the  exception  only  of  its  colour,  which  is  a  fine  and  full 
blue  verging  somewhat  upon  green.  And  it  is  not  a  little 
remarkable  that  this  phenomenon  of  a  blue  colour,  which  is 
so  rare  among  stars  (except  when  in  the  immediate  proxi- 
mity of  yellow  stars)  occurs,  though  less  strikingly,  in  three 
other  objects  of  this  class,  viz.  in  No.  4,  whose  colour  is  sky- 
blue,  and  in  Nos.  11  and  12,  where  the  tint,  though  paler,  is 
still  evident.  Nos.  2,  7,  9,  and  12,  are  also  exceedingly 
characteristic  objects  of  this  class.  Nos.  3,  4,  and  11  (the 
latter  in  the  parallel  of  v  Aquarii,  and  about  5m  preceding 
that  star),  are  considerably  elliptic,  and  (respectively)  about 
38",  30"  and  15"  in  diameter.  On  the  disc  of  No.  3,  and 
very  nearly  in  the  center  of  the  ellipse,  is  a  star  9m,  and 
the  texture  of  its  light,  being  velvety,  or  as  if  formed  of  fine 
dust,  clearly  indicates  its  resolvability  into  stars.  The  largest 
of  these  objects  is  No.  5,  situated  somewhat  south  of  the 
parallel  of  y3  Ursa?  Majoris  and  about  12m  following  that 
star.     Its  apparent  diameter  is  2'  40",  which,  supposing  it 


•   Places  for  1830  of  twelve  of  the  most  remarkable  planetary  nebulas. 

R.A. 

N.P.D. 

R.A. 

N.P.D. 

R.A. 

N.P.D. 

h.    m.    s. 

1.  7  34     2 

2.  9   16  39 

3.  9  59  52 
1.   10  16  36 

o      / 
104  20 
147  35 
129  36 
107   47 

h.  in.    s. 

5.  11      4   49 

6.  11    41   56 

7.  15     5    18 

8.  19   10     9 

O      r 

34     4 

146   14 

1 35      1 

83   46 

h.   in    ■. 
9.    19  34  21 

10.  19  40  19 

11.  20  54  53 

12.  28    17  44 

o     , 
104  33 

39  54 
102     2 

48  24 

646.  OUTLINES    OF    ABTHONOMV. 

placed  at  a  distance  from  us  not  more  than  that  of  61 
Cygni,  would  imply  a  linear  one  seven  times  greater  than 
that  of  the  orbit  of  Neptune.  The  light  of  this  stupendous 
globe  is  perfectly  equable  (except  just  at  the  edge,  where  it  is 
slightly  softened),  and  of  considerable  brightness.  Such  an 
appearance  would  not  be  presented  by  a  globular  space 
uniformly  filled  with  stars  or  luminous  matter,  which  struc- 
ture would  necessarily  give  rise  to  an  apparent  increase  of 
brightness  towards  the  center  in  proportion  to  the  thickness 
traversed  by  the  visual  ray.  We  might,  therefore,  be  in- 
duced to  conclude  its  real  constitution  to  be  either  that  of  a 
hollow  spherical  shell  or  of  a  flat  disc,  presented  to  us  (by  a 
highly  improbable  coincidence)  in  a  plane  precisely  perpen- 
dicular to  the  visual  ray. 

(877.)  Whatever  idea  we  may  form  of  the  real  nature 
of  such  a  body,  or  of  the  planetary  nebulae  in  general, 
which  all  agree  in  the  absence  of  central  condensation,  it 
is  evident  that  the  intrinsic  splendour  of  their  surfaces,  if 
continuous,  must  be  almost  infinitely  less  than  that  of  the 
sun.  A  circular  portion  of  the  sun's  disc,  subtending  an 
angle  of  1',  would  give  a  light  equal  to  that  of  780  full 
moons ;  while  among  all  the  objects  in  question  there  is  not 
one  which  can  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye.  M.  Arago  has 
surmised  that  they  may  possibly  be  envelopes  shining  by 
reflected  light,  from  a  solar  body  placed  in  their  center,  in- 
visible to  us  by  the  effect  of  its  excessive  distance ;  removing, 
or  attempting  to  remove  the  apparent  paradox  of  such  an 
explanation,  by  the  optical  principle  that  an  illuminated 
surface  is  equally  bright  at  all  distances,  and,  therefore,  if 
large  enough  to  subtend  a  measurable  angle,  can  be  equally 
well  seen,  whereas  the  central  body,  subtending  no  such 
angle,  has  its  effect  on  our  sight  diminished  in  the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  square  of  its  distance.*  The  immense  optical 
powers  applied  by  Lord  Kosse  and  Mr.  Lassell  to  the  ex- 

*  With  due  deference  to  so  high  an  authority  we  must  demur  to  the  conclu- 
sion. Even  supposing  the  envelope  to  reflect  »nd  scatter  (equally  in  all  direc- 
tions) half  the  light  of  the  central  sun.  the  portion  of  the  light  so  sca'tered  which 
would  fall  to  our  share  could  not  exceed  the  remaining  half  which  that  sun  itself 
would  still  send  to  us  by  direct  radiation.  But  this,  ex  hypothec,  is  too  smill 
to  affect  the  eye  with  any   luminous  perception,  when  concentrated  in  a  point, 


DOUBLE    NEBULAE.        '  647 

animation  of  these  enigmatical  objects  have  hitherto  only 
added  to  the  mystery  which  hangs  about  them,  by  dis- 
closing caprices  of  structure  in  several  of  them  of  the  most 
extraordinary  nature.* 

(878.)  Double  nebula?  occasionally  occur — and  when  such 
is-  the  case,  the  constituents  most  commonly  belong  to  the 
class  of  spherical  nebulae,  and  are  in  some  instances  undoubt- 
edly globular  clusters.  All  the  varieties  of  double  stars,  in 
fact,  as  to  distance,  position,  and  relative  brightness,  have 
their  counterparts  in  double  nebulae  ;  besides  which  the  varie- 
ties of  form  and  gradation  of  light  in  the  latter  afford  room 
for  combinations  peculiar  to  this  class  of  objects.  Though 
the  conclusive  evidence  of  observed  relative  motion  be  yet 
wanting,  and  though  from  the  vast  scale  on  which  such  sys- 
tems are  constructed,  and  the  probable  extreme  slowness  of 
the  angular  motion,  it  may  continue  for  ages  to  be  so,  yet  it 
is  impossible,  when  we  cast  our  eyes  upon  such  objects,  or  on 
the  figures  which  have  been  given  of  themt,  to  doubt  their 
physical  connexion.  The  argument  drawn  from  the  compa- 
rative rarity  of  the  objects  in  proportion  to  the  whole  extent 
of  the  heavens,  so  cogent  in  the  case  of  the  double  stars,  is 
infinitely  more  so  in  that  of  the  double  nebulae.  Nothing 
more  magnificent  can  be  presented  to  our  consideration,  than 
6uch  combinations.  Their  stupendous  scale,  the  multitude 
of  individuals  they  involve,  the  perfect  symmetry  and  regu- 
larity which  many  of  them  present,  the  utter  disregard  of 
complication  in  thus  heaping  together  system  upon  system, 
and  construction  upon  construction,  leave  us  lost  in  wonder 
and  admiration  at  the  evidence  they  afford  of  infinite  power 
and  unfathomable  design. 

(879.)  Nebulae  of  regular  forms  often  stand  in  marked  and 
symmetrical  relation  to  stars,  both  single  and  double.  ThuB 
we  are  occasionally  presented  with  the  beautiful  and  striking 
phamomenon  of  a  sharp  and  brilliant  star  concentrically  sur- 
rounded by  a  perfectly  circular  disc  or  atmosphere  of  faint 

much  less  then  coulil  it  do  so  if  spread  over  a  surface  many  million  times  Mtecd- 
inif  in  angular  area  the  apparent  disc  of  the  central  sun  itself.  (See  Annuaire 
(lit  Bureau  del  Longitudes,  1M2,  p.  409,  410,  411.) 

*  See  tlie  figures  in  their  papers,  lliil.  Trans.  1850  ana  1861,  and  Mem. 
A st    S  >c.  vol.  xxxvi. 

f   PhU.    Trans.  1833,  Plate  vii. 


648  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

light,  in  some  cases  dying  away  insensibly  on  all  sides,  in 
others  almost  suddenly  terminated.  These  are  Nebulous  Stars. 
Fine  examples  of  this  kind  are  the  45th  and  69th  nebulae  of 
Sir  Wm.  Herschel's  fourth  class*  (R.  A.  7h  19m  8s,  N.  P.  D. 
68°  45',  and  3h  58m  36%  59°  40'),  in  which  stars  of  the 
8th  magnitude  are  surrounded  by  photospheres  of  the  kind 
above  described  respectively  of  12''  and  25"  in  diameter. 
Among  stars  of  larger  magnitudes,  55  Andromeda?  and 
8  Canum  Venaticorum  may  be  named  as  exhibiting  the  same 
phenomenon  with  more  brilliancy,  but  perhaps  with  less 
perfect  regularity. 

(880.)  The  connexion  of  nebula?  with  double  stars  is  in 
many  instances  extremely  remarkable.  Thus  in  R.  A.  18h 
7m  l8,  N.  P.  D.  109°  56',  occurs  an  elliptic  nebula  having  its 
longer  axis  about  50",  in  which,  symmetrically  placed,  and 
leather  nearer  the  vertices  than  the  foci  of  the  ellipse,  are  the 
equal  individuals  of  a  double  star,  each  of  the  10th  magnitude. 
In  a  similar  combination  noticed  by  M.  Struve  (in  R.  A.  18h 
25m,  N.  P.  D.  25°  7'),  the  stars  are  unequal  and  situated  pre- 
cisely at  the  two  extremities  of  the  major  axis.  In  R.  A.  13h 
47m  33%  N.  P.  D.  129°  9',  an  oval  nebula  of  2'  in  diameter  has 
very  near  its  center  a  close  double  star,  the  individuals  of 
which,  slightly  unequal,  and  about  the  9"10  magnitude,  are 
not  more  than  2"  asunder.  The  nucleus  of  Messier's  64th 
nebula  is  "  strongly  suspected  "  to  be  a  close  double  star  — 
and  several  other  instances  might  be  cited. 

(881.)  Among  the  nebula?  which,  though  deviating  more 
from  symmetry  of  form,  are  yet  not  wanting  in  a  certain 
regularity  of  figure,  and  which  seem  clearly  entitled  to  be 
regarded  as  systems  of  a  definite  nature,  however  mysterious 
their  structure  and  destination,  by  far  the  most  remarkable 
are  the  27th  and  51st  of  Messier's  Catalogue. f      The  former 

*  The  classes  here  referred  to  ore  not  the  species  described  in  Art.  868.,  but 
lists  of  nebula;,  eight  in  number  arranged  according  to  brightness,  size,  density 
of  clustering,  &c,  in  one  or  other  of  which  all  nebula;  were  originally  classed  by 
him.  Class  I.  contains  "  Bright  nebula?;"  II.  "  Faint  do. ;"  III.  '"Very  faint 
do.;"  IV.  "Planetary  nebulae,  stars  with  bars,  milky  cbevelures,  short  ray-., 
remarkable  shapes,  &c. ;"  V  "  Very  large  nebula,-;"  VI.  "  Very  compressed  rub 
clusters;"  VII.  "Pretty  much  compressed  do.;"  V  I II.  "  Coarsely  scattered 
cbisiers." 

f  Places  for  1830:  R.  A.  1  9h  5Vm  V2',  N.  P.  I).  CT°  44',  and  K.  A.  lSh  22* 
b9\  N.P.  D.  41"  S6'. 


NEBULA  OF  PECULIAR  PORM8.         649 

oonsists  of  two  round  or  somewhat  oval  nebulous  masses 
united  by  a  short  neck  of  nearly  the  same  density.  Both  this 
and  the  masses  graduate  off,  however,  into  a  fainter  nebuloua 
envelope  which  completes  the  figure  into  an  elliptic  form,  of 
which  the  interior  masses  with  their  connexion  occupy  the 
lesser  axis.  Seen  in  a  reflector  of  18  inches  in  aperture,  the 
form  has  considerable  regularity  ;  and  though  a  few  stars  are 
here  and  there  scattered  over  it,  it  is  unresolved.  Lord 
Rosse,  viewing  it  with  a  reflector  of  double  that  aperture,  de- 
scribes and  figures  it  as  resolved  into  numerous  stars  with 
much  intermixed  nebula;  while  the  symmetry  of  form,  by 
rendering  visible  features  too  faint  to  be  seen  with  inferior 
power,  is  rendered  considerably  less  striking,  though  by  no 
means  obliterated. 

(882.)  The  5 1st  nebula  of  Messier,  viewed  through  an  18- 
inch  reflector,  presents  the  appearance  of  a  large  and  bright 
globular  nebula,  surrounded  by  a  ring  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  globe,  very  unequal  in  brightness  in  its  differ- 
ent parts,  and  subdivided  through  about  two-fifths  of  its  cir- 
cumference as  if  into  two  lamina;,  one  of  which  appears  as  if 
turned  up  towards  the  eye  out  of  the  plane  of  the  rest.  Near 
it  (at  about  a  radius  of  the  ring  distant)  is  a  small  bright 
round  nebula.  Viewed  through  the  6-f'eet  reflector  of  Lord 
Rosse  the  aspect  is  much  altered.  The  interior,  or  what 
appeared  the  upturned  portion  of  the  ring,  assumes  the  aspect 
of  a  nebulous  coil  or  convolution  tending  in  a  spiral  form 
towards  the  center,  and  a  general  tendency  to  a  spiroid 
arrangement  of  the  streaks  of  nebula  connecting  the  ring  and 
central  mass  which  this  power  brings  into  view,  becomes 
apparent,  and  forms  a  very  striking  feature.  The  outlying 
nebula  is  connected  by  a  narrow  nebulous  arc  with  the 
ring,  and  the  whole  has  a  resolvable  character.  (See  PI. 
VI.  fig.  3.)  Both  Lord  Rosse  and  Mr.  Lassell  have  found 
this  spiral  character,  even  still  more  marked,  to  belong  to 
many  other  nebulae :  sufficiently  numerous,  in  fact,  to  form 
a  class  apart,  of  which  Messier's  99th  nebula  is  a  fine 
specimen. 

(883.)  We  come  now  to  a  class  of  nebulae  of  totally  differ- 


b50  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY.      . 

ent  character.  They  are  of  very  great  extent,  utterly  devoid 
of  all  symmetry  of  form,  —  on  the  contrary,  irregular  and 
capricious  in  their  shapes  and  convolutions  to  a  most  extra- 
ordinary degree,  and  no  less  so  in  the  distribution  of  their 
light.  Xo  two  of  them  can  be  said  to  present  any  similarity 
of  figure  or  aspect,  but  they  have  one  important  character  in 
common.  They  are  all  situated  in,  or  very  near,  the  borders 
of  the  Milky  Way.  The  most  remote  from  it  is  that  in  the 
sword  handle  of  Orion,  which  being  20°  from  the  galactic 
circle,  and  15°  from  the  visible  border  of  the  Via  Lactea,  might 
seem  to  form  an  exception,  though  not  a  striking  one.  But 
this  very  situation  may  be  adduced  as  a  corroboration  of  the 
general  view  which  this  principle  of  localization  suggests. 
For  the  place  in  question  is  situated  in  the  prolongation  ol 
that  faint  offset  of  the  Milky  Way  which  we  traced  (Art.  787.) 
from  a  and  e  Persei  towards  Aldebaran  and  the  Hyades,  and 
in  the  zone  of  Great  Stars  noticed  in  Art.  785.  as  an  ap- 
pendage of,  and  probably  bearing  relation  to  that  stratum. 

(884.)  From  this  it  woidd  appear  to  follow,  almost  as  a  matter 
of  course,  that  they  must  be  regarded  as  outlying,  very  distant, 
and  as  it  were  detached  fragments  of  the  great  stratum  of  the 
Galaxy,  and  this  view  of  the  subject  is  strengthened  when 
we  find  on  mapping  down  their  places  that  they  may  all  be 
grouped  in  four  great  masses  or  nebulous  regions,  —  that  of 
Orion,  of  Argo,  of  Sagittarius,  and  of  Cygnus.  And  thus, 
inductively,  we  may  gather  some  information  respecting  the 
structure  and  form  of  the  Galaxy  itself,  which,  could  we  view 
it  as  a  whole,  from  a  distance  such  as  that  which  separates  us 
from  these  objects,  would  very  probably  present  itself  under 
an  aspect  quite  as  complicated  and  irregular. 

(885.)  The  great  nebula  surrounding  the  stars  marked  6  1 
in  the  sword  handle  of  Orion  was  discovered  by  Huy^hens 
in  1656,  and  has  been  repeatedly  figured  and  described  by 
astronomers  since  that  time.  Its  appearance  varies  greatly 
(as  that  of  all  nebulous  objects  does)  with  the  instrumental 
power  applied,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  recognize  in  repre- 
sentations made  with  inferior  telescopes,  even  principal  fea- 
tures,  to   say    nothing   of  subordinate    details.       Until    this 


NEBULA   OF   OUION.         ,  051 

became  well  understood,  it  was  supposed  to  have  changed 
very  materially,  both  in  form  aud  extent,  during  the  interval 
elapsed  since  its  first  discovery.  No  doubt,  however,  now 
remains  that  these  supposed  changes  have  originated  partly 
from  the  cause  above-mentioned,  partly  from  the  difficulty  ot 
correctly  drawing,  and,  still  more,  engraving  such  objects, 
and  partly  from  a  want  of  sufficient  care  in  the  earlier  de- 
lineators themselves  in  faithfully  copying  that  which  they 
really  did  see.  Our  figure  (Plate  IV.,  fig.  1.)  is  reduced 
from  a  larger  one  made  under  very  favourable  circumstances, 
from  drawings  taken  with  an  18-inch  reflector  at  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  where  its  meridian  altitude  greatly  exceeds 
what  it  has  at  European  stations.  The  area  occupied  by 
this  figure  is  about  one  25th  part  of  a  square  degree,  extend- 
ing in  H.  A.  (or  horizontally)  2m  of  time,  equivalent  almost 
exactly  to  30'  in  arc,  the  object  being  very  near  the  equator, 
and  24'  vertically,  or  in  polar  distance.  The  figure  shows 
it  reversed  in  declination,  the  northern  side  being  lower- 
most, and  the  preceding  towards  the  right  hand.  In  form, 
the  brightest  portion  offers  a  resemblance  to  the  head  and 
yawning  jaws  of  some  monstrous  animal,  with  a  sort  of  pro- 
boscis running  out  from  the  snout.  Many  stars  are  scattered 
over  it,  which  for  the  most  part  appear  to  have  no  connexion 
with  it,  and  the  remarkable  sextuple  star  6  1  Orionis,  of 
which  mention  has  already  been  made  (Art.  837.),  occupies 
a  most  conspicuous  situation  close  to  the  brightest  portion, 
at  almost  the  edge  of  the  opening  of  the  jaws.  It  is  re- 
markable, however,  that  within  the  area  of  the  trapezium  no 
nebula  exists.  The  g-miral  aspect  of  the  less  luminous  and 
cirrous  portion  is  simply  nebulous  and  irresolvable,  but  the 
brighter  portion  immediately  adjacent  to  the  trapezium, 
forming  the  square  front  of  the  head,  is  shown  with  the  18-inch 
reflector  broken  up  into  masses  (very  imperfectly  represented 
in  the  figure),  whose  mottled  aud  curdling  light  evidently 
indicates  by  a  sort  of  granular  texture  its  consisting  of  stars, 
and  when  examined  under  the  great  light  of  Lord  Rosse'a 
reflector,  or  the  exquisite  defining  power  of  the  great  achro- 
matic at  Cambridge;   U.S.,  is  evidently  perceived    to  con 


652  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

(list  of  clustering  stars.  There  can  therefore  be  little  doubt 
as  to  the  whole  consisting  of  stars,  too  minute  to  be  discerned 
individually  even  with  these  powerful  aids,  but  which  become 
visible  as  points  of  light  when  closely  adjacent  in  the  more 
crowded  parts  in  the  mode  already  more  than  once  suggested. 

(886.)  The  nebula  is  not  confined  to  the  limits  of  our 
figure.  Northward  of  6  about  33',  and  nearly  on  the  same 
meridian  are  two  stars  marked  C  1  and  C  2  Orionis,  in 
volved  in  a  bright  and  branching  nebula  of  very  singular  form, 
and  south  of  it  is  the  star  t  Orionis,  which  is  also  involved 
in  strong  nebula.  Careful  examination  with  powerful  tele- 
scopes has  traced  out  a  continuity  of  nebulous  light  between 
the  great  nebula  and  both  these  objects,  and  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  nebulous  region  extends  northwards,  as 
far  as  s  in  the  belt  of  Orion,  which  is  involved  in  strong 
nebulosity,  as  well  as  several  smaller  stars  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood.  Professor  Bond  has  given  a  beautiful  figure 
of  the  great  nebula  in  Trans.  American  Acad,  of  Arts  and 
Sciencea,  new  series,  vol.  iii.,  and  Lord  Oxmantown  a 
Buperb  one  in  Phil.  Tr.  186S. 

(887.)  The  remarkable  variation  in  lustre  of  the  bright 
star  7}  in  Argo,  has  been  already  mentioned.  This  star  is 
situated  in  the  most  condensed  region  of  a  very  extensive 
nebula  or  congeries  of  nebular  masses,  streaks  and  branches, 
a  portion  of  which  is  represented  in  fig.  2.  Plate  IV.  The 
whole  nebula  is  spread  over  an  area  of  fully  a  square  degree 
in  extent,  of  which  that  included  in  the  figure  occupies  about 
one-fourth,  that  is  to  say,  28'  in  polar  distance,  and  32'  of 
arc  in  R.  A.,  the  portion  not  included  being,  though  fainter, 
even  more  capriciously  contorted  than  that  here  depicted, 
in  which  it  should  be  observed  that  the  preceding  side  is 
towards  the  right  hand,  and  the  southern  uppermost.  Viewed 
with  an  18-inch  reflector,  no  part  of  this  strange  object  shows 
any  sign  of  resolution  into  stars,  nor  in  the  brightest  and 
most  condensed  portion  adjacent  to  the  singular  oval  vacancy 
in  the  middle  of  the  figure  is  there  any  of  that  curdled 
appearance,  or  that  tendency  to  break  up  into  bright  knots 
with    intervening   darker    portions    which    characterize    the 


NEBULA    OF    AKGO. 


(J53 


nebula  of  Orion,  and  indicate  its  resolvability.  The  whole 
is  situated  in  a  very  rich  and  brilliant  part  of  the  Milky  Way, 
so  thickly  strewed  with  stars  (omitted  in  the  figure),  that  in 
the  area  occupied  by  the  nebula,  not  less  than  1200  have 
been  actually  counted,  and  their  places  in  R.  A.  and  P.  D. 
determined.  Yet  it  is  obvious  that  these  have  no  connexion 
whatever  with  the  nebula,  being,  in  fact,  only  a  simple  con- 
tinuation over  it  of  the  general  ground  of  the  galaxy,  which 
on  an  average  of  two  hours  in  Right  Ascension  in  this 
period  of  its  course  contains  no  less  than  3138  stars  to  the 
square  degree,  all,  however,  distinct,  and  (except  where  the 
object  in  question  is  situated)  seen  projected  on  a  perfectly 
dark  heaven,  without  any  appearance  of  intermixed  nebulosity. 
The  conclusion  can  hardly  be  avoided,  that  in  looking  at  it 
we  see  through,  and  beyond  the  Milky  Way,  far  out  into 
space,  through  a  starless  region,  disconnecting  it  altogether 
from  our  system.  "  It  is  not  easy  for  language  to  convey  a 
full  impression  of  the  beauty  and  sublimity  of  the  spectacle 
which  this  nebula  offers,  as  it  enters  the  field  of  view  of  a 
telescope  fixed  in  Right  Ascension,  by  the  diurnal  motion, 
ushered  in  as  it  is  by  so  glorious  and  innumerable  a  procession 
of  stars,  to  which  it  forms  a  sort  of  climax,"  and  in  a  part  of 
the  heavens  otherwise  full  of  interest.  One  other  bright 
and  very  remarkably  formed  nebula  of  considerable  mag- 
nitude precedes  it  nearly  on  the  same  parallel,  but  without 
any  traceable  connexion  between  them. 

(888.)  The  nebulous  group  of  Sagittarius  consists  of  several 
conspicuous  nebula?  *  of  very  extraordinary  forms  by  no 
means  easy  to  give  an  idea  of  by  mere  description.  One  of 
them  (h,  1991  f)  is  singularly  trifid,  consisting  of  three  bright 
and  irregularly  formed  nebulous  masses,  graduating  away 
insensibly  externally,  but  coming  up  to  a  groat  intensity  of 

•  About  R.A.  17h  .52".  N.P  D.  113°  1',  four  nebulae,  No.  41  of  Sir  Wm. 
Horschel's  4th  class,  and  Nos.  1,  'J,  3,  of  his  5th  all  connected  into  one  greut 
complex  nebula.-  In  R.A.  17b  53"  27',  N. P. D.  114°  21',  the  8th,  and  in 
18b  1  lm,  106°  15'.  the  17th  of  MesMer's  Catalogue. 

f  This  number  refers  tn  the  catalogue  of  nehuUe  in  Phil.  Trass.,  1833.  The 
reader  will  find  figures  of  the  seveial  nebula?  of  this  group  in  that  volume,  pi.  k. 
Pg.  35  ,  in  the  Author's  "  Results  of  Observations,  &c,  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Horn;."  Plates  i.  fig.  1.,  and  it.  figs.  I  and  9,  and  in  Mason's  Memoir  in  the  col 
lection  of  the  American  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  art.  xiiL 


654  OUTLINES    OF    ASTROtfOMT. 

light  at  their  interior  edges,  where  they  enclose  and  surround 
a  sort  of  three-forked  rift,  or  vacant  area,  abruptly  and  un- 
couthly  crooked,  and  quite  void  of  nebulous  light.  A  beau- 
tiful triple  star  is  situated  precisely  on  the  edge  of  one  of 
these  nebulous  masses  just  where  the  interior  vacancy  forks 
out  into  two  channels.  A  fourth  nebulous  mass  spreads  like 
a  fan  or  downy  plume  from  a  star  at  a  little  distance  from  the 
triple  nebula. 

(889.)  Nearly  adjacent  to  the  last  described  nebula,  and 
no  doubt  connected  with  it,  though  the  connexion  has  not  yet 
been  traced,  is  situated  the  8th  nebula  of  Messier's  Catalogue. 
It  is  a  collection  of  nebulous  folds  and  masses,  surrounding 
and  including  a  number  of  oval  dark  vacancies,  and  in 
one  place  coming  up  to  so  great  a  degree  of  brightness,  as  to 
offer  the  appearance  of  an  elongated  nucleus.  Superposed 
upon  this  nebula,  and  extending  in  one  direction  beyond  its 
area,  is  a  fine  and  rich  cluster  of  scattered  stars,  which  seem 
to  have  no  connexion  with  it,  as  the  nebula  does  not,  as  in 
the  region  of  Orion,  show  any  tendency  to  congregate  about 
the  stars. 

(890.)  The  19th  nebula  of  Messier's  Catalogue,  though 
some  degrees  remote  from  the  others,  evidently  belongs  to 
this  group.  Its  form  is  very  remarkable,  consisting  of  two 
loops  like  capital  Greek  Omegas,  the  one  bright,  the  other  ex- 
ceedingly faint,  connected  at  their  bases  by  a  broad  and  very 
bright  band  of  nebula,  insulated  within  which  by  a  narrow 
comparatively  obscure  border,  stands  a  bright,  resolvable 
knot,  or  what  is  probably  a  cluster  of  exceedingly  minute 
stars.  A  very  faint  round  nebula  stands  in  connexion  with 
the  upper  or  convex  portion  of  the  brighter  loop. 

(891.)  The  nebulous  group  of  Cygnus  consists  of  several 
large  and  irregular  nebulae,  one  of  which  passes  through  the 
double  star  h  Cygni,  as  a  long,  crooked,  narrow  streak,  forking 
out  in  two  or  three  places.  The  others*,  observed  in  the  first 
instance  by  Sir  W.  Herschel  and  by  the  author  of  this  work 
as  separate  nebulae,  have  been  traced  into  connexion  by  Air. 
Mason,  and  shown  to  form  part  of  a  curious  and  intricate 
nebulous  system,  consisting,  1st,  of  a  long,  narrow,  curved, 

*    R.  A    20"  49"  '->0*.  N.P.D.  5S°  27'. 


THE  MAGELLANIC  CLOUDS.  055 

and  forked  streak,  and  2dly,  of  a  cellular  effusion  of  great 
extent,  in  which  the  nebula  occurs  intermixed  with,  and 
adhering  to  stars  around  the  borders  of  the  cells,  while  their 
interior  is  free  from  nebula,  and  almost  so  from  stars. 

(»92.)  The  Magellanic  clouds,  or  the  nubecula?  (major  and 
minor),  as  they  are  called  in  the  celestial  maps  and  charts,  are, 
as  their  name  imports,  two  nebulous  or  cloudy  masses  of  light, 
conspicuously  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  in  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere, in  the  appearance  and  brightness  of  their  light  not 
unlike  portions  of  the  Milky  Way  of  the  same  apparent  size. 
They  are,  generally  speaking,  round,  or  somewhat  oval,  and 
the  larger,  which  deviates  most  from  the  circular  form,  ex- 
hibits the  appearance  of  an  axis  of  light,  very  ill  defined,  and 
by  no  means  strongly  distinguished  from  the  general  mass, 
which  seems  to  open  out  at  its  extremities  into  somewhat 
oval  sweeps,  constituting  the  preceding  and  following  portions 
of  its  circumference.  A  small  patch,  visibly  brighter  than 
the  general  light  around,  in  its  following  part,  indicates  to 
the  naked  eye  the  situation  of  a  very  remarkable  nebula 
(No.  30  Doradus  of  Bode's  catalogue),  of  which  more  here- 
after. The  greater  nubecula  is  situated  between  the  me- 
ridians of  4h  40m  and  6h  O"1  and  the  parallels  of  156°  and  162° 
of  N.P.D.,  and  occupies  an  area  of  about  42  square  degrees. 
The  lesser,  between  the  meridians  *  0h  28m  and  lh  lom  and 
the  parallels  of  162°  and  165°  N.  P.  D.,  covers  about  ten  square 
degrees.  Their  degree  of  brightness  may  be  judged  of  from 
the  effect  of  strong  moonlight,  which  totally  obliterates  the 
lesser,  but  not  quite  the  greater. 

(893.)  When  examined  through  powerful  telescopes,  the 
constitution  of  the  nubecula?,  and  especially  of  the  nubecula 
major,  is  found  to  be  of  astonishing  complexity.  The  general 
ground  of  both  consists  of  large  tracts  and  patches  of  nebu- 
losity in  every  stage  of  resolution,  from  light,  irresolvable 
with  18  inches  of  reflecting  aperture,  up  to  perfectly  sepa- 
rated stars  like  the  Milky  Way,  and  clustering  groups  suffi- 
ciently insulated  and  condensed  to  come  under  the  designation 
of  irregular,  and  in  some  cases  pretty  rich  clusters.     But  be- 

*   It  is  laid  dtwn  nearly  an  hour  wrong  in  all  the  celestial  charts  and  glnb«* 


650  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

sides  those,  there  are  also  nebulae  in  abundance,  both  regulai 
and  irregular;  globular  clusters  in  every  state  of  condensation; 
and  objects  of  a  nebulous  character  quite  peculiar,  and  which 
have  no  analogue  in  any  other  region  of  the  heavens.  Such 
is  the  concentration  of  these  objects,  that  in  the  area  occupied 
by  the  nubecula  major,  not  fewer  than  278  nebulae  and 
clusters  have  been  enumerated,  besides  50  or  60  outliers, 
which  (considering  the  general  barrenness  in  such  objects  ot 
the  immediate  neighbourhood)  ought  certainly  to  be  reckoned 
as  its  appendages,  being  about  6^  per  square  degree,  which  very 
far  exceeds  the  average  of  any  other,  even  the  most  crowded 
parts  of  the  nebulous  heavens.  In  the  nubecula  minor,  the 
concentration  of  such  objects  is  less,  though  still  very  striking, 
37  having  been  observed  within  its  area,  and  6  adjacent,  but 
outlying.  The  nubecula?,  then,  combine,  each  within  its  own 
area,  characters  which  in  the  rest  of  the  heavens  are  no  less 
strikingly  separated, — viz.,  those  of  the  galactic  and  the  nebu- 
lar system.  Globular  clusters  (except  in  one  region  of  small 
extent)  and  nebulae  of  regular  elliptic  forms  are  compara- 
tively rare  in  the  Milky  Way,  and  are  found  congregated  in 
the  greatest  abundance  in  a  part  of  the  heavens,  the  most 
remote  possible  from  that  circle ;  whereas,  in  the  nubecula?, 
they  are  indiscriminately  mixed  with  the  general  starry 
ground,  and  with  irregular  though  small  nebulae. 

(894.)  This  combination  of  characters,  rightly  considered, 
is  in  a  high  degree  instructive,  affording  an  insight  into  the 
probable  comparative  distance  of  stars  and  nebula,  and  the 
real  brightness  of  individual  stars  as  compared  one  with 
another.  Taking  the  apparent  semidiameter  of  the  nubecula 
major  at  3°,  and  regarding  its  solid  form  as,  roughly  speaking, 
spherical,  its  nearest  and  most  remote  parts  differ  in  their 
distance  from  us  by  a  little  more  than  a  tenth  part  of  our 
distance  from  its  center.  The  brightness  of  objects  situated 
in  its  nearer  portions,  therefore,  cannot  be  much  exaggerated, 
nor  that  of  its  remoter  much  enfeebled,  by  their  difference  of 
distance ;  yet  within  this  globular  space,  we  have  collected 
upwards  of  GOO  stars  of  the  7th,  8th,  9th,  and  10th  magni- 
tudes, nearly  300  nebulae,  and  globular  and  other  clusters, 


TIIE    MAGELLANIC    CLOUDS.  657 

of  all  degrees  qfresolubility,  and  smaller  scattered  stars  innu- 
merable of  every  inferior  magnitude,  from  the  10th  to  such 
as  by  their  multitude  and  minuteness  constitute  irresolvable 
nebulosity,  extending  over  tracts  of  many  square  degrees. 
Were  there  but  one  such  object,  it  might  be  maintained  with- 
out utter  improbability  that  its  apparent  sphericity  is  only  an 
effect  of  foreshortening,  and  that  in  reality  a  much  greater  pro- 
portional difference  of  distance  between  its  nearer  and  more 
remote  parts  exists.  But  such  an  adjustment,  improbable 
enough  in  one  case,  must  be  rejected  as  too  much  so  for  fair 
argument  in  two.  It  must,  therefore,  be  taken  as  a  demon- 
strated fact,  that  stars  of  the  7th  or  8th  magnitude  and  irre- 
solvable nebula  may  co-exist  within  limits  of  distance  not 
differing  in  proportion  more  than  as  9  to  10,  a  conclusion  which 
must  inspire  some  degree  of  caution  in  admitting,  as  certain, 
many  of  the  consequences  which  have  been  rather  strongly 
dwelt  upon  in  the  foregoing  pages. 

(895.)  Immediately  preceding  the  center  of  the  nubecula 
minor,  and  undoubtedly  belonging  to  the  same  group,  occurs 
the  superb  globular  cluster,  No.  47.  Toucani  of  Bode,  very 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  one  of  the  finest  objects  of  this 
kind  in  the  heavens.  It  consists  of  a  very  condensed  spherical 
mass  of  stars,  of  a  pale  rose  colour,  concentrically  enclosed  in 
a  much  less  condensed  globe  of  white  ones,  15'  or  20'  in 
diameter.  This  is  the  first  in  order  of  the  list  of  such  clusters 
in  Art.  867. 

(896.)  Within  the  nubecula  major,  as  already  mentioned, 
and  faintly  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  is  the  singular  nebula 
(marked  as  the  star  30  Doradus  in  Bode's  Catalogue)  noticed 
by  Lacaille  as  resembling  the  nucleus  of  a  small  comet.  It 
occupies  about  one-500th  part  of  the  whole  area  of  the  nu- 
becula, and  is  so  satisfactorily  represented  in  Plate  V.,  fig.  I., 
as  to  render  further  description  superfluous.  See  Art.  (896  a), 
Note  K. 

(897.)  We  shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  the  mention  of 
two  phenomena,  which  seem  to  indicate  the  existence  of 
some  slight  degree  of  nebulosity  about  the  sun  itself,  and  even 
to  place  it  in  the  list  of  nebulous  stars.     The  first  is  that 

u  u 


658  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

nailed  the  zodiacal  light,  which  may  be  seen  any  very  cleai 
evening  soon  after  sunset,  about  the  months  of  March,  April, 
and  May,  or  at  the  opposite  seasons  before  sunrise,  as  a  cone 
or  lenticularly-shaped  light,  extending  from  the  horizon  ob- 
liquely upwards,  and  following  generally  the  course  of  the 
ecliptic,  or  rather  that  of  the  sun's  equator.  The  apparent 
angular  distance  of  its  vertex  from  the  sun  varies,  according 
to  circumstances,  from  40°  to  90°,  and  the  breadth  of  its  base 
perpendicular  to  its  axis  from  8°  to  30°.  It  is  extremely 
faint  and  ill  defined,  at  least  in  this  climate,  though  better 
seen  in  tropical  regions,  but  cannot  be  mistaken  for  any 
atmospheric  meteor  or  aurora  borealis.  It  is  manifestly  in 
the  nature  of  a  lenticularly -formed  envelope*,  surrounding  the 
sun,  and  extending  beyond  the  orbits  of  Mercury  and  Venus, 
and  nearly,  perhaps  quite,  attaining  that  of  the  earth,  since  its 
vertex  has  been  seen  fully  90°  from  the  sun's  place  in  a  great 
circle.  It  may  be  conjectured  to  be  no  other  than  the  denser 
part  of  that  medium,  which,  we  have  some  reason  to  believe, 
resists  the  motion  of  comets ;  loaded,  perhaps,  with  the  actual 
materials  of  the  tails  of  millions  of  those  bodies,  of  which 
they  have  been  stripped  in  their  successive  perihelion  pas- 
sages (Art.  566.).  An  atmosphere  of  the  sun,  in  any  proper 
sense  of  the  word,  it  cannot  be,  since  the  existence  of  a 
gaseous  envelope  propagating  pressure  from  part  to  part ; 
subject  to  mutual  friction  in  its  strata,  and  therefore  rotating 
in  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  time  with  the  central  body ; 
and  of  such  dimensions  and  ellipticity,  is  utterly  incompatible 
with  dynamical  laws.  If  its  particles  have  inertia,  they  must 
necessarily  stand  with  respect  to  the  sun  in  t  he  relation  of  se- 
parate and  independent  minute  planets,  each  having  its  own 
orbit,  plane  of  motion,  and  periodic  time.  The  total  mass  being 
almost  nothing  compared  to  that  of  the  sun,  mutual  perturba- 
tion is  out  of  the  question,  though  collisions  among  such  as 
may  cross   each  other's  paths  may  operate  in  the  course  of 

*  I  cannot  imagine  upon  what  grounds  Humboldt  persists  in  ascribing  to  it 
the  form  of  a  ring  encircling  the  sun.  For  a  most  elaborate  series  of  obsetva- 
tions  of  the  zodiacal  light,  by  the  Rev.  G.  Jones,  see  ''United  States  Japan 
Expedition,"  vol.  iii.  4°.  Washington.  1856.  It  contain*  3.57  plates  of  lis  <p- 
pearance. 


METEOROL1TES   AND    SHOOTING    STARS.  659 

indefinite  ages  to  effect  a  subsidence  of  at  least  some  portion 
of  it  into  the  body  of  the  sun  or  those  of  the  planets. 

(898.)  Nothing  prevents  that  these  particles,  or  soma 
among  them,  may  have  some  tangible  size,  and  be  at  very 
great  distances  from  each  other.  Compared  with  planets 
visible  in  our  most  powerful  telescopes,  rocks  and  stony 
masses  of  great  size  and  weight  would  be  but  as  the  im- 
palpable dust  which  a  sunbeam  renders  visible  as  a  sheet  of 
light  when  streaming  through  a  narrow  chink  into  a  dark 
chamber.  It  is  a  fact,  established  by  the  most  indisputable 
evidence,  that  stony  masses  and  lumps  of  iron  do  occasionally, 
and  indeed  by  no  means  unfrequently,  fall  upon  the  earth  from 
the  higher  regions  of  our  atmosphere  (where  it  is  obviously  im- 
possible they  can  have  been  generated),  and  that  they  have 
done  so  from  the  earliest  times  of  history.  Four  instances 
are  recorded  of  persons  being  killed  by  their  fall.  A  block 
of  stone  fell  at  ./Egos  Potamos,  B.C.  465,  as  large  as  two 
mill-stones  ;  another  at  Narni,  in  921,  projected,  like  a  rock, 
four  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  river,  into  which  it  was 
seen  to  fall.  The  emperor  Jehangire  had  a  sword  forged 
from  a  mass  of  meteoric  iron  which  fell,  in  1620,  at  Jalandar, 
in  the  Punjab.*  Sixteen  instances  of  the  fall  of  stones  in 
the  British  Isles  are  well  authenticated  to  have  occurred  since 
1620,  one  of  them  in  London.  In  1803,  on  the  26th  of 
April,  thousands  of  stones  were  scattered  by  the  explosion 
into  fragments  of  a  large  fiery  globe  over  a  region  of  twenty 
or  thirty  square  miles  around  the  town  of  L'Aigle,  in  Nor- 
mandy. The  fact  occurred  at  mid-day,  and  the  circumstances 
were  officially  verified  by  a  commission  of  the  French  go- 
vernment-f  These,  and  innumerable  other  instances},  fully 
establish  the  general  fact ;  and  after  vain  attempts  to  account 
for  it  by  volcanic  projection,  either  from  the  earth  or  the 
moon,  the  planetary  nature  of  thes?e  bodies  seems  at  length 
to  be  almost  generally  admitted.  The  heat  which  they  pos- 
sess when  fallen,  the  igneous  phamomena  which  accompany 

•  See  the  emperor's  own  very  remarkable  account  of  tlie  occurrence,  trans- 
lated in  Phil.   Trans.  1798,  p.  90ft 

t   See  M.   Biot's  report  in  Mum.  de  l'lnstitut   180G. 

j  Sm  a  list  of  upwards  of  200,  published  by  C'hladui,  Annates  du  burt.au  la 
Longitudes  de  i'ranee,  1825. 


660  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

them,  their  explosion  on  arriving  within  the  denser  regions 
of  our  atmosphere,  &c,  are  all  sufficiently  accounted  for  on 
physical  principles,  by  the  condensation  of  the  air  before 
them  in  consequence  of  their  enormous  velocity,  and  by  the 
relations  of  air  in  a  highly  attenuated  state  to  heat.* 

(899.)  Besides  stony  and  metallic  masses,  however,  it  is 
probable  that  bodies  of  very  different  natures,  or  at  least  states 
of  aggregation,  are  thus  circulating  round  the  sun.  Shooting 
stars,  often  followed  by  long  trains  of  light,  and  those  great 
fiery  globes,  of  more  rare,  but  not  very  uncommon  occurrence, 
which  are  seen  traversing  the  upper  regions  of  our  atmosphere, 
sometimes  leaving  trains  behind  them  remaining  for  many 
minutes,  sometimes  bursting  with  a  loud  explosion,  sometimes 
becoming  quietly  extinct,  may  not  unreasonably  be  presumed 
to  be  bodies  extraneous  to  our  planet,  which  only  become  visi- 
ble on  becoming  ignited  in  the  act  of  grazing  the  confines  of 
our  atmosphere.  Among  the  last-mentioned  meteors,  how- 
ever, are  some  which  can  hardly  be  supposed  solid  masses. 
The  remarkable  meteor  of  August  18.  1783,  traversed  the 
whole  of  Europe,  from  Shetland  to  Rome,  with  a  velocity  of 
about  30  miles  per  second,  at  a  height  of  50  miles  from  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  with  a  light  greatly  surpassing  that  of 
the  full  moon,  and  a  real  diameter  of  fully  half  a  mile.  Yet 
with  these  vast  dimensions,  it  made  a  sudden  bend  in  its 
course ;  it  changed  its  form  visibly,  and  at  length  quietly  se- 
parated into  several  distinct  bodies,  accompanying  each  other 
in  parallel  courses,  and  each  followed  by  a  tail  or  train. 

(900.)  There  are  circumstances  in  the  history  of  shooting 
stars,  which  very  strongly  corroborate  the  idea  of  their  ex- 
traneous or  cosmical  origin,  and  their  circulation  round  the 
sun  in  definite  orbits.  On  several  occasions  they  have  been 
observed  to  appear  in  unusual,  and,  indeed,  astonishing  num- 
bers, so  as  to  convey  the  idea  of  a  shower'of  rockets,  and  bril- 
liantly illuminating  the  whole  heavens  for  hours  together,  and 
that  not  in  one  locality,  but  over  whole  continents  and  oceans, 
and  even  (in  one  instance)  in  both  hemispheres.  Now  it  is 
extremely  remarkable  that,  whenever  this  great  display  has 

*  Edinburgh  Review,  Jan  1848,  p.  195.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  no  new 
chemical  element  has  been  detected  in  any  of  the  numerous  meteorolitcs  which 
have  hecn  subjected  to  analysis. 


PERIODIC    APPEARANCE    OF    METEORS.  661 

been  exhibited  (at  least  in  modern  times),  it  has  uniformly 
happened  on  the  night  between  the  12th  and  13th,  or  on  that 
between  the  13th  and  14th  of  November.  Such  cases  occurred 
in  1799,  1832, 1833,  and  1834.  On  tracing  back  the  records 
of  similar  phaenomena,  it  has  been  ascertained,  moreover,  that 
more  often  those  identical  nights,  but  sometimes  those  imme- 
diately adjacent,  have  been,  time  out  of  mind,  habitually 
signalized  by  such  exhibitions.  Another  annually  recurring 
epoch,  in  which,  though  far  less  brilliant,  the  display  of 
meteors  is  more  certain  (for  that  of  November  is  often  inter- 
rupted for  a  great  many  years),  is  that  of  the  10th  of  August, 
on  which  night,  and  on  the  9th  and  11th,  numerous,  large, 
and  bright  shooting  stars,  with  trains,  are  almost  sure  to  be 
seen.  Other  epochs  of  periodic  recurrence,  less  marked  than 
the  above,  have  also  been  to  a  certain  extent  established. 

(901.)  It  is  impossible  to  attribute  such  a  recurrence  of 
identical  dates  of  very  remarkable  phaenomena  to  accident. 
Annual  periodicity,  irrespective  of  geographical  position, 
refers  us  at  once  to  the  place  occupied  by  the  earth  in  its 
annual  orbit,  and  leads  direct  to  the  conclusion  that  at  that 
place  the  earth  incurs  a  liability  to  frequent  encounters  or 
concurrences  with  a  stream  of  meteors  in  their  progress  of 
circulation  round  the  sun.  Let  us  test  this  idea  by  pursuing 
it  into  some  of  its  consequences.  In  the  first  place  then, 
supposing  the  earth  to  plunge,  in  its  yearly  circuit,  into  a 
uniform  ring  of  innumerable  small  meteor-planets,  of  such 
breadth  as  would  be  traversed  by  it  in  one  or  two  days ; 
since  during  this  small  time  the  motions,  whether  of  the 
earth  or  of  each  individual  meteor,  may  be  taken  as  uniform 
and  rectilinear,  and  those  of  all  the  latter  (at  the  place  and 
time)  parallel,  or  very  nearly  so,  it  will  follow  that  the  relative 
motion  of  the  meteors  referred  to  the  earth  as  at  rest,  will  be 
also  uniform,  rectilinear,  and  parallel.  Viewed,  therefore, 
from  the  center  of  the  earth  (or  from  any  point  in  its  cir- 
cumference, if  we  neglect  the  diurnal  velocity  as  very  small 
compared  with  the  annual)  they  will  all  appear  to  diverge 
from  a  common  point,  fixed  in  relation  to  the  celestial  sphere, 
as  if  emanating  from  a  sidereal  apex  (Art  115.). 


662  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY, 

(902.)  Now  tins  is  precisely  what  actually  happens.  The 
meteors  of  the  12th — 14th  of  November,  or  at  least  the 
vast  majority  of  them,  describe  apparently  arcs  of  great 
circles,  passing  through  or  near  y  Leonis.  No  matter  what 
the  situation  of  that  star  with  respect  to  the  horizon  or  to  its 
east  and  west  points  may  be  at  the  time  of  observation,  the 
paths  of  the  meteors  all  appear  to  diverge  from  that  star. 
On  the  9th  —  11th  of  August  the  geometrical  fact  is  the 
v<arne,  the  apex  only  differing ;  1>  Camelonardali  being  for 
that  epoch  the  point  of  divergence.  As  we  need  not  suppose 
the  meteoric  ring  coincident  in  its  plai  e  with  the  ecliptic, 
and  as  for  a  ring  of  meteors  we  may  substitute  an  elliptic 
annulus  of  any  reasonable  excentricity,  so  that  both  the 
velocity  and  direction  of  each  meteor  may  differ  to  any  extent 
•from  the  earth's,  there  is  nothing  in  the  great  and  obviuus 
difference  in  latitude  of  these  apices  at  all  militating  against 
the  conclusion. 

(903.)  If  the  meteors  be  uniformly  distributed  in  such  a 
ring  or  elliptic  annulus,  the  earth's  encounter  with  them  in 
every  revolution  will  be  certain,  if  it  occur  once.  But  if  the 
ring  be  broken,  if  it  be  a  succession  of  groups  revolving  in 
an  ellipse  in  a  period  not  identical  with  that  of  the  earth, 
years  may  pass  without  a  rencontre ;  and  when  such  happen, 
they  may  differ  to  any  extent  in  their  intensity  of  character, 
according  as  richer  or  poorer  groups  have  been  encoun- 
tered. 

(904.)  No  other  plausible  explanation  of  these  highly  cha- 
racteristic features  (the  annual  periodicity,  and  divergence 
from  a  common  apex,  always  alike  for  each  respective  epoch) 
has  been  even  attempted,  and  accordingly  the  opinion  is 
generally  gaining  ground  among  astronomers  that  shooting 
stars  belong  to  their  department  of  science,  and  great  interest 
is  excited  in  their  observation  and  the  further  development  of 
their  laws.  The  first  connected  and  systematic  series  of 
observations  of  them,  having  for  their  object  to  trace  out  their 
relative  paths  with  respect  to  the  earth,  are  those  of  Benzen- 
berg  and  Brandes,  who,  by  noting  the  instants  and  apparent 
places  of  appearance  and  extinction,   as  well  as  the  precise 


PERIODIC    APFEARANCE    OF    METEORS.  663 

apparent  paths  among  the  stars,  of  individual  meteors,  from 
the  extremities  of  a  measured  base  line  nearly  50,000  feet 
id  length,  were  led  to  conclude  that  their  heights  at  the 
instant  of  their  appearance  and  disappearance  vary  from 
16  miles  to  140,  and  their  relative  velocities  from  18  to  36 
miles  per  second,  velocities  so  great  as  clearly  to  indicate  an 
independent  planetary  circulation  round  the  sun.  [A  very 
remarkable  meteor  or  bolide,  which  appeared  on  the  19th 
August,  1847,  was  observed  at  Dieppe  and  at  Paris,  with 
sufficient  precision  to  admit  of  calculation  of  the  elements 
of  its  orbit  in  absolute  space.  This  calculation  has  been 
performed  by  M.  Petit,  director  of  the  observatory  of  Tou- 
louse, and  the  following  hyperbolic  elements  of  its  orbit  round 
the  sun  are  stated  by  him  (Astr.  Nachr.  701.)  as  its  result; 
viz.,  Semimajor  axis  =  —0*3240083  ;  excentricity  =3*95 130; 
perihelion  distance  =  0*95626 ;  inclination  to  plane  of  the 
earth's  equator,  18°  20'  18" ;  ascending  node  on  the  same  plane, 
10°  34'  48";  motion  direct.  According  to  this  calculation, 
the  body  would  have  occupied  no  less  than  37340  years  in 
travelling  from  the  distance  of  the  nearest  fixed  star  sup- 
posed to  have  a  parallax  of  I"]. 

(905.)  It  is  by  no  means  inconceivable  that  the  earth 
approaching  to  such  as  differ  but  little  from  it  in  direction 
and  velocity,  may  have  attached  many  of  them  to  it  as  per- 
manent satellites,  and  of  these  there  may  be  some  so  large, 
and  of  such  texture  and  solidity,  as  to  shine  by  reflected 
light,  and  become  visible  (such,  at  least,  as  are  very  near  the 
earth)  for  a  brief  moment,  suffering  extinction  by  plunging 
into  the  earth's  shadow ;  in  other  words,  undergoing  total 
eclipse.  Sir  John  Lubbock  is  of  opinion  that  such  is  the 
case,  and  has  given  geometrical  formulas  for  calculating  their 
distances  from  observations  of  this  nature.*  The  observations 
of  M.  Petit  would  lead  us  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  at 
least  one  such  body,  revolving  round  the  earth,  as  a  satellite, 
in  about  3  hours  20  minutes,  and  therefore  at  a  distance  equal 
to  2*513  radii  of  the  earth  from  its  centre,  or  5,000  milea 
above  its  surface.!     (See  Note  N.) 

*   Phil.  Ma^.,  Txjnd.  Ed.  Dub.  1848.  p.  80. 

f  (oinptcs  Rendu*,  Oct  12.   1846,  and  Aug.  9.  1847. 


CiCht  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

(905  a.)  In  <irt.  400.  the  generation  of  heat  by  friction  is 
suggested  as  affording  a  possible  explanation  of  the  supply  of 
solar  heat,  without  actual  combustion.  A  very  old  doctrine, 
advocated  on  grounds  anything  rather  than  reasonable  or 
sven  plausible  by  Bacon,  but  afterwards  worked  into  a  cir- 
cumstantial and  elaborate  theory  by  the  elder  Seguin,  which 
makes  heat  to  consist  in  a  continual,  rapid,  vibratory  or  gyra- 
tory motion  of  the  particles  of  bodies,  has  of  late  been  put  for- 
ward into  great  prominence  by  Messrs.  Mayer  and  Joule 
and  Sir  W.  Thomson ;  according  to  this  theory  motion  once 
generated  or  however  originating,  is  never  destroyed,  but 
continues  to  subsist  in  the  form  of  "  vis  viva  "  among  the 
molecules  of  bodies,  even  when  by  their  impact  or  mutual- 
obstruction  they  appear  to  have  been  brought  to  rest.*  The 
"  vis  viva  "  only  takes  another  form,  and  is  disseminated,  as 
increased  vibratory  or  gyratory  movement,  among  their  mole- 
cules ;  as  such  it  is  heat,  or  light,  or  both,  and  is  communi- 
cated to  the  molecules  of  the  luminiferous  ether,  and  so  dis- 
tributed throughout  that  ether,  constituting  the  phenomena 
of  radiant  light  and  heat.  Granting  a  feAv  postulates  (not 
very  easy  of  conception,  and  still  less  so  of  admission  when 
conceived,)  this  theory  is  not  without  its  plausibility,  and 
certainly  does  (on  its  own  conventions)  give  a  consistent  ac- 
count of  the  production  of  heat  by  friction  and  impact.  It  has 
been  applied  by  Mr.  Waterson  and  Sir  W.  Thomson  to  ex- 
plain the  evolution  of  solar  light  and  heat,  as  follows.  Ac- 
cording to  the  former,  the  meteorolites  which,  revolving  in 
very  excentric  or  cometic  orbits,  arrive  within  the  limits  of 
the  solar  atmosphere  are  precipitated  on  the  sun's  surface  in 
such  abundance,  and  with  such  velocity,  as  to  generate  in 
the  way  above  described  the  totality  of  the  emitted  radiants. 
Sir  W.  Thomson,  undismayed  as  would  appear  by  the  per- 
petual battery  thus  kept  up  on  the  sun's  surface  (on  every 
square  foot  of  which,  on  Mr.  Waterson's  view  of  the  sub- 
ject, a  weight  of  matter  equal  to  5  lbs.  would  require  to  be 
delivered  per  hour  with  a  velocity  of  390  miles  per  second, 

*  On  this  point  sec  a  paper  by  the  Authoi  on  the  absorption  of  light,  LoikL 
and  Ed.  Phil.  Mag.  and  Journ.,  3rd  series,  vol.  iii.  No.  18,  Dec.  1833. 


PRODUCTION    OF    SOLAR   HEAT   AND    LIGHT.        665 

covering  the  whole  surface  with  stony  or  other  solid  mate- 
rial, to  the  depth  of  12  feet  per  annum,  if  of  the  density  of 
granite,)  prefers  to  consider  the  nebula  of  the  zodiacal  light 
in  a  vaporous  state  as  continually  subsiding  into  the  sun, 
by  gradual  spiral  approach,  until  suddenly  meeting  with 
greatly  increased  resistance  in  its  atmosphere  (as  arriving 
iu  a  state  of  more  rapid  revolution)  by  friction  on  the  ex- 
ternal envelope  or  photosphere  of  its  surface  (art.  389.), 
produces  there  the  heat  and  light  actually  observed  ;  whereas 
the  theory  of  Mr.  Waterson  would  place  its  origin  on  the 
solid  surface  itself,  contrary  to  the  observed  fact.*  Our 
readers  will  judge  for  themselves  what  degree  of  support 
■the  telescopic  aspect  of  the  sun's  surface  as  described  iu 
arts.  386—395,  and  especially  (387  a),  Note  G,  affords. 

*  The  quantity  of  matter  annually  required  to  be  deposited  on  the  sun, 
whether  in  a  pulverulent,  liquid,  or  vaporous  form,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson's  theory, 
is  nearly  double  of  that  called  for  by  Mr.  Waterson's,  viz.,  24  feet  of  granite 
per  annum,  i.e.  a  mile  in  260  years  ;  so  that  the  sun's  apparent  diameter  would 
be  increasing  at  the  rate  of  about  1"  per  100,000  years  on  this  hypothesis. 

In  the  "Manuel  de  la  Science,  ou  Annuaire  du  Cosmos"  for  1859,  by  the 
Abbe  Moigno  (a  work  of  high  interest,  and,  generally  speaking,  of  great  impar- 
tiality in  the  discussion  of  claims  to  scientitic  priority ),  pp.  85,  6,  7,  l2m*  partie, 
this  article  is  so  translated  (probably  for  want  of  a  perfect  appretiation  of  the 
force  of  the  expressions  used  in  it)  as  to  convey  an  unqualified  adhesion  to  the 
theory  in  question  and  to  M.  Seguin's  doctrine.  This,  however  (especially  the 
latter,  as  stated  at  length  in  Pt.  I.  pp.  224.  et  seq. ),  1  am  very  far  from  pre- 
pared to  give: — and  the  English  reader  will,  I  presume,  consider  the  terms 
employed  quite  sufficiently  guarded,  even  as  respects  the  general  piinciple,  to 
lay  nothing  of  the  specialties  of  M    Seguin's  'hcorv. —  [Note  milled,  1859.] 


666  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


PART  IV. 

03"    THE    ACCOUNT    OF    TIME. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

NATURAL  UNITS  OF  TIME.  —  RELATION  OF  THE  SIDEREAL  TO  TIIK 
SOLAR  DAY  AFFECTED  BY  PRECESSION.  —  INCOMMENSURABILITY 
OF  THE  DAY  AND  YEAR.  —  ITS  INCONVENIENCE.  —  HOW  OB- 
VIATED.—  THE     JULIAN     CALENDAR. IRREGULARITIES    AT     ITS 

FIRST   INTRODUCTION.  —  REFORMED    BY    AUGUSTUS.  GREGORIAN 

REFORMATION.  —  SOLAR      AND     LUNAR    CYCLES.  INDICTION.  

JULIAN    PERIOD. TABLE     OE      CHRONOLOGICAL    ERAS.   —  RULES 

FOR  CALCULATING  THE  DAYS  ELAPSED  BETWEEN  GIVEN  DATES. 
—  EQUINOCTIAL  TIME.  —  FIXATION  OF  ANCIENT  DATES  BY 
ECLIPSES. 

(906).  Time,  like  distance,  may  be  measured  by  comparison 
with  standards  of  any  length,  and  all  that  is  requisite  for 
ascertaining  correctly  the  length  of  any  interval,  is  to  be 
able  to  apply  the  standard  to  the  interval  throughout  its 
whole  extent,  without  overlapping  on  the  one  hand,  or 
leaving  unmeasured  vacancies  on  the.  other;  to  determine, 
without  the  possible  error  of  a  unit,  the  number  of  integer 
standards  which  the  interval  admits  of  being  interposed 
between  its  beginning  and  end ;  and  to  estimate  precisely 
the  fraction,  over  and  above  an  integer,  which  remains  when 
all  the  possible  integers  are  subtracted. 

(907).  But  though  all  standard  units  of  time  are  equally 
possible,  theoretically  speaking,  yet  all  are  not,  practically, 
ecpaally  convenient.  The  solar  day  is  a  natural  interval 
which  the  wants  and  occupations  of  man  in  every  state  of 
society  force  upon  him,  and  compel  him  to  adopt  as  his 
fundamental  unit  of  time.  Its  length  as  estimated  from  the 
departure  of  the  suu  from  a  given  meridian,  and  its  next 
return  to  the  same,  is  subject,  it  is  true,  to  an  annual  fluctua- 
tion in  excess  and  defect  of  its  mean  value,  amounting  at  its 


NATURAL    UNITS   OF    TIME.  667 

maximum  to  full  half  a  minute.  But  except  foe  astronomical 
purposes,  this  is  too  small  a  change  to  interfere  in  the  slight- 
est degree  with  its  use,  or  to  attract  any  attention,  and  the 
tacit  substitution  of  its  mean  for  its  true  (or  variable)  value 
may  be  considered  as  having  been  made  from  the  earliest 
ages,  by  the  ignorance  of  mankind  that  any  such  fluctuation 
existed. 

(908).  The  time  occupied  by  one  complete  rotation  of  the 
earth  on  its  axis,  or  the  mean  *  sidereal  day,  may  be  shewn, 
on  dynamical  principles,  to  be  subject  to  no  variation  from 
any  external  cause,  and  although  its  duration  would  be 
shortened  by  contraction  in  the  dimensions  of  the  globe  itself, 
such  as  might  arise  from  the  gradual  escape  of  its  internal 
heat,  and  consequent  refrigeration  and  shrinking  of  the 
whole  mass,  yet  theory,  on  the  one  hand,  has  rendered  it 
almost  certain  that  this  cause  cannot  have  effected  any  per- 
ceptible amount  of  change  during  the  history  of  the  human 
race  ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  comparison  of  ancient  and  modern 
observations  affords  every  corroboration  to  this  conclusion. 
From  such  comparisons,  Laplace  has  concluded  that  the 
sidereal  day  has  not  changed  by  so  much  as  one  hundredth  ot  a 
second  since  the  time  of  Hipparchus.  The  mean  sidereal  day 
therefore  possesses  in  perfection  the  essential  quality  of  a 
standard  unit,  that  of  complete  invariability  The  same  is 
true  of  the  mean  sidereal  year,  if  estimated  upon  an  average 
sufficiently  large  to  compensate  the  minute  fluctuations  arising 
from  the  periodical  variations  of  the  major  axis  of  the  earth's 
orbit  due  to  planetary  perturbation  (Art.  668.). 

(909.)  The  mean  solar  day  is  an  immediate  derivative  of 
the  sidereal  day  and  year,  being  connected  with  them  by 
the  same  relation  which  determines  the  synodic  from  the 
sidereal  revolutions  of  any  two  planets  or  other  revolving 
bodies  (Art.  418.).  The  exact  determination  of  the  ratio  of 
the  sidereal  to  the  solar  day,  which  is  a  point  of  the  utmost 
importance  in  astronomy,  is  however,  in  some  degree,  com- 
plicated by  the  effect  of  precession,  which  renders  it  necessary 

•  The  true  sidereal  day  is  variable  by  the  effect  of  nutation  ;  but  the  vari- 
ation (an  excessively  minute  fruition  of  the  whole)  compensates  itself  iu  a  rc- 
voli'ion  of  the  moon's  nodes. 


668 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


to  distinguish  between  the  absolute  time  of  the  earth's 
rotation  on  its  axis,  (the  real  natural  and  invariable  standard 
of  comparison,)  and  the  mean  interval  between  two  successive 
returns  of  a  given  star  to  the  same  meridian,  or  rather  of  a 
given  meridian  to  the  same  star,  which  not  only  differs  by  a 
minute  quantity  from  the  sidereal  day,  but  is  actually  not 
the  same  for  all  stars.  As  this  is  a  point  to  which  a  little 
difficulty  of  conception  is  apt  to  attach,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  explain  it  in  some  detail.  Suppose  then  ir  the 
pole  of  the  ecliptic,  and  P  that  of  the  equinoctial,  A  C  the 
solstitial  colure  at  any  given  moment  of  time,  and  P  p  q  r 
the  small  circle  described  by  P  about  ir  in  one  revolution 
of  the  equinoxes,  i.  e.  in  25870  years,  or  9448300  solar 
days,  all  projected  on  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  A  B  C  D. 
Let  S  be  a  star  anywhere  situated  on  the  ecliptic,  or  between 
it  and  the  small  circle  P  q  r.     Then  if  the  pole  P  were  at 


rest,  a  meridian  of  the  earth  setting  out  from  P  S  C,  and 
revolving  in  the  direction  C  D,  will  come  again  to  the  star 
after  the  exact  lapse  of  one  sidereal  day,  or  one  rotation  of 
the  earth  on  its  axis.  But  P  is  not  at  rest.  After  the  lapse 
of  one  such  day  it  will  have  come  into  the  situation  (suppose) 
p,  the  vernal  equinox  B  having  retreated  to  b,  and  the 
colure  P  C  having  taken  up  the  new  position  p  c.  Now  a 
conical  movement  impressed  on  the  axis  of  rotation  of  a 
globe  already  rotating  is  equivalent  to  a  rotation  impressed 


NATURAL   UNITS   OF    TIME.  069 

on  the  whole  globe  round  the  axis  of  the  cone,  in  addition 
to  that  which  the  globe  has  and  retains  round  its  own  inde- 
pendent axis  of  revolution.  Such  a  new  rotation,  in  trans- 
ferring P  to  p,  being  performed  round  an  axis  passing 
through  7r,  will  not  alter  the  situation  of  that  point  of  the 
globe  which  has  n  in  its  zenith.  Hence  it  follows  that  p  ■*  c 
passing  through  v  will  be  the  position  taken  up  by  the 
meridian  P  ir  C  after  the  lapse  of  an  exact  sidereal  day.  But 
this  does  not  pass  through  S,  but  falls  short  of  it  by  the 
hour-angle  ir  p  S,  which  is  yet  to  be  described  before  the 
meridian  comes  up  to  the  star.  The  meridian,  then,  has  lost 
so  much  on,  or  lagged  so  much  behind,  the  star  in  the  lapse 
of  that  interval.  The  same  is  true  whatever  be  the  arc  I* p. 
After  the  lapse  of  any  number  of  days,  the  pole  being 
transferred  to  p,  the  spherical  angle  it  p  S  will  measure  the 
total  hour  an<jle  which  the  meridian  has  lost  on  the  star. 
Now  when  S  lies  any  where  between  C  and  r,  this  angle 
continually  increases  (though  not  uniformly),  attaining  180° 
when  p  comes  to  r,  and  still  (as  will  appear  by  following  out 
the  movement  beyond  r)  increasing  thence  till  it  attains  360° 
when  p  has  completed  its  circuit.  Thus  in  a  whole  revolution 
of  the  equinoxes,  the  meridian  will  have  lost  one  exact 
revolution  upon  the  star,  or  in  9448300  sidereal  days,  will 
have  re-attained  the  star  only  9448299  times:  in  other 
words,  the  length  of  the  day  measured  by  the  mean  of  the 
successive  arrivals  of  any  star  outside  of  the  circle  P  p  q  r  on 
one  and  the  same  meridian  is  to  the  absolute  time  of  rotation 
of  the  earth  on  its  axis  as  9448300  :  9448299,  or  as 
1-0000001 1  to  1. 

(910.)  It  is  otherwise  of  a  star  situated  within  this  circle, 
as  at  cr.  For  such  a  star  the  angle  itp  <r,  expressing  the 
lagging  of  the  meridian,  increases  to  a  maximum  for  some 
situation  of  p  between  q  and  r,  and  decreases  again  to  o  at  r  ; 
after  which  it  takes  an  opposite  direction,  and  the  meridian 
begins  to  get  in  advance  of  the  star,  and  continues  to  get 
more  and  more  so,  till  p  has  attained  some  point  between 
t  and  P,  where  the  advance  is  a  maximum,  and  thence 
decreases  again  to  o  when  p  has  completed  its  circuit.     For 


670  OUTLINES  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

any  star  so  situated,  then,  the  mean  of  all  the  days  k, 
estimated  through  a  whole  period  of  the  equinoxes  is  an 
absolute  sidereal  day,  as  if  precession  had  no  existence. 

(911.)  If  we  compare  the  sun  with  a  star  situated  in  the 
ecliptic,  the  sidereal  year  is  the  mean  of  all  the  intervals  of 
its  arrival  at  that  star  throughout  indefinite  ages,  or  (without 
fear  of  sensible  error)  throughout  recorded  history.  Now,  it' 
we  would  calculate  the  synodic  sidereal  revolution  of  the  sun 
and  of  a  meridian  of  the  earth  by  reference  to  a  star  so  situated, 
according  to  the  principles  of  Art.  418.,  we  must  proceed  M 
follows :  Let  D  be  the  length  of  the  mean  solar  day  (or 
synodic  day  in  question)  d  the  mean  sidereal  revolution  of 
the  meridian  with  reference  to  the  same  star,  and  y  the  sidereal 
year.     Then  the  arcs  described  by  the  sun  and  the  meridian 

in  the  interval  D  will  be  respectively  360°   —    and  360°  —j . 

And  since  the  latter  of  these  exceeds  the  former  by  precisely 
360°,  we  have 

360° -y  =  360°  -  +360°; 
d  y 

whence  it  follows  that 

II  =  1  +  5=1-00273780, 
d  y 

taking  the  value  of  the  sidereal  year  y  as  given  in  Art.  383, 
viz.  365d  6h  9m  9 '6s.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  d  is  not  the  ab- 
solute sidereal  day,  but  exceeds  it  in  the  ratio  1  '000000 11:1. 
Hence  to  get  the  value  of  the  mean  solar  day,  as  expressed  in 
absolute  sidereal  days,  the  number  above  set  down  must,  be 
increased  in  the  same  ratio,  which  brings  it  to  1 '00273791, 
which  is  the  ratio  of  the  solar  to  the  sidereal  day  actually 
in  use  among  astronomers. 

(912).  It  would  be  well  for  chronology  if  mankind  would, 
or  could  have  contented  themselves  with  this  one  invariable, 
natural,  and  convenient  standard  in  their  reckoning  of  time. 
The  ancient  Egyptians  did  so,  and  by  their  adoption  of  an 
historical  and  official  year  of  365  days  have  afforded  the  only 
example  of  a  practical  chronology,  free  from  all  obscurity  or 
complication.      But    the    return    of  the    seasons,    on    which 


NATURAL    UNITS   OF    TIME.  671 

depend  all  the  more  important  arrangements  and  business  of 
cultivated  life  is  not  conformable  to  such  a  multiple  of  the 
diurnal  unit.  Their  return  is  regulated  by  the  tropical  year, 
or  the  interval  between  two  successive  arrivals  of  the  sun  at 
the  vernal  equinox,  which,  as  we  have  seen  (Art.  383.),  differs 
from  the  sidereal  year  by  reason  of  the  motion  of  the  equinoctial 
points.  Now  thi=  motion  is  not  absolutely  uniform,  because  the 
ecliptic,  upon  which  it  is  estimated,  is  gradually,  though  very 
slowly,  changing  its  situation  in  space  under  the  disturbing 
influence  of  the  planets  (Art.  640.).  And  thus  arises  a  vari- 
ation in  the  tropical  year,  which  is  dependent  on  the  place  of 
the  equinox  (Art.  383.).  The  tropical  year  is  actually  about 
4*2 Is  shorter  than  it  was  in  the  time  of  Hipparchus.  This 
absence  of  the  most  essential  requisite  for  a  standard,  viz. 
invariability,  renders  it  necessary,  since  we  cannot  help 
employing  the  tropical  year  in  our  reckoning  of  time,  to 
adopt  an  arbitrary  or  artificial  value  for  it,  so  near  the  truth, 
as  not  to  admit  of  the  accumulation  of  its  error  for  several 
centuries  producing  any  practical  mischief,  and  thus  satisfying 
the  ordinary  w  ants  of  civil  life  ;  while,  for  scientific  purposes, 
the  tropical  year,  so  adopted,  is  considered  only  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  a  certain  number  of  integer  days  and  a  fraction  — 
the  day  being,  in  effect,  the  only  standard  employed.  The 
case  is  nearly  analagous  to  the  reckoning  of  value  by  guineas 
and  shillings,  an  artificial  relation  of  the  two  coins  being  fixed 
by  law,  near  to,  but  scarcely  ever  exactly  coincident  with, 
the  natural  one,  determined  by  the  relative  market  price 
of  gold  and  silver,  of  which  either  the  one  or  the  other  — 
whichever  is  really  the  most  invariable,  or  the  most  in  use 
with  other  nations,  —  may  be  assumed  as  the  true  theoretical 
standard  of  value. 

(913).  The  other  inconvenience  of  the  tropical  year  as  a 
greater  unit  is  its  incommensurability  with  the  lesser.  In 
our  measure  of  space  all  our  subdivisions  are  into  aliquot 
parts :  a  yard  is  three  feet,  a  mile  eight  furlongs,  &c.  But  a 
year  is  no  exact  number  of  days,  nor  an  integer  number  with 
any  exact  fraction,  as  one  third  or  one  fourth,  over  and  above; 
but  the  surplus  is  an  incommensurable  fraction,  composed  oi 


672  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

hours,  minutes,  seconds,  &c.,  which  produces  the  same  kind 
of  inconvenience  in  the  reckoning  of  time  that  it  would  do 
in  that  of  money,  if  we  had  gold  coins  of  the  value  of  twenty- 
one  shillings,  with  odd  pence  and  farthings,  and  a  fraction  of 
a  farthing  over.  For  this,  however,  there  is  no  remedy  but 
to  keep  a  strict  register  of  the  surplus  fractions ;  and,  when 
they  amount  to  a  whole  day,  cast  them  over  into  the  integer 
account. 

(914.)  To  do  this  in  the  simplest  and  most  convenient 
manner  is  the  object  of  a  well-adjusted  calendar.  In  the 
Gregorian  calendar,  which  we  follow,  it  is  accomplished  with 
considerable  simplicity  and  neatness,  by  carrying  a  little 
farther  than  is  done  above,  the  principle  of  an  assumed 
or  artificial  year,  and  adopting  two  such  years,  both  con- 
sisting of  an  exact  integer  number  of  days,  viz.  one  of 
365  and  the  other  of  366,  and  laying  down  a  simple  and 
easily  remembered  rule  for  the  order  in  which  these  years 
shall  succeed  each  other  in  the  civil  reckoning  of  time,  so 
that  during  the  lapse  of  at  least  some  thousands  of  years  the 
sum  of  the  integer  artificial,  or  Gregorian,  years  elapsed 
shall  not  differ  from  the  same  number  of  real  tropical  years 
by  a  whole  day.  By  this  contrivance,  the  equinoxes  and 
solstices  will  always  fall  on  days  similarly  situated,  and 
bearing  the  same  name  in  each  Gregorian  year;  and  the 
seasons  will  for  ever  correspond  to  the  same  months,  instead 
of  running  the  round  of  the  whole  year,  as  they  must  do 
upon  any  other  system  of  reckoning,  and  used,  in  fact,  to  do 
before  this  was  adopted,  as  a  matter  of  ignorant  haphazard  in 
the  Greek  and  Roman  chronology,  and  of  strictly  defined 
and  superstitiously  rigorous  observance  in  the  Egyptian. 

(9^5.)  The  Gregorian  rule  is  as  follows: —  The  years  are 
denominated  as  years  current  (not  as  years  elapsed)  from  the 
midnight  between  the  31st  of  December  and  the  1st  of 
January  immediately  subsequent  to  the  birth  of  Christ,  accord- 
ing to  the  chronological  determination  of  that  event  by  Diony- 
sius  Exiguus.  Every  year  whose  number  is  not  divisible  by 
4  without  remainder,  consists  of  365  days ;  every  year  which 
is  so  divisible,  but  is  not  divisible  by  TOO,  of  366 ;  every  year 


GREGORIAN    CALENDAR.  673 

divisible  by  100,  but  not  by  400,  again  of  3G5;  and  every 
year  divisible  by  400,  again  of  366.  For  example,  the  year 
1833,  not  being  divisible  by  4,  consists  of  365  days;  1836  of 
366;  1800  and  1900  of  365  each;  but  2000  of  366.  In 
order  to  see  how  near  this  rule  will  bring  us  to  the  truth, 
let  us  see  what  number  of  days  10000  Gregorian  years  will 
contain,  beginning  with  the  year  a.  d.  1.  Now,  in  10000,  the 
numbers  not  divisible  by  4  will  be  f  of  10000  or  7500 ;  these 
divisible  by  100,  but  not  by  400,  will  in  like  manner  be  £ 
of  100,  or  75  ;  so  that,  in  the  10000  years  in  question,  7575 
consist  of  365,  and  the  remaining  2425  of  366,  producing  in 
all  3652425  days,  which  would  give  for  an  average  of  each 
year,  one  with  another,  365d,2425.  The  actual  value  of  the 
tropical  year,  (art.  383.)  reduced  into  a  decimal  fraction,  is 
365*24224,  so  the  error  in  the  Gregorian  rule  on  10000  of 
the  present  tropical  years,  is  2*6,  or  2d  14h  24m;  that  is  to 
say,  less  than  a  day  in  3000  years ;  which  is  more  than  suf- 
ficient for  all  human  purposes,  those  of  the  astronomer  ex- 
cepted, who  is  in  no  danger  of  being  led  into  error  from 
this  cause.  Even  this  error  is  avoided  by  extending  the 
wording  of  the  Gregorian  rule  one  step  farther  than  its 
contrivers  probably  thought  it  worth  while  to  go,  and 
declaring  that  years  divisible  by  4000  should  consist  of  365 
days.  This  would  take  off  two  integer  days  from  the  above 
calculated  number,  and  2*5  from  a  larger  average ;  making 
the  sum  of  days  in  100000  Gregorian  years,  36524225, 
which  differs  only  by  a  single  day  from  100000  real  tropical 
years,  such  as  they  exist  at  present.* 

(916.)  In  the  historical  dating  of  events  there  is  no  year  a.d.  0. 
The  year  immediately  previous  to  a.d.  1,  is  always  called  B.C.  I. 
This  must  always  be  borne  in  mind  in  reckoning  chronological 
and  astronomical  intervals.  The  sum  of  the  nominal  years  B.C. 
and  a.d.  must  be  diminished  by  1.  Thus,  from  Jan.  1.  B.C.  47 13, 
to  Jan.  1.  a.d.  1582,  the  years  elapsed  are  not  6295,  but  6294. 

(917.)  As  any  distance  along  a  high  road  might,  though  in 
a  rather  inconvenient  and  roundabout  way,  be  expressed 
without  introducing  error  by  setting  up  a  series  of  milestones, 

*  Sec  note  (A)  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
X  X 


674  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY- 

at  intervals  of  unequal  lengths,  so  that  every  fourth  mile,  for 
instance,  should  be  a  yard  longer  than  the  rest,  or  according 
to  any  other  fixed  rule ;  taking  care  only  to  mark  the  stones 
so  as  to  leave  room  for  no  mistake,  and  to  advertise  all 
travellers  of  the  difference  of  lengths  and  their  order  of  suc- 
cession ;  so  may  any  interval  of  time  be  expressed  correctly  by 
stating  in  what  Gregorian  years  it  begins  and  ends,  and  where- 
abouts in  each.  For  this  statement  coupled  with  the  decla- 
ratory rule,  enables  us  to  say  how  many  integer  years  are  to 
be  reckoned  at  365,  and  how  many  at  366  days.  The  latter 
years  are  called  bissextiles,  or  leap-years,  and  the  surplus  days 
thus  thrown  into  the  reckoning  are  called  intercalary  or  leap- 
days. 

(918.)  If  the  Gregorian  rule,  as  above  stated,  had  always 
and  in  all  countries  been  known  and  followed,  nothing  would 
be  easier  than  to  reckon  the  number  of  days  elapsed  between 
the  present  time,  and  any  historical  recorded  event.  But  this 
is  not  the  case ;  and  the  history  of  the  calendar,  with  refer- 
ence to  chronology,  or  to  the  calculation  of  ancient  obser- 
vations, may  be  compared  to  that  of  a  clock,  going  regularly 
when  left  to  itself,  but  sometimes  forgotten  to  be  wound  up ; 
and  when  wound,  sometimes  set  forward,  sometimes  back- 
ward, either  to  serve  particular  purposes  and  private  interests, 
or  to  rectify  blunders  in  setting.  Such,  at  least,  appears  to 
have  been  the  case  with  the  Roman  calendar,  in  which  our  own 
originates,  from  the  time  of  Numa  to  that  of  Julius  Caesar, 
when  the  lunar  year  of  13  months,  or  355  days,  was  augmented 
at  pleasure  to  correspond  to  the  solar,  by  which  the  seasons  are 
determined,  by  the  arbitrary  intercalations  of  the  priests,  and 
the  usurpations  of  the  decemvirs  and  other  magistrates,  till 
the  confusion  became  inextricable.  To  Julius  Caesar,  assisted 
by  Sosigenes,  an  eminent  Alexandrian  astronomer  and 
mathematician,  we  owe  the  neat  contrivance  of  the  two  years 
of  365  and  366  days,  and  the  insertion  of  one  bissextile  after 
three  common  years.  This  important  change  took  place  in 
the  45th  year  before  Christ,  which  he  ordered  to  commence 
on  the  1st  of  January,  being  the  day  of  the  new  moon  imme- 
diately following  the  winter  solstice  of  the  year  before.    We  may 


JULIAN   REFORMATION  675 

judge  of  the  state  into  which  the  reckoning  of  time  had  fallen, 
by  the  fact,  that  to  introduce  the  new  system  it  was  neces- 
sary to  enact  that  the  previous  year,  46  b.  c,  should  consist 
of  445  days,  a  circumstance  which  obtained  for  it  the  epithet 
of  "  the  year  of  confusion." 

(919.)  Had  Caesar  lived  to  carry  out  into  practical  effect, 
as  Chief  Pontiff,  his  own  reformation,  an  inconvenience 
would  have  been  avoided,  which  at  the  very  outset  threw 
the  whole  matter  into  confusion.  The  words  of  his  edict, 
establishing  the  Julian  system  have  not  been  handed  down 
to  us,  but  it  is  probable  that  they  contained  some  expression 
equivalent  to  "  every  fourth  year,"  which  the  priests  misin- 
terpreting after  his  death  to  mean  (according  to  the  sacerdotal 
system  of  numeration)  as  counting  the  leap  year  newly  elapsed 
as  No.  1.  of  the  four,  intercalated  every  third  instead  of  every 
4th  year.  This  erroneous  practice  continued  during  36  years, 
in  which  therefore  12  instead  of  9  days  were  intercalated, 
and  an  error  of  three  days  produced;  to  rectify  which, 
Augustus  ordered  the  suspension  of  all  intercalation  during 
three  complete  quadriennia, — thus  restoring,  as  may  be  pre- 
sumed his  intention  to  have  been,  the  Julian  dates  for  the 
future,  and  re-establishing  the  Julian  system,  which  was 
never  afterwards  vitiated  by  any  error,  till  the  epoch  when 
its  own  inherent  defects  gave  occasion  to  the  Gregorian 
reformation.  According  to  the  Augustan  reform  the  years 
a.u.c.  761,  765,  769,  &c,  which  we  now  call  a.d.  8,  12, 
16,  &c,  are  leap  years.  And  starting  from  this  as  a  certain 
fact,  (for  the  statements  of  the  transaction  by  classical  authors 
are  not  so  precise  as  to  leave  absolutely  no  doubt  as  to  the 
previous  intermediate  years,)  astronomers  and  chronologists 
have  agreed  to  reckon  backwards  in  unbroken  succession  on 
this  principle,  and  thus  to  carry  the  Julian  chronology  into 
post  time,  as  if  it  had  never  suffered  such  interruption,  and 
as  if  it  were  certain*  thai  Caesar,  by  way  of  securing  the 
intercalation  as  a  matter  of  precedent,  made  his  initial  year 

*  Scaliger,  Idelcr,  and  the  best  authorities  consider  it  probable.  A  strong,  if 
not  decisive,  argument  in  its  favour,  is  that  Augustus  evidently  intending  to  rein- 
state the  Julian  idea,  and  with  a  clear  view  of  the  recent  inconveniences  present 

XK    > 


676  OUTLINES   OP    ASTRONOMY. 

45  B.C.  a  leap  year.  Whenever,  therefore,  in  the  relation  of 
any  event,  either  in  ancient  history,  or  in  modern,  previous 
to  the  change  of  style,  the  time  is  specified  in  our  modern 
nomenclature,  it  is  always  to  be  understood  as  having  been 
identified  with  the  assigned  date  by  threading  the  mazes  (often 
very  tangled  and  obscure  ones)  of  special  and  national  chro- 
nology, and  referring  the  day  of  its  occurrence  to  its  place  in 
the  Julian  system  so  interpreted. 

(920.)  Different  nations  in  different  ages  of  the  world  have 
of  course  reckoned  their  time  in  different  ways,  and  from 
different  epochs,  and  it  is  therefore  a  matter  of  great  con- 
venience that  astronomers  and  chronologists  (as  they  have 
agreed  on  the  uniform  adoption  of  the  Julian  system  of  years 
and  months)  should  also  agree  on  an  epoch  antecedent  to 
them  all,  to  which,  as  to  a  fixed  point  in  time,  the  whole  list 
of  chronological  eras  can  be  differentially  referred.  Such  an 
epoch  is  the  noon  of  the  1st  of  January,  B.C.  4713,  which  is 
called  the  epoch  of  the  Julian  period,  a  cycle  of  7980  Julian 
years,  to  understand  the  origin  of  which,  we  must  explain 
that  of  three  subordinate  cycles,  from  whose  combination  it 
takes  its  rise,  by  the  multiplication  together  of  the  numbers 
of  years  severally  contained  in  them,  viz :  —  the  Solar  and 
Lunar  cycles,  and  that  of  the  indictions. 

(921.)  The  Solar  cycle  consists  of  28  Julian  years,  after 
the  lapse  of  which  the  same  days  of  the  week  on  the  Julian 
system  would  always  return  to  the  same  days  of  each  month 
throughout  the  year.  For  four  such  years  consisting  of  146 1 
dayg,  which  is  not  a  multiple  of  7,  it  is  evident  that  the  least 
number  of  years  which  will  fulfil  this  condition  must  be 
seven  times  that  interval,  or  28  years.  The  place  in  this 
cycle  for  any  year  a.  D.,  as  1849,  is  found  by  adding  9  to  the 
year,  and  dividing  by  28.  The  remainder  is  the  number 
sought,  0  being  counted  as  28. 

to  his  mind,  did  actually  direct  the  future  intercalations  to  take  place  in  odd  years 
u.c.  Such  then,  no  douht,  must  have  been  Cajsar's  intention.  For  the  correc- 
tion of  Roman  dates  during  the  fifty-two  years  between  the  Julian  and  Augus- 
tan reformations,  see  Ideler,  "  Handbuch  der  Mathematischen  und  Technischeu 
Chronologic."  which  vc  take  for  our  guide  throughout  this  chapter. 


LUNAK   CYCLE.       INDICTION.  677 

(922.)  The  Lunar  cycle  consists  of  19  years  or  235  luna- 
tions, which  differ  from  19  Julian  years  of  365^  days  only 
by  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  so  that,  supposing  the  new 
moon  to  happen  on  the  first  of  January,  in  the  first  year  of 
the  cycle,  it  will  happen  on  that  day  (or  within  a  very  short 
time  of  its  beginning  or  ending)  again  after  a  lapse  of  19 
years;  and  all  the  new  moons  in  the  interval  will  run  on  the 
same  days  of  the  month  as  in  the  preceding  cycle.  This 
period  of  19  years  is  sometimes  called  the  Metonic  cycle, 
from  its  discoverer  Meton,  an  Athenian  mathematician,  a  dis- 
covery duly  appretiated  by  his  countrymen,  as  ensuring  the 
correspondence  between  the  lunar  and  solar  years,  the  former 
of  which  was  followed  by  the  Greeks.  Public  honours  were 
decreed  to  him  for  this  discovery,  a  circumstance  very 
expressive  of  the  annoyance  which  a  lunar  year  of  necessity 
inflicts  on  a  civilized  people,  to  whom  a  regular  and  simple 
calendar  is  one  of  the  first  necessities  of  life.  A  cycle  of 
4  x  19  =  76  years  was  proposed  by  Callippus  as  a  supposed 
improvement  on  the  Metonic,  but  in  this  interval  the  errors 
accumulated  to  6  hours  and  in  4  x  76  =  304  years  to  an  entire 
day.  To  find  the  place  of  a  given  year  in  the  lunar  cycle, 
(or  as  it  is  called  the  Golden  Number,)  add  1  to  the  number 
of  the  year  a.  d.,  and  divide  by  19,  the  remainder  (or  19  if 
exactly  divisible,)  is  the  Golden  Number. 

(923.)  The  cycle  of  the  indictions  is  a  period  of  15  years 
used  in  the  courts  of  law  and  in  the  fiscal  organization  of 
the  Roman  empire,  under  Constantine  and  his  successors, 
and  thence  introduced  into  legal  dates,  as  the  Golden  Num- 
ber, serving  to  determine  Easter,  was  into  ecclesiastical  ones. 
To  find  the  place  of  a  year  in  the  indiction  cycle,  add  3  and 
divide  by  15.  The  remainder  (or  15  if  0  remain)  is  the 
number  of  the  indictional  year. 

(924.)  If  we  multiply  together  the  numbers  28,  19,  and 
15,  we  got  7980,  and,  therefore,  a  period  or  cycle  of  7980 
years  will  bring  round  the  years  of  the  tliree  cycles  again  in 
the  same  order,  so  that  each  year  shall  hold  the  same  place  in 
all  the  three  cycles  as  the  corresponding  year  in  the  foregoing 
period.     As  none  of  the  three  numbers  in  question  have  any 


678  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

common  factor,  it  is  evident  that  no  two  years  in  the  same 
compound  period  can  agree  in  all  the  three  particulars :  so 
that  to  specify  the  numbers  of  a  year  in  each  of  these  cycles 
is,  in  fact,  to  specify  the  year,  if  within  that  long  period; 
which  embraces  the  entire  of  authentic  chronology.  The 
period  thus  arising  of  7980  Julian  years,  is  called  the  Julian 
period,  and  it  has  been  found  so  useful,  that  the  most  com- 
petent authorities  have  not  hesitated  to  declare  that,  through 
its  employment,  light  and  order  were  first  introduced  into 
chronology.*  We  owe  its  invention  or  revival  to  Joseph 
Scaliger,  who  is  said  to  have  received  it  from  the  Greeks  of 
Constantinople.  The  first  year  of  the  current  Julian  period, 
or  that  of  which  the  number  in  each  of  the  three  subordinate 
cycles  is  1,  was  the  year  4713  B.C.,  and  the  noon  of  the 
1st  of  January  of  that  year,  for  the  meridian  of  Alexandria, 
is  the  chronological  epoch,  to  which  all  historical  eras  are 
most  readily  and  intelligibly  referred,  by  computing  the 
number  of  integer  days  intervening  between  that  epoch  and 
the  noon  (for  Alexandria)  of  the  day,  which  is  reckoned  to 
be  the  first  of  the  particular  era  in  question.  The  meridian 
of  Alexandria  is  chosen  as  that  to  which  Ptolemy  refers  the 
commencement  of  the  era  of  Nabonassar,  the  basis  of  all  his 
calculations. 

(925.)  Given  the  year  of  the  Julian  period,  those  of  the 
subordinate  cycles  are  easily  determined  as  above.  Con- 
versely, given  the  years  of  the  solar  and  lunar  cycles,  and  of 
the  indiction,  to  determine  the  year  of  the  Julian  period 
proceed  as  follows :  —  Multiply  the  number  of  the  year  in 
the  solar  cycle  by  4845,  in  the  lunar  by  4200,  and  in  the 
Cycle  of  the  Tndictions  by  6916,  divide  the  sum  of  the  pro- 
ducts by  7980,  and  the  remainder  is  the  year  of  the  Julian 
period  sought. 

(926.)  The  following  table  contains  these  intervals  for 
sonic  of  the  more  important  historical  eras :  — 

•   Ideler,   Handbuch,  ic.   niL  J.   |v  77. 


CHRONOLOGICAL    ERAS. 


67a 


Intervals  in  Days  between  the  Commencement  of  the  Julian 
Period,  and  that  of  some  other  remarkable  chronological 
and  astronomical  Eras* 


First  day 

Chronological 

Current  Year 

Interval, 

Names  by  which  the  Era  is  usually  cited. 

current  of 

Designation  1 

of  the  Julian  ffij 

(the  Era. 

of  the  Year. 

Period. 

rui  m,u;  cut' 

rent  add  1. 

Julian  Epochs. 

Julian  Date*. 

j 

Julian  period           .... 

Jan.  1. 

B.C.  4713 

1 

0; 

Creation  of  the  world  (Usher) 

(Jan.  1.) 

4004 

710 

258.963 

Era   of    the    Deluge   ( Aboulhassan 

Feb.  18. 

3102 

1612 

588,466 

Kuschiar) 

Ditto  Vulgar  Computation 

(Jan.  1.) 

2348 

2366 

863.817 

Era  of  Abraham  (Sir  H.  Nicolas)  - 

Oct.  1. 

2015 

2699 

985,718 

Destruction  of  Troy,      (ditto) 

July  12. 

1184 

3530 

1,289,160 

Dedication  of  Solomon's  Temple 

(May  1.) 

1015 

3699 

1,350,815 

Olympiads  (mean  epoch  in  general 

use  j 
Building  of  Rome  (  Varronian  epoch, 

0.  c. ) 
Era  of  Nabonassar          ... 

July  1. 

776 

3938 

1,438,171 

April  22 

753 

3961 

1,446,502 

Feb.  26. 

747 

3967 

1,448,638 

Eclipse  of  Tliales            - 

May  28. 

5sr> 

4129 

1.507,900 

Eclipse  of  Larissa           ... 

May  19 

557 

4157 

1,518,118 

Metonic  cycle  (Astronomical  epoch) 

July  15. 

432 

4282 

1,563831 

Callippic  cycle    Do.     ( Biot) 

June  28. 

330 

4384 

1,599,608 

Philippic  era,  or  era  of  Philip  Aridaeus 

Nov.  12. 

324 

4390 

1,603,398 

Era  of  the  Seleucidae      - 

Oct.  1. 

312 

4402 

1,607,739 

Eclipse  of  Agathocles     - 

Aug.  15. 

310 

4404 

1,608,422 

Caesarean  era  of  Antioch 

Sept.  1. 

49 

4665 

1,703,770 

Julian  reformation  of  the  Calendar 

Jan.  1. 

45 

4669 

1 ,704,987 

Spanish  era  ----- 

Jan.  1. 

38 

4676 

1,707,544 

Actian  era  in  Rome        ... 

Jan.  1. 

SO 

4684 

1,710,466 

Actian  era  of  Alexandria 

Aug.  29. 

30 

4684 

1,710,706 

Vulgar  or  Dionysian  era 

Jan.  1. 

A.  D.           1 

4714 

1,791.494 

Era  of  Diocletian             ... 

Aug.  29. 

284 

4997 

1,825,030 

Hejira    (astronomical    epoch,     new 

July  15. 

622 

5335 

1 ,943.439 

moon) 

Era  of  Yezdegird  - 

June  16. 

632 

5345 

1,952,063 

Eclipse  of  Sticklastad     -         -         - 

Aug.  31. 

1030 

5743 

2,097,508 

Gelalaean  era  (Sir  H.  Nicolas) 

March  14. 

1079 

5792 

2,115,235 

Last    day    of    Old    Style   (Catholic 

Oct.  4. 

1583 

6295 

2.299,160 

nations) 

Last  day  of  Old  Style  in  England   - 

Sept.  2. 

1752 

6465 

3,361,221 

Gregorian  Epochs. 

Gregorian 
Dales. 

New  Style  in  Catholic  nations   . 

Oct.  15. 

1582 

6295 

2,299,161 

Ditto       in  England   - 

Sept.  14. 

1752 

6465 

2,361,222 

Commencement  of  the  19th  century. 

Jan.  1. 

1801 

6514 

2,378,862 

Epoch  of  Bode's  catalogue  of  stars 

Epoch  of  the  catalogue  of  stars  of 

Jan.  1. 

1830 

6543 

2,389,454 

the  R.  Astronomical  Society 

Epoch  of  the  catalogue  of  the  British 

Jan.  1. 

1850 

6563 

2,396,759 

Association 

*  See  note  (C  )  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


680  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

(927.)  The  determination  of  the  exact  interval  between 
any  two  given  dates,  is  a  matter  of  such  importance,  and, 
unless  methodically  performed,  is  so  very  liable  to  error,  that 
the  following  rules  will  not  be  found  out  of  place.  In  the 
first  place  it  must  be  remarked,  generally,  that  a  date, 
whether  of  a  day  or  year,  always  expresses  the  day  or  year 
current  and  not  elapsed,  and  that  the  designation  of  a  year 
by  A.  D.  or  B.  C.  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  name  of  that  year, 
and  not  as  a  mere  number  uninterruptedly  designating  the 
place  of  the  year  in  the  scale  of  time.  Thus,  in  the  date, 
Jan.  5.  B.C.  1,  Jan.  5  does  not  mean  that  5  days  of  Ja- 
nuary in  the  year  in  question  have  elapsed,  but  that  4 
have  elapsed,  and  the  5th  is  current.  And  the  B.C.  1,  in- 
dicates that  the  first  day  of  the  year  so  named,  (the  first  year 
current  before  Christ,)  preceded  the  first  day  of  the  vulgar 
era  by  one  year.  The  scale  of  a.d.  and  B.C.,  as  already  ob- 
served, is  not  continuous,  the  year  0  in  both  being  wanting  ; 
so  that  (supposing  the  vulgar  reckoning  correct)  our  Saviour 
was  born  in  the  year  B.C.  1. 

(928.)  To  find  the  year  current  of  the  Julian  period,  (j.  r.) 
corresponding  to  any  given  year  current  u.  c.  or  A.  D.  If  B.  C, 
subtract  the  number  of  the  year  from  4714  :  if  a.  d.,  add  its 
number  to  4713.     For  examples,  see  the  foregoing  tabic 

(929.)  To  find  the  day  current  of  the  Julian  period  cor- 
responding to  any  given  date,  Old  Style.  Convert  the  year  b.  C. 
or  A.  D.  into  the  corresponding  year  j.  p.  as  above.  Subtract 
1  and  divide  the  number  so  diminished  by  4,  and  call  Q  the 
integer  quotient,  and  R  the  remainder.  Then  will  Q  be 
the  number  of  entire  quadriennia  of  1461  days  each,  and  K 
the  residual  years,  the  first  of  which  is  always  a  leap-year. 
Convert  Q  into  days  by  the  help  of  the  first  of  the  annexed 
tables,  and  R  by  the  second,  and  the  sum  will  be  the  interval 
between  the  Julian  epoch,  and  the  commencement,  Jan.  1. 
of  the  year.  Then  find  the  days  intervening  between  the 
beginning  of  Jan.  1.,  and  that  of  the  date-day  by  the  third 
table,  using  the  column  for  a  leap-year,  where  R  =  0,  and 
that  for  a  common  year  when  R  is  1,  2,  or  3.  Add  the  days 
*>o  found  to  those  in  Q  +  R,  and  the  sum  will  be  the  days 


CHRONOLOGICAL    INTERVALS. 


681 


elapsed  of  the  Julian  period,  the  number  of  which  increased 
by  1  gives  the  day  current. 


Tab;.h  1.  Multiples  of  1461,  the  days  in  a 
Julian  Quadriennium. 


1  1461 

2  2922 

3  4383 


5844 
7305 
8766 


10227 
11688 
13149 


Tablr  2.    Days  in 

Residual  years. 


o 

366 

731 

1096 


Tabi.r  3.  —  Days  elapsed  from  Jan.  1.  to  the  1st  of  each  Month. 


In  a  common 

In  a  leap 

In  a  common 

i 
In  a  leap 

Year. 

Year. 

Year. 

Year. 

Jan.   1. 

0 

0 

July  1. 

181 

182 

Feb.  1. 

31 

31 

Aug.  1.       - 

212 

213 

March  1.     - 

59 

60 

Sept.  1.       - 

243 

244 

April  1.       - 

90 

91 

Oct.  1. 

273 

274 

May  I. 

120 

121 

Nov.  1. 

304 

305 

June  1. 

151 

152 

Dec.  1. 

334 

335 

Example.  —  What  is  the  current  day  of  the  Julian  period 
corresponding  to  the  last  day  of  Old  Style  in  England,  on 
Sept.  2.,  a.d.  1752. 


1752 
4713 

6465  year  current. 
1 


4)6464  years  elapsed. 


Q=10I6 
R 


1000                   1,461,000 

600                      876,600 

10                        14,610 

6                           8,766 

R=0                              0 

Jan. 

1.  to  Sept.  1.                     244 

Sept. 

1.  to  Sept.  2.                        1 

2,361,221  dayseiapscd. 

Current  day  the  2,361, 222". 

^930.)  To  find  the  same  for  any  given  date,  New  Style. 
Proceed  as  above,  considering  the  date  as  a  Julian  date,  and 
disregarding  the  change  of  style.  Then  from  the  resulting 
days,  subtract  as  follows:  — 

For  any  date  of  Now  Style,  antecedent  to  March  1.  a.  d.  1700  -   10  davs. 

After  Feb.  28.  1700  and"  before  March  1.  a.d.  1800  -  -  .11  days. 

„  1800  „  „  1900-  .  .   12  days. 

„  1900  „  „  2100-  -  -  13  days,  &c 

(931.)  To  find  the  interval  bchceen  any  two  dates,  whether 
of  Old  or  New  Style,  or  one  of  one,  and  one  of  the  other.     Fiud 


682  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

the  day  current  of  the  Julian  period  corresponding  to  each 
date,  and  their  difference  is  the  interval  required.  If  the 
dates  contain  hours,  minutes,  and  seconds,  they  must  be 
annexed  to  their  respective  days  current,  and  the  subtraction 
performed  as  usual. 

(932.)  The  Julian  rule  made  every  fourth  year,  without 
exception,  a  bissextile,  beginning  with  the  year  J.  P.  1,  which 
is  to  be  accounted  as  such.  This  is,  in  fact,  an  over-correc- 
tion ;  it  supposes  the  length  of  the  tropical  year  to  be  3654/, 
which  is  too  great,  and  thereby  induces  an  error  of  7  days  in 
900  years,  as  will  easily  appear  on  trial.  Accordingly,  so 
early  as  the  year  1414,  it  began  to  be  perceived  that  the 
equinoxes  were  gradually  creeping  away  from  the  21st  of 
March  and  September,  where  they  ought  to  have  always 
fallen  had  the  Julian  year  been  exact,  and  happening  (as  it 
appeared)  too  early.  The  necessity  of  a  fresh  and  effectual 
reform  in  the  calendar  was  from  that  time  continually  urged, 
and  at  length  admitted.  The  change  (which  took  place 
under  the  popedom  of  Gregory  XIII.)  consisted  in  the 
omission  of  ten*  nominal  days  after  the 4th  of  October,  1582, 
(so  that  the  next  day  was  called  the  15th,  and  not  the  5th,) 
and  the  promulgation  of  the  rule  already  explained  for  future 
regulation.  The  change  was  adopted  immediately  in  all 
catholic  countries;  but  more  slowly  in  protestant.  In  England, 
"  the  change  of  style,"  as  it  was  called,  took  place  after  the 
2d  of  September,  1752,  eleven  nominal  days  being  then 
struck  out ;  so  that,  the  last  day  of  Old  Style  being  the  2d, 
the  first  of  New  Style  (the  next  day)  was  called  the  14th, 
instead  of  the  3d.  The  same  legislative  enactment  which 
established  the  Gregorian  year  in  England  in  1752,  shortened 
the  preceding  year,  1751,  by  a  full  quarter.  Previous  to 
that  time,  the  gear  was  held  to  begin  with  the  25th  March, 
and  the  year  A.D.  1751  did  so  accordingly;  but  that  year 
was  not  suffered  to  run  out,  but  was  supplanted  on  the  1st 
January  by  the  year  1752,  which  (as  well  as  every  subse- 
quent year)  it  was  enacted  should  commence  on  that  day,  so 
that  our  English  year  1751  was  in  effect  an  "  annus  confu- 
eionis,"  and  consisted  of  only  282  days.     Russia  is  now  the 

*  Sec  note  (B)  at  the  end  of  thu  chapter. 


ANCIENT    ECLIPSES. 

only  country  in  Europe  in  which  the  Old  Style  is  still  ad- 
hered to,  and  (another  secular  year  having  elapsed)  the  differ 
ence  between  the  European  and  Russian  dates  amounts,  at 
present,  to  12  days. 

(933.)  It  is  fortunate  for  astronomy  that  the  confusion  ot 
dates,  and  the  irreconcilable  contradictions  which  historical 
statements  too  often  exhibit,  when  confronted  with  the  best 
knowledge  we  possess  of  the  ancient  reckonings  of  time, 
affect  recorded  observations  but  little.  An  astronomical 
observation,  of  any  striking  and  well-marked  phaenomenon, 
carries  with  it,  in  most  cases,  abundant  means  of  recovering 
its  exact  date,  when  any  tolerable  approximation  is  af- 
forded to  it  by  chronological  records;  and,  so  far  from 
being  abjectly  dependent  on  the  obscure  and  often  contra- 
dictory dates,  which  the  comparison  of  ancient  authorities 
indicates,  is  often  itself  the  surest  and  most  convincing 
evidence  on  which  a  chronological  epoch  can  be  brought  to 
rest.  Remarkable  eclipses,  for  instance,  now  that  the  lunar 
theory  is  thoroughly  understood,  can  be  calculated  back  for 
several  thousands  of  years,  without  the  possibility  of  mis- 
taking the  day  of  their  occurrence.  And,  whenever  any 
such  eclipse  is  so  interwoven  with  the  account  given  by  an 
ancient  author  of  some  historical  event,  as  to  indicate  pre- 
cisely the  interval  of  time  between  the  eclipse  and  the  event, 
and  at  the  same  time  completely  to  identify  the  eclipse,  that 
date  is  recovered  and  fixed  for  ever.  This  has  been  done  in 
the  cases  of  four  very  remarkable  total  eclipses  of  the  sun, 
(the  dates  of  which  are  accordingly  entered  as  epochs  in 
the  table  of  Chronological  Eras,  art.  926),  which  have  given 
rise  (at  least  one  of  them)  to  much  discussion  and  diversity  of 
opinion  among  astronomers,  but  which  have  at  length  been 
definitively  settled  by  Mr.  Airy  on  the  occasion  of  the  recent 
publication  of  Prof.  Hansen's  Lunar  Tables,  the  accuracy  of 
which  is  such  as  to  justify  the  most  entire  reliance  on  the 
results  of  such  calculations  grounded  upon  them. 

(933  a.)  The  solar  eclipse  designated  as  that "  of  Thales  " 
is  the  celebrated  one  which  is  stated  by  Herodotus  to  have 
been  predicted  by  that  philosopher,  and  to  have  caused  the 


684  OUTLINES  OF    ASTRONOMY. 

suspension  of  a  battle  between  the  Medes  and  Lydians,  fol- 
lowed by  a  treaty  of  peace.  Only  a  total  eclipse,  as  Mr. 
Baily  had  clearly  shown,  could  have  so  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  the  combatants  ;  and  in  a  very  remarkable  memoir  on 
the  subject  (Phil.  Trans.  1811)  that  eminent  astronomer 
was  led,  by  the  use  of  the  best  tables  then  in  existence,  to 
identify  this  eclipse  with  the  total  one  of  Sept.  30th,  B.C.  610, 
which,  according  to  those  tables,  must  have  passed  over  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Halys  (where  it  had  all  along  been  assumed, 
though  without  any  positive  grounds  for  the  assumption,  the 
battle  was  fought).  The  same  conclusion  having  been  ar- 
rived at  by  M.  Oltmanns,  the  point  was  supposed  to  be 
settled.  Prof.  Hansen's  tables,  however,  throw  the  path  of 
the  shadow  in  this  eclipse  altogether  out  of  Asia  Minor,  and 
even  north  of  the  sea  of  Azof.  On  the  other  hand  the  eclipse 
of  B.C.  585,  which  was  also  total,  passed,  according  to  those 
tables,  over  Issus,  a  locality  satisfying  all  the  circumstantial 
and  general  military  conditions  of  the  narrative  even  better 
than  the  Halys,  and  at  this  spot  there  can  now  be  little  or  no 
doubt  the  battle  was  really  fought. 

(933  b.)  The  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  which  was  witnessed 
by  the  fleet  of  Agathocles  in  his  escape  from  Syracuse,  block- 
aded by  the  Carthaginians,  on  the  second  day  of  his  voyage 
to  Cape  Bon,  had  been  considered  by  Mr.  Baily  in  the  memoir 
above  cited,  and  found  to  be  incompatible  (according  to  the 
then  existing  tables)  with  the  year  B.C.  310,  supposing  the 
former  eclipse  to  have  been  rightly  identified.  This  having  now 
been  shown  not  to  be  the  case,  it  is  all  the  more  satisfactory 
to  find  that,  under  very  reasonable  and  natural  suppositions 
respecting  Agathocles'  voyage,  the  total  eclipse  which  did 
undoubtedly  pass  on  the  date  assigned  very  near  the  southern 
corner  of  Sicily  might  have  enveloped  his  fleet,  and  that  no 
other  eclipse  by  possibility  could  have  done  so. 

(933  c.)  The  "  eclipse  of  Larissa"  is  related  by  Xenophon 
to  have  caused  the  capture  of  the  Asiatic  city  of  that  name, 
by  producing  a  panic  terror  in  its  Median  defenders,  of  which 
the  Persian  besiegers  took  advantage.  The  site  of  Larissa 
has  been  satisfactorily  identified  by  Mr.  Layard  with  2s  im- 


ECLIPSE   OF    LARISSA.  685 

roud,  and  a  pyramid  of  stone  close  to  it  (the  city  being  of 
burnt  brick  on  a  substructure  of  stone)  is  expressly  men- 
tioned by  Xenophon,  the  remains  of  which  still  exist ;  as  well 
as  those  of  a  neighbouring  castle  near  Mespila  (Mosul)  built 
of  shelly  stone,  (also  expressly  mentioned  as  such  by  the  Greek 
historian).  According  to  Hansen's  tables  the  total  eclipse 
of  May  19th,  B.C.  557,  passed  centrally  over  Nimroud,  and, — 
the  total  shadow  being  in  this  instance  a  very  small  one,  not 
exceeding  some  25  miles  in  diameter, — we  are  thus  presented 
with  a  datum,  in  those  remote  times,  having  all  the  precision 
of  a  most  careful  modern  observation,  not  only  for  establish- 
ing a  chronological  epoch,  but  for  affording  a  point  of  refe- 
rence in  the  history  of  the  moon's  motion.  The  eclipse  of 
Sticklastad  is  of  no  historical  importance.* 

(934.)  The  days  thus  parcelled  out  into  years,  the  next 
step  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  time  is  to  secure  the  identifi- 
cation of  each  day,  by  imposing  on  it  a  name  universally 
known  and  employed.  Since,  however,  the  days  of  a  whole 
year  are  too  numerous  to  admit  of  loading  the  memory  with 
distinct  names  for  each,  all  nations  have  felt  the  necessity  of 
breaking  them  down  into  parcels  of  a  more  moderate  extent ; 
giving  names  to  each  of  these  parcels,  and  particularizing  the 
days  in  each  by  numbers,  or  by  some  especial  indication. 
The  lunar  month  has  been  resorted  to  in  many  instances; 
and  some  nations  have,  in  fact,  preferred  a  lunar  to  a  solar 
chronology  altogether,  as  the  Turks  and  Jews  continue  to  do 
to  this  day,  making  the  year  consist  of  12  lunar  months,  or 
354  days.  Our  own  division  into  twelve  unequal  months  is 
entirely  arbitrary,  and  often  productive  of  confusion,  owing 
to  the  equivoque  between  the  lunar  and  calendar  month.f 
The  intercalary  day  naturally  attaches  itself  to  February  as 
the  shortest  month. 

•  The  solar  eclipse  in  the  first  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  which  was  total 
Mt  Athens,  "some  stars  hecoming  visible,"  according  to  Thucydides,  deserves  to 
be  recomputed.  See  Heis.  He  supposes  the  eclipse  not  total,  and  the  "  stars  "  to 
have  been  planets. 

f  "  A  month  in  law  is  a  lunar  month  or  twenty-eight  days,"  (! !  see  Art. 
418.)  '•  unless  otherwise  expressed."  —  Blackstone,  ii.  chap.  9. :  "a  lease  for  twelve 
months  is  only  for  forty-eight  weeks."  Ibid.-,  yet  the  same  eminent  authority 
(Introd.  §  3.)  informs  us  that  "the  law  is  the  perfection  of  reason,"  and  that 
■  what  is  not  reason  is  not  law." 


W6  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

(935.)  Astronomical  time  reckons  from  the  noon  of  the 
current  day  ;  civil  from  the  preceding  midnight,  so  that  the 
two  dates  coincide  only  during  the  earlier  half  of  the  astrono- 
mical and  the  latter  of  the  civil  day.  This  is  an  inconvenience 
which  might  be  remedied  by  shifting  the  astronomical  epoch  to 
coincidence  with  the  civil.  There  is,  however,  another  incon- 
venience, and  a  very  serious  one,  to  which  both  are  liable, 
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  day  itself,  which  is  a  local  pheno- 
menon, and  commences  at  different  instants  of  absolute  time, 
under  different  meridians,  whether  we  reckon  from  noon, 
midnight,  sunrise,  or  sunset.  In  consequence,  all  astronomical 
observations  require  in  addition  to  their  date,  to  render  them 
comparable  with  each  other,  the  longitude  of  the  place  of 
observation  from  some  meridian,  commonly  respected  by  all 
astronomers.  For  geographical  longitudes,  the  Isle  of 
Feme  has  been  chosen  by  some  as  a  common  meridian, 
indifferent  (and  on  that  very  account  offensive)  to  all  nations. 
Were  astronomers  to  follow  such  an  example,  they  would 
probably  fix  upon  Alexandria,  as  that  to  which  Ptolemy's  ob- 
servations and  computations  were  reduced,  and  as  claiming 
on  that  account  the  respect  of  all  while  offending  the  national 
egotism  of  none.  But  even  this  will  not  meet  the  whole 
difficulty.  It  will  still  remain  doubtful,  on  a  meridian  180° 
remote  from  that  of  Alexandria,  what  day  is  intended  by  any 
given  date.  Do  what  we  will,  when  it  is  Monday  the  1st  of 
January,  1849,  in  one  part  of  the  world,  it  will  be  Sunday 
the  31st  of  December,  1848,  in  another,  so  long  as  time  is 
reckoned  by  local  hours.  This  equivoque,  and  the  necessity 
of  specifying  the  geographical  locality  as  an  element  of  the 
date,  can  only  be  got  over  by  a  reckoning  of  time  which 
refers  itself  to  some  event,  real  or  imaginary,  common  to 
all  the  globe.  Such  an  event  is  the  passage  of  the  sun 
through  the  vernal  equinox,  or  rather  the  passage  of  an 
imaginary  sun,  supposed  to  move  with  perfect  equality, 
through  a  vernal  equinox  supposed  free  from  the  inequalities 
of  nutation,  and  receding  upon  the  ecliptic  with  perfect  uni- 
formity.     The  actual  equinox  is  variable,  not  only  by  the 


EQUINOCTIAL    TIME.  687 

effect  of  nutation,  but  by  that  of  the  inequality  of  precession 
resulting  from  the  change  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  due  to 
planetary  perturbation.  Both  variations  are,  however,  pe- 
riodical, the  one,  in  the  short  period  of  19  years,  the  other, 
in  a  period  of  enormous  length,  hitherto  uncalculated,  and 
whose  maximum  of  fluctuation  is  also  unknown.  This  would 
appear,  at  first  sight,  to  render  impracticable  the  attempt  to 
obtain  from  the  sun's  motion  any  rigorously  uniform  measure 
of  time.  A  little  consideration,  however,  will  satisfy  us  that 
such  is  not  the  case.  The  solar  tables,  by  which  the  apparent 
place  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens  is  represented  with  almost 
absolute  precision  from  the  earliest  ages  to  the  present  time, 
are  constructed  upon  the  supposition  that  a  certain  angle, 
which  is  called  "  the  sun's  mean  longitude,"  (and  which  is 
in  effect  the  sum  of  the  mean  sidereal  motion  of  the  sun,  plus 
the  mean  sidereal  motion  of  the  equinox  in  the  opposite 
direction,  as  near  as  it  can  be  obtained  from  the  accumulated 
observations  of  twenty-five  centuries,)  increases  with  rigorous 
uniformity  as  time  advances.  The  conversion  of  this  mean 
longitude  into  time  at  the.  rate  of  360°  to  the  mean  tropical 
year,  (such  as  the  tables  assume  it,)  will  therefore  give  us 
both  the  unit  of  time,  and  the  uniform  measure  of  its  lapse, 
which  we  seek.  It  will  also  furnish  us  with  an  epoch,  not 
indeed  marked  by  any  real  event,  but  not  on  that  account 
the  less  positively  fixed,  being  connected,  through  the  medium 
of  the  tables,  with  every  single  observation  of  the  sun  on 
which  they  have  been  constructed  and  with  which  compared. 
(936.)  Such  is  the  simplest  abstract  conception  of  equi- 
noctial time.  It  is  the  mean  longitude  of  the  sun  of  some 
one  approved  set  of  solar  tables,  converted  into  time  at  the 
rate  of  360°  to  the  tropical  year.  Its  unit  is  the  mean 
tropical  year  which  those  tables  assume,  and  no  other,  and  its 
epoch  is  the  mean  vernal  equinox  of  these  tables  for  the 
current  year,  or  the  instant  when  the  mean  longitude  of  the 
tables  is  rigorously  0,  according  to  the  assumed  mean  motion 
of  the  sun  and  equinox,  the  assumed  epoch  of  mean  longitude, 
and  the  assumed  equinoctial  point  on  which  the  tables  have 
been  computed,  and  no  other.     To  give  complete  effect  to 


688  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

this  idea,  it  only  remains  to  specify  the  particular  tables 
fixed  upon  for  the  purpose,  which  ought  to  be  of  great  and 
admitted  excellence,  since,  once  decided  on,  the  very  essence 
of  the  conception  is  that  no  subsequent  alteration  in  any  respect 
should  be  made,  even  when  the  continual  progress  of  astronomical 
science  shall  have  sit  own  any  one  or  all  of  the  elements  concerned 
to  be  in  some  minute  degree  erroneous  (as  necessarily  they 
must),  and  shall  have  even  ascertained  the  corrections  they 
require  (to  be  themselves  again  corrected,  when  another  step 
in  refinement  shall  have  been  made). 

(937)  Delambre's  solar  tables  (in  1828)  when  this  mode 
of  reckoning  time  was  first  introduced*,  appeared  entitled  to 
this  distinction.  According  to  these  tables,  the  sun's  mean 
longitude  was  0°,  or  the  mean  vernal  equinox  occurred,  in  the 
year  1828,  on  the  2 2d  of  March  at  lh  2m  59>05  mean  time 
at  Greenwich,  and  therefore  at  lh  12m  20s,65  mean  time  at 
Paris,  or  lh  56m  34"  55  mean  time  at  Berlin,  at  which  instant, 
therefore,  the  equinoctial  time  was  0d  0h  0m  0S,00,  being  the 
commencement  of  the  1828th  year  current  of  equinoctial 
time,  if  we  choose  to  date  from  the  mean  tabular  equinox, 
nearest  to  the  vulgar  era,  or  of  the  6541st  year  of  the  Julian 
period,  if  we  prefer  that  of  the  first  year  of  that  period. 

(938.)  Equinoctial  time  then  dates  from  the  mean  vernal 
equinox  of  Delambre's  solar  tables,  and  its  unit  is  the  mean 
tropical  year  of  these  tables  (365d,242264).  Hence,  having 
the  fractional  part  of  a  day  expressing  the  difference  between 
the  mean  local  time  at  any  place  (suppose  Greenwich)  on 
any  one  day  between  two  consecutive  mean  vernal  equinoxes, 
that  difference  will  be  the  same  for  every  other  day  in  the 
3ame  interval.  Thus,  between  the  mean  equinoxes  of  1828 
and  1829,  the  difference  between  equinoctial  and  Greenwich 
time  is  0d-956261  or  0d  22h  57m  08,95,  which  expresses  the 
equinoctial  day,  hour,  minute,  and  second,  corresponding  to 
mean  noon  at  Greenwich  on  March  23,  1828,  and  for  the 
noons  of  the  24th,  25th,  &c,  we  have  only  to  substitute  Id, 
2d,  &c.  for  0d,  retaining  the  same  decimals  of  a  day,  or  the 
same  hours,  minutes,  &c,  up  to  and  including  March  22, 

*   On  the  instance  of  the  author  of  these  |MtgCfc 


EQUINOCTIAL    TIME. 


C8i) 


1829.  Between  Greenwich  noon  of  the  22d  and  23d  of 
March,  1829,  the  1828th  equinoctial  year  terminates,  and 
the  1829th  commences.  This  happens  at  0d- 286003,  or  at 
6h  51m  508-66  Greenwich  mean  time,  after  which  hour,  and 
until  the  next  noon,  the  Greenwich  hour  added  to  equinoctial 
time  364d*95626l  will  amount  to  more  than  365242264,  a 
complete  year,  which  has  therefore  to  be  subtracted  to  get 
the  equinoctial  date  in  the  next  year,  corresponding  to  the 
Greenwich  time.  For  example,  at  12h  0m  0"  Greenwich 
mean  time,  or  0d'500000,  the  equinoctial  time  will  be 
364-9562610  +  •500000  =  365-456261,  which  being  greater 
than  365*242264,  shows  that  the  equinoctial  year  current  has 
changed,  and  the  latter  number  being  subtracted,  we  get 
»>d-213977  for  the  equinoctial  time  of  the  1829th  year  current 
corresponding  to  March  22,  12h  Greenwich  mean  time. 

(939 j  Having,  therefore,  the  fractional  part  of  a  day 
for  any  one  year  expressing  the  equinoctial  hour,  &c.,  at  the 
mean  noon  of  any  given  place,  that  for  succeeding  years  will 
be  had  by  subtracting  0d'242264,  and  its  multiples,  from  such 
fractional  part  (increased  if  necessary  by  unity),  and  for  pre- 
ceding years  by  adding  them.  Thus,  having  found  0-198525 
for  the  fractional  part  for  1827,  we  find  for  the  fractional 
parts  for  succeeding  years  up  to  1853  as  follows*:  — 

•1I09HI 
•868717 
•626453 
•384189 
•141995 
•899661 


1828 

•956261 

1835 

•260413 

1842 

•56456.-; 

1848 

1829 

•713997 

1 836 

•018149 

1843 

•322301 

1849 

1830 

•471733 

1837 

•775885  J 

1844 

•080037 

1850 

1831 

•2294R9 

1838 

•533621  1 

1845 

•8377-3 

1851 

1832 

•987205 

1839 

•291357  | 

1846 

•595509 

1  852 

1833 

•74494! 

1840 

049093 

1847 

•353245 

1853 

1834 

•502677 

1841 

-806829  ' 

i 

*  These  number*  differ  from  those  in  the  Nautical  Almanack,  anil  would 
require  to  he  substituted  for  them,  to  carry  out  the  idea  of  equinoctial  time  as 
above  laid  down.  In  the  years  1828  —  1X33,  the  late  emiient  editor  of  I li  it 
work.  Dr.  Young,  used  an  equinox  slightly  differing  from  that  of  Delambre, 
which  accounts  for  the  difference  in  those  years.  In  1834,  it  would  appear  that 
a  deviation  both  Irom  the  principle  of  the  text  and  from  the  previous  practice  of 
that  ephemeris  took  place,  in  deriving  the  fractior  foi  1834  from  that  for  1833, 
which  has  been  ever  since  perpetuated.  It  consisted  in  rejecting  the  mean 
longitude  of  Delambre 's  tables,  and  adopting  Bessel's  correction  of  that  element 
The  effect  of  this  alteration  was  to  insert  3"  3,-68  ofpvrrj'/  imaginary  time  lietwcen 
the  end  of  the  equinoctial  year  1833  and  the  beginning  of  1834,  or,  in  other  words, 
.o  make  the  intervals  between  the  noons  of  Mart  h  22  and  23.  1834,  24*  :(■  3*  <>8, 
when  reckoned  by  equinoctial  time.  In  1835,  and  in  all  subsequent  years,  a  fur- 
ther departure  from  the  principle  of  the  text  took  place  by  substituting  Hessel's 

T  Y 


690 


OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMT. 


tropical  year  of  365*2422175  for  Dclainbre's.  Thus  the  whole  subject  fell  intc 
confusion.  Under  the  present  eminent  superintendent  of  the  Nautical  Alma- 
nack a  compromise  has  been  effected  —  a  fixed  equinoctial  year  of  365-242216 
mean  solar  days  has  been  adopted  (and  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  henceforward  be 
adli:  red  to),  and  corrections  stated  by  which  the  data  in  the  Almanacks  for  182& 
— 1834  may  be  brought  into  consistency  with  those  in  alter  years.  According 
to  this  arrangement  the  fractional  parts  in  question  for  1828 — 1856  will  run  as 
follows : — 


1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 


•958321 
•716105 
•473889 
•231673 
•989457 
•747241 
•505025 
•262809 


1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
184! 
1842 


•020593 
•778377 
•536161 
•293945 
•051729 
•809513 
•567297 


1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


•325031 

1850 

•082865 

1851 

•840649 

1852 

•598433 

1853 

•356217 

1854 

•114001 

1855 

871785 

1856 

•629569 
•387353 
•145137 
•902921 
•660705 
•418489 
•176273 


[Note  {A)  on  Art.  (916.) 

A  rule  proposed  by  Omar,  a  Persian  astronomer  of  the  court  of  Gelaleddin 
Melek  Schah,  in  a.u.  1079,  (or  more  than  five  centuries  before  the  reformation  of 
Gregory)  deserves  notice.  It  consists  in  interpolating  a  day,  as  in  the  Julian 
system,  every  fourth  year,  only  postponing  to  the  33d  year  the  intercalation 
which  on  that  system  would  be  made  in  the  32d.  This  is  equivalent  to  omitting 
the  Julian  intercalation  altogether  in  each  128th  year  (retaining  all  the  others). 
To  produce  an  accumulated  error  of  a  day  on  this  system  would  require  a  lapse 
of  5000  years,  so  that  the  Persian  astronomer's  rule  is  not  only  far  more  simple, 
but  materially  more  exact  than  the  Gregorian.] 

[Xote  (B)  on  Table,  Art.  (926.) 

The  civil  epochs  of  the  Metonic  cycle,  and  the  Hejira,  are  each  one  day 
later  than  the  astronomical,  the  latter  being  the  epochs  of  the  absolute  new 
moons,  the  former  those  of  the  earliest  possible  visibility  of  the  lunar  crescent 
in  a  tropical  sky.  M.  Biot  has  shown  that  the  solstice  and  new  moon  not 
only  coincided  on  the  day  here  set  down  as  the  commencement  of  the  Callippic 
cycle,  but  that,  by  a  happy  coincidence,  a  bare  possibility  existed  of  seeing  the 
crescent  moon  at  Athens  within  that  day,  reckoned  from  midniyht  to  midnight.'] 

[Note  (C)  on  Art  (932.) 

The  reformation  of  Gregory  was,  after  all,  incomplete.  Instead  of  10  davs 
he  ought  to  have  omitted  12  The  interval  from  Jan.  1,  a.  d.  1,  to  Jan.  1,  a  d. 
1582,  reckoned  as  Julian  years,  is  577460  days,  and  as  tropical,  577448,  with 
an  error  not  exceeding  O^'Ol,  the  difference  being  12  days,  whose  omission 
would  have  completely  restored  the  Julian  epoch.  But  Gregory  assumed  for 
his  fixed  point  of  departure,  not  that  epoch,  but  one  later  by  324  years,  viz. 
Jan.  1,  a.d.  325,  the  year  of  the  Council  of  Nice;  assuming  which,  the  dif- 
ference of  the  two  reckonings  is  9*  "505,  or,  to  the  nearest  whole  number,  10 
days.  To  such  as  may  have  occasion,  in  an  insulated  case,  to  compute  the 
interval  between  the  beginnings  of  two  proposed  \ears.  or  the  number  of 
days  elapsed  from  Jan.  1st  &  of  the  one  to  Jan.  1st  0b  cf  the  other,  the  fol- 
lowing formulae  will  be  found  useful,  in  which  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the 

m 
notation  ==■  is  used   to  express  the  integer  portion  only  of  the  quotient  when 

n 

one  number  m  is  divided  by  another  »,  and  where  D  is  the  number   of  days 
required. 


NOTES.  691 


Cv#  I. —  Years  before  Christ — from  n.c.  x  to  a.d.   1. 

x  +  * 

D  =  x.S65  +    = 

4 

Case  2. —  Years  after  Christ — from  a.d.   1  to  a.d.  x. 

x  -   I 


(A) D  =  (x  -  I).  365  + 

t 

x  -   I         r  -  200  4 

<B) D  =  <*-1>-365  +  =r:-=ioF=  +  & 

where  the  formula  (A)  is  to  be  used  if  the  later  date  (x)  is  before  the  chiinge  of 
style  in  that  paiticular  country  for  which  the  calculation  is  made,  and  (B)  if 
after.] 

[Note  (D),  Art.  (223  a.) 

(223  a.)  Since  the  table  of  measured  arcs  in  Art.  216  was 
compiled,  vast  additions  have  been  made  to  our  knowledge  of 
the  true  figure  and  dimensions  of  our  globe;  especially 
through  the  extension  of  the  two  great  arcs  of  Russia  and 
India,  the  former  of  which  has  been  enlarged  to  an  amplitude 
of  25°  20',  the  latter  to  21°  21'.  The  whole  series  of  geo- 
desical  measurements  of  any  authority,  executed  in  all  parts 
of  the  world  (these  and  the  French  arc,  the  next  in  mag- 
nitude, of  course  included),  have  been  lately  combined  under 
one  general  and  comprehensive  system  of  calculation  by 
Capt.  A.  R.  Clarke,  R.E.,  in  an  elaborate  memoir  (Mem.  R. 
Ast.  Soc.  vol.  xxix.  1860),  of  which  the  final  result  (in- 
cluding some  slight  subsequent  corrections)  may  be  stated  as 
follows : — 

The  earth  is  not  exactly  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution.  The 
equator  itself  is  slightly  elliptic,  the  longer  and  shorter 
diameters  being  respectively  41,852,864  and  41,843,096  feet. 
The  ellipticity  of  the  equatorial  circumference  is  therefore 
TiVi'  anc*  *ne  excess  °f  its  longer  over  its  shorter  diametei 
about  two  miles.  The  vertices  of  the  longer  diameter  are 
situated  in  longitudes  14°  23'  E.  and  194°  23r  E.  of  Green- 
wich, and  of  its  shorter  in  104°  23'  and  284°  23'  E.  The 
polar  axis  of  the  earth  is  41,707,796  feet  in  length,  and 
consequently  the  most  elliptic  meridian  (that  of  long.  14°  23' 
and  194°  23')  has  for  its  ellipticity  ^,  and  the  least  so  (that 
of  long.  104°  23'  and  284°  23')  an  ellipticity  of  ^ 

112 


692  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

General  Schubert  also  (Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Petersb.  1859) 
has  arrived  at  a  somewhat  similar  conclusion,  by  a  totally 
different  (and,  as  appears  to  us,  less  general  and  definitive) 
system  of  calculation.  He  makes  the  ellipticity  of  the 
equator  g8l8ii,  and  places  the  vertices  of  its  longer  axis 
26°  41'  to  the  eastward  of  Capt.  Clarke's.  His  polar  axis,  as 
deduced  from  each  of  the  three  great  meridian  arcs,  the 
Russian,  Indian,  and  French  respectively,  is  41,711,019. 
41,712,534,  and  41,697,496  feet,  the  mean  of  which,  giving 
to  each  a  weight  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  arc  from 
which  it  is  deduced*,  is  41,708,710. 

A  very  remarkable  consequence  follows  from  these  results. 
If  we  reduce  the  polar  axis  last  found  to  British  imperial 
inches,  the  result  is  500,504,520,  exceeding  500,500,000  by 
4520  in.  On  the  other  hand,  Capt.  Clarke's  result  similarly 
reduced  is  500,493,552,  falling  short  of  500,500,000  by 
6448  in.,  so  that  we  may  take  500,500,000  inches  for  the 
length  of  the  earth's  polar  axis,  with  every  probability  of 
being  within  150  yards  of  the  truth.  Were  our  imperial 
standard  of  length,  then,  increased  by  exactly  one-thousandth 
part,  the  inch,  foot,  yard,  &c.  retaining  their  present  re- 
lative proportions,  our  inch  would  then  be,  with  all  but 
mathematical  precision,  one  five- hundred-millionth  part  of 
the  earth's  polar  axis,  a  unit  common  to  all  the  world. 
And,  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  if  at  the  same  time  our 
standard  of  weight  were  increased  by  one  2,600th  part  (or 
one-seventh  of  a  grain  on  the  ounce),  an  ounce  of  distilled 
water,  at  our  present  standard  temperature  of  62°  Fahr., 
would  occupy  precisely  one-thousandth  part  of  our  {then) 
cubic  foot,  and  our  half-pint  precisely  one-hundredth.  Thus, 
by  a  change  such  as  would  be  absolutely  unfelt  in  any  com- 
mercial transaction,  we  should  be  put  in  possession  of  a 
modular  or  geometrical  system  (which  we  might  decimalize  if 
thought  proper)  far  superior  both  in  principle  and  in  accuracy 
to  anything  which  has  yet  been  devised  on  the  important 

*  This  is  not  Gin.  Schubert's  mode  of  procedure.  He  arbitrarily  exclude* 
the  result  of  the  French  arc,  and  gives  the  Russian  duuhlc  the  weight  of  the 
Indian-  -a  procedure  manifestly  unfair. 


NOTES.  693 

subject  of  a  national  system  of  weights  and  measures,  the 
French  metrical  system  not  excepted. 

[Note  (E)  on  Art.  234. 

Mr.  Broun  of  Edinburgh,  and  M.  B  •binet  of  Paris,  have  each  separately  ana 
independently  devised  extremely  ingenious  applications  of  the  principle  of  the 
tor-ion  balance,  to  bring  into  equilibrium  the  force  of  gravity  and  the  elastic 
force  of  a  metallic  spring,  with  a  view  to  utilize  the  method  here  sugpistvil  of 
ascertaining  the  variation  of  gravity.  It  were  much  to  be  desired  that  both 
their  methods  should  be  btought  to  the  test  of  practical  trial.] 


[AW(F),  Art.  (357). 

(357  a.)  A  series  of  concerted  observations  of  the  differ- 
ences of  apparent  declinations  between  the  planet  Mars  and 
neighbouring  fixed  stars,  set  on  foot  at  the  instance  of 
M.  Winnecke,  during  its  last  opposition,  which  took  place 
under  circumstances  of  proximity  to  the  earth  particularly 
favourable  to  the  determination  of  its  parallax,  has  resulted 
in  assigning  to  that  planet  a  parallax  greater  by  about  one- 
twenty-seventh  part  than  that  which  would  correspond  to 
its  distance  as  computed  for  the  time  by  the  hitherto  assumed 
dimensions  of  the  planetary  orbits.  The  conclusion  of  course 
is,  that  these  dimensions  (including  the  earth's  distance  from 
the  sun)  have  been  over-estimated  by  that  fractional  part  of 
their  value  ;  that  the  sun's  parallax,  in  place  of  8"*6,  or  more 
exactly  8"*5766,  should  be  set  down  at  8"#8953,  and  its 
distance  at  91,600,000  instead  of  95,000,000  miles.  Now  it 
is  strongly  corroborative  of  this  conclusion,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  affords  a  striking  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the 
several  departments  of  science  depend  on  and  illustrate  one 
another,  that  a  correction  in  the  same  direction,  and  to 
nearly  the  same  amount,  is  indicated  by  a  recent  redeter- 
mination, by  direct  experiment,  of  the  velocity  of  light  by 
M.  Foucault ;  who  finds  that  velocity  not  only  less  than  that 
concluded  by  M.  Fizeau's  experiments  (see  Art.  545),  but 
even  less  than  the  commonly  received  estimate  of  192,000 
miles  per  second,  by  about  the  same  fractional  part.  Light, 
as  shown  in  Art.  545,  travels  over  the  diameter  of  the  earth's 
orbit  in  16w  268,6 ;  and  the  time  remaining  the  same,  a  dhni- 


694  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

nished  speed  corresponds  to  a  diminished  diameter,  and 
therefore  the  snn's  distance  computed  from  the  velocity  so 
determined,  and  the  time  as  given  by  observation,  will  come 
to  be  diminished  in  the  same  proportion.  These  and  several 
other  conspiring  indications  lead  to  an  extremely  strong  pre- 
sumption that  all  the  dimensions  of  our  system  have  been 
overrated,  and  should  be  diminished  by  about  one-tsventy- 
eighth  part. 

(357  b  b.)  In  strong  corroboration,  or  rather  in  full  con- 
firmation, of  this  presumption,  it  must  be  especially  noticed, 
that  quite  recently  the  whole  subject  of  the  reduction  of 
the  transit  observations  of  1769  has  been  resumed  by  Mr. 
Stone  in  a  memoir  for  which  the  gold  medal  of  the  Astrono- 
mical Society  for  1869  has  been  awarded  to  him,  in  which 
he  has  clearly  shown  that  the  received  result  of  those 
observations  has  been  vitiated  by  a  misinterpretation  of  the 
expressions  used  by  the  observers  in  describing  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  external  and  internal  contacts  of  the  limb 
of  Venus  with  that  of  the  sun,  which  are  complicated  with 
certain  optical  appearances  materially  influencing  the  es- 
timation of  their  times  of  happening ;  and  that  when  those 
expressions  are  taken  according  to  their  real  and  legitimate 
meaning,  and  duly  calculated  on,  they  aiford  a  value  for 
the  solar  parallax  of  8"'91  with  a  probable  error  of  (/''OS 
(in  place  of  the  hitherto  received  value,  8"*5776),  agreeing 
very  precisely  with  the  value  (8"  943)  deduced  by  him 
from  the  assemblage  of  comparative  observations  of  Mars  in 
lik  opposition  of  1862,  instituted  at  Greenwich,  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  and  Williamstown,  Victoria,  N.S.W. 

(357  c.)  The  distances  being  diminished  in  any  ratio,  the 
estimated  masses  will  require  to  be  diminished  also,  in  the 
ratio  of  the  cubes  of  the  distances ;  for  all  the  distances  will 
have  to  be  reckoned  on  a  new  scale,  and  among  the  rest  the 
diameters  of  the  orbits  of  all  satellites  (the  moon  excepted); 
and  as  the  squares  of  the  periodic  times  are  as  the  sums  of 
the  masses  directly  and  the  cubes  of  the  distances  inversely, 
the  times  remaining  unchanged  the  masses  must  be  di- 
minished in  the  same  proportion  as  those  cubes. 


NOTES.  695 

^357  d.)  The  time  is  not  yet  come  for  a  complete  and 
final  determination  of  the  exact  "  coefficient  of  diminution  " 
to  be  applied  to  our  planetary  elements.  The  whole  matter 
is  too  recent,  and  we  must  wait  for  the  next  transits  of 
Venus  in  1874  and  1882  for  a  full  and  precise  settlement  of 
this  important  question.  Meanwhile,  therefore,  and  pro- 
visionally, the  reader  will  bear  in  mind  that  in  all  our 
numerical  statements  of  distances  (those  of  the  fixed  stars 
and  the  velocity  of  light  inclusive,  but  that  of  the  moon  ex- 
cepted), as  well  in  the  text  as  in  the  tables  of  elements,  the 
numbers  set  down  have  to  be  diminished  by  one  twenty- 
eighth  of  their  value,  and  in  the  case  of  the  masses  (the 
moon's  excepted)  in  the  ratio  of  273:  283  or  of  0*89664  to  1. 

(357  e.)  The  superficial  reader  (one  of  a  class  too  nu- 
merous) may  think  it  strange  and  discreditable  to  science  to 
have  erred  by  nearly  four  millions  of  miles  in  estimating  the 
sun's  distance.  But  such  may  be  reminded  that  the  error 
of  0"*32  in  the  sun's  parallax,  on  which  the  correction  turns, 
corresponds  to  the  apparent  breadth  of  a  human  hair  at  125 
feet,  or  of  a  sovereign  at  8  miles  off,  and  that,  moreover, 
this  error  has  been  detected  and  the  correction  applied ;  and 
that  the  detection  and  correction  have  originated  with  the 
friends  and  not  with  the  enemies  of  science.] 

[Note  (G),  Art.  (387  a.) 

This  curious  appearance  of  the  "  pores "  of  the  sun's 
surface  has  lately  received  a  most  singular  and  unex- 
pected interpretation  from  the  remarkable  discovery  of  Mr. 
J.  Nasmyth,  who,  from  a  series  of  observations  published  in 
the  Memoirs  of  the  Lit.  and  Phil.  Society  of  Manchester  for 
1862,  made  with  a  reflecting  telescope  of  his  own  construction 
under  very  high  magnifying  powers  and  under  exceptional 
circumstances  of  tranquillity  and  definition,  has  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  these  pores  are  the  polygonal  interstices 
between  certain  luminous  objects  of  an  exceedingly  definite 
shape  and  general  uniformity  of  size,  whose  form  (at  least  as 
Been  in  projection,  in  the  central  portions  of  the  disc)  is  that 


H96  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

of  the  oblong  leaves  of  a  willow  tree.  These  cover  the 
whole  disc  of  the  sun  (except  in  the  space  occupied  by  spots) 
in  countless  millions,  and  lie  crossing  each  other  in  every 
imaginable  direction.  A  representation  copied  from  the 
figure  in  Mr.  Nasmyth's  memoir  (the  engraver  being  aided 
by  photographs  from  his  original  drawings  obligingly  sup- 
plied by  him  for  the  purpose)  of  the  structure  of  the  general 
luminous  surface,  is  given  in  our  Fig.  1,  Plate  B,  while 
Fig.  2  of  the  same  plate  exhibits  their  arrangement  at  the 
borders  and  in  the  penumbrae  of  a  spot.  This  most  asto- 
nishing revelation  has  been  confirmed  10  a  certain  consider- 
able extent,  and  with  some  modifications  as  to  the  form  of  the 
objects,  their  exact  uniformity  of  size,  and  resemblance  of 
figure,  by  Messrs.  T>elaRue,  Pritchard,  and  Stone,  in  England, 
and  M.  Secchi  in  Home.  Mr.  Stone  compares  them  to  rice 
grains,  others  to  bits  of  straw.  They  strongly  suggest  the 
idea  of  solid  bodies  sustained  in  equilibrio  at  a  definite  level 
(determined  by  their  density)  in  a  transparent  atmosphere 
■passing  by  every  gradation  of  density  from  that  of  a  liquid  to 
that  of  the  rarest  gas  by  reason  of  its  heat  and  the  enormous 
superincumbent  pressure  (as  in  the  experiments  of  M. 
Cagniard  de  la  Tour  on  the  vaporization  of  liquids  under 
high  pressure) ;  their  luminosity  being  a  consequence  of  their 
solidity ;  transparent  and  colourless  fluids  radiating  no  light 
from  their  interior  however  hot.* 

(387  b.)  In  speaking  of  the  intimate  nature  of  the  sun's 
luminous  envelope,  the  remarkable  phenomenon  witnessed 
on  the  1st  of  September,  1859,  by  two  independent  ob- 
servers, Mr.  Carrington  and  Mr.  Hodgson,  ought  not  to 
be  passed  in  silence.  These  two  gentlemen  viewing  the 
sun,  each  at  his  own  residence  and  without  previous  concert, 

*  Such  is  the  view  of  their  nature  and  of  that  of  the  solar  photosphere  sug- 
gested by  the  author  in  a  paper  "  On  the  Solar  Spots,"  published  in  the 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  April,  1864.  M.  Faye,  in  a  Memoir  read  to 
the  French  Academy  in  January,  IS65,  has  arrived  at  a  conclusion  nearly 
analogous.  It  ought  to  be  noticed  that  Mr.  Dawes  still  professes  himself 
(lUsatistied  as  to  the  existence  of  these  objects. 


NOTES.  697 

at  the  same  instant  of  time  on  that  day,  were  hoth  surprised 
by  the  sudden  appearance,  in  the  immediate  confines  of  a 
large  irregular  spot,  of  what  seemed  to  be  two  luminous 
clouds,  much  more  brilliant  than  the  general  surface  of  the 
sun.  They  lasted  about  five  minutes,  and  disappeared 
almost  instantaneously,  sweeping  in  that  interval  among  the 
details  of  the  spot,  with  a  visible  progressive  motion,  over  a 
space  which  could  not  be  estimated  at  less  than  35,000  miles. 
The  magnetic  needle,  as  was  aftenvards  ascertained,  under- 
went a  considerable  and  sudden  disturbance  at  that  very 
time;  and  the  phenomenon,  indeed,  occurred  during  the 
continuance  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  universal 
"  magnetic  storms  "  on  record. 

(387  c  c.)  To  Mr.  Carrington,  also,  we  owe  a  long-con- 
tinued and  most  elaborate  series  of  observations  of  the  solar 
spots  (contained  in  a  memoir  recently  presented  to  the 
Royal  Society),  continued  through  a  whole  period  of  their 
maximum  and  minimum  frequency:  arriving  at  the  con- 
clusion that  the  period  of  rotation  of  a  spot  is  dependent  on 
its  heliographical  latitude;  those  on  and  near  the  sun's 
equator  being  carried  round  more  swiftly  than  those  in 
northern  and  southern  latitudes.  The  empiiical  law  at 
which  he  arrives  as  a  mean  expression  of  all  his  observations' 
assigns  for  the  movement  of  rotation  per  diem  of  a  spot  in 
heliographical  latitude  / 

865' -165' (sin/)  »-75, 

so  that  a  spot  on  the  equator  will  make  a  complete  sidereal 
revolution  in  24d*202 — one  in  N.  or  S.  latitude  1.5°  in 
2jd-44,  and  in  30°  N.  or  S.  in  26d'24. 

(387  d  d.)  The  confinement  of  the  spots  to  a  region 
limited  both  ways  in  latitude  and  rarely  beyond  30°  on 
either  side  of  the  solar  equator,  as  well  as  the  frequency  of 
their  arrangement  along  parallels  of  latitude,  has  already 
(art.  393)  given  us  ground  to  conclude  the  existence  of 
a  circulation  in  the  solar  atmosphere  relatively  to  the  solid 
body  of  the  sun,  and  to  surmise  an  analogy  between  the 
cause  of  that  circulation  and  that  of  the  trade  winds  in  our 


698  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

own  atmosphere.  It  has  been  suggested*  that,  owing  to 
oblateness  in  the  solar  atmosphere,  its  greater  depth  in  the 
equatorial  regions  might  be  conceived  to  oppose  the  free 
escape  of  heat  more  than  in  the  polar,  and  so  might  give 
rise  to  a  permanent  inequality  of  temperature  in  the  two 
regions  from  which  movements  analogous  to  those  winds 
must  of  necessity  originate.  Were  this  the  case,  however, 
one  of  the  results  would  (of  equal  necessity)  be  the  pro- 
duction of  an  equatorial  region  of  calm.  Supposing  our 
earth  so  covered  with  cloud  that  a  spectator  without  could 
never  see  the  solid  body,  and  could  judge  only  of  its  rotation 
from  the  observed  circulation  of  dark  masses  of  its  clouds ; 
he  might,  it  is  true,  conclude  correctly  the  time  of  rotation 
of  the  solid  body  from  observation  of  cloudy  masses  in  the 
higher  strata  either  on  the  equator  or  in  high  latitudes ; 
but  in  the  two  intermediate  zones  north  and  south  of  the 
equator,  he  would  conclude  a  greater  rapidity  of  rotation, 
owing  to  the  general  westerly  tendency  of  the  upper  aerial 
currents  in  those  zones.  In  proceeding  then  from  the  poles 
towards  the  equator,  he  would  find,  first,  an  apparent 
acceleration,  then  in  certain  latitudes  N.  and  S.  a  maximum 
of  rotary  velocity,  and  thence  up  to  the  equator  a  com- 
parative retardation.  Mr.  Carrington's  law  is  therefore 
incompatible  with  this  supposed  analogy,  and  we  must  look 
elsewhere  for  its  explanation.  The  only  one  which  seems 
at  all  satisfactory  is  that  of  external  force  impressing  such 
a  movement;  and  thus  we  fall  back  upon  the  frictional 
impulse  of  circulating  planetary  matter  in  process  of  sub- 
sidence into  and  absorption  by  the  central  body.  Tho 
rotation  of  the  sun,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  very  much 
slower  than  that  of  a  planet  revolving  just  clear  of  its  sur- 
face— a  fact  perfectly  in  unison  with  that  theory  of  the 
formation  of  our  system  to  which  the  term  "  the  nebular 
hypothesis"  (arts.  871.  872)  has  been  applied,  according  to 
which  the  central  body  has  resulted  from  the  aggregation 
of  all  the  matter   assembling   from   every  quarter,  whose 

*   Results  of  Astronomical  Observations  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  p.  434. 


NOTES.  699 

movements  conflicting  would  destroy  each  other,  leaving  only 
as  a  surplus  that  small  portion  of  rotation  in  one  direction 
which  remained  outstanding.  The  same  considerations 
render  an  equally  plausible  account  of  the  intense  heat  of 
the  central  body.] 

[Note  (H),  Art.  (430  a.) 

The  enormous  size  and  vast  depth  of  many  of  the  lunar 
craters,  far  surpassing,  in  both  respects,  anything  observed 
on  our  globe,  are  certainly  very  striking  features,  but  are 
easily  reconcileable  with  what  we  know  of  the  special  con- 
ditions which  obtain  on  the  moon's  surface.  For  while  on 
the  one  hand  the  force  of  volcanic  explosion  and  ejection  is 
nowise  dependent  on  the  total  mass  of  the  planetary  body 
on  which  the  volcano  may  subsist,  the  repressing  power  to 
prevent  an  outbreak,  which  is  the  weight  of  the  incumbent 
matter,  is  only  about  one-sixth  of  what  an  equal  mass  of 
overlying  matter  would  exert  on  the  earth,  the  force  of 
gravity  on  the  moon  being  less  than  that  on  the  earth  in 
that  proportion.  Again,  when  disrupted  and  scattered  in 
fragments,  the  force  generating  their  velocity  of  projection 
being  the  same,  and  therefore  also  that  velocity,  the  broken 
fragments,  stones,  scoriae,  &c.  ejected  would  be  hurled  to 
far  greater  distances,  being  less  powerfully  coerced  by 
gravity,  in  the  same  ratio.  Most  of  the  ejected  matter 
would  therefore  fly  ou*  beyond  the  rims  of  the  craters, 
instead  of  falling  back  *o  refill  *hem.  And  lastly,  we  have 
to  add,  the  absence  of  the  resistance  of  an  atmosphere —  that 
powerful  coercer  of  projectile  range  here  on  earth. 

(430  b  b.)  Changes  in  the  aspect  and  configuration  of  par- 
ticular portions  of  the  lunar  disc  have  been  often  suspected, 
but  no  satisfactory  evidence  had  been  obtained  of  anything 
which  could  not  be  accounted  for,  either  by  the  difference  of 
optical  power  in  the  telescopes  used,  or  by  difference  of  pre- 
sentation to  the  solar  rays,  or  to  those  reflected  from  the  earth. 
Quite  recently,  however,  on  the  16th  of  October,  1866,  the 
crater  marked  as  A  in  Lohrmann's  Chart  (sec.  iv.),  and  dcsig- 


700  OUTLINES    OF    ASTllONOMY. 

nated  by  Miidler  under  the  name  "  Linnaeus  "  (a  crater  five 
miles  and  a  half  in  diameter,  and  very  deep,  and  which  had 
served  those  selenographers  as  a  zero-point  of  the  first  class 
for  their  micrometrical  measurements),  has  been  declared  by 
Professor  J.  Schmidt,  Director  of  the  Observatory  at  Athens, 
to  have  altogether  disappeared,  and  to  be  replaced  by  a 
smooth  surface  unmarked  by  any  shadow  !  Subsequent 
observations  made  by  him  in  November  and  December, 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances  as  to  solar  illumi- 
nation, failed  to  show  any  signs  of  the  missing  crater,  though 
other  much  smaller  ones  in  the  neighbourhood  were  readily 
perceived.  The  most  plausible  conjecture  as  to  the  cause  of 
this  disappearance  seems  to  be  the  filling  up  of  the  crater 
from  beneath  by  an  effusion  of  viscous  lava,  which,  over- 
flowing the  rim  on  all  sides,  may  have  so  flowed  down  the 
outer  slope  as  to  efface  its  ruggedness  and  convert  it  into  a 
gradual  declivity  casting  no  stray  shadow.] 

[Note  (I)  on  Art.  (437.) 

Our  Plate  C  exhibits  the  appc.rance  of  a  very  rough  and  volcanic  portion  ol 
the  moon's  surface  as  modelled  from  telescopic  observation  by  Mr.  Nasmyth,  the 
engraving  being  taken  from  the  photograph  of  the  original  model  kindly  fur- 
nished by  him  for  the  purpose.  A  very  ingenious  idea  of  Mr.  WheaUtone 
has  enabled  the  photographer  to  produce  stereoscopic  views  of  the  moon,  present- 
ing it,  not  as  a  flat  disc,  but  as  a  sphere,  with  all  the  mountains  in  full  relief, 
and  with  all  the  appearance  of  a  real  object.  Owing  to  the  libration  of  the 
moon  (Art.  43.5)  the  same  point  of  her  surface  is  seen  sometimes  en  one  side  of 
the  center  of  her  disc,  and  sometimes  on  the  other,  the  effect  being  the  same  as 
if,  the  moon  remaining  fixed,  the  eye  were  shifted  from  right  to  left  through  an 
angle  equal  to  the  total  libration.  Now  this  is  the  condition  on  which  stereo- 
scopic vision  depends:  so  that  by  choosing  two  epochs  in  different  lunations  in 
which  the  moon  shall  be  presented  in  the  two  aspects  best  adapted  for  the  pur- 
pose, and  in  the  same  phase  of  illumination  (which  the  annual  motion  of  the  earth 
renders  possible,  by  bringing  the  moon  to  the  same  elongation  from  the  sun,  in 
different  parts  of  her  own  elliptic  orbit),  and  taking  separate  and  independent 
photographs  of  it  in  each  aspect,  the  two  stereoscopically  combined,  so  com- 
pletely satisfy  all  the  requisite  conditions  as  to  show  the  spherical  form  just  as  ■ 
giant  might  see  it  whose  stature  were  such  that  the  interval  between  his  eyes 
should  equal  the  distance  between  the  place  where  the  earth  stood  when  one 
view  was  taken,  and  that  to  which  it  would  have  to  be  removed  (our  moon  being 
fixed)  to  get  the  other.  Nothing  can  surpass  the  impression  of  real  corpwel 
form  fhus  conveyed  by  some  of  these  pictures  as  taken  by  Mr.  DelaRue  with  his 
powerful  reflector,  the  production  of  which  (as  a  step  in  some  sort  taken  by  man 
outside  of  the  planet  he  inhabits)  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  unexpected 
triumphs  of  scientific  art. 

Mr.  Hirt  has  recently  bestowed  much  pains  on  the  frequent  and  mintiti 
tciuiiuy  of  particular  and  limited  regions  of  the  lunar  surface.] 


NOTES.  701 

[Note  (J). 
(859  a.)  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  companion  body 
producing  these  disturbances  of  proper  motion  should  be  non- 
luminous.  Nothing  prevents  that  it  should  be  a  small  com- 
panion star  which,  though  invisible  to  ordinary  telescopes,  or 
lost  in  the  brightness  of  the  disturbed  luminary,  may  become 
visible  through  telescopes  of  increased  power.  Antares  has 
such  a  minute  companion  at  only  12"  distance,  a  Lyrae  at 
43",  and  Procyon  at  46".  A  disturbance  in  the  regular 
progression  of  proper  motion  of  the  conspicuous  star,  peri- 
odical in  its  nature,  both  in  R.A.  and  in  N.P.D.,  would 
arise  from  the  displacement  of  the  larger  star  around  the 
common  center  of  gravity,  however  comparatively  massive, 
and  (mass  for  mass)  greater  the  greater  the  distance  of  the 
individuals.  It  was  not,  therefore,  without  much  interest 
that  astronomers  received  the  announcement  of  the  recent 
detection  of  a  small  companion  of  Sirius,  by  Mr.  Alvan 
Clarke,  a  most  eminent  and  successful  constructor  of  large 
achromatic  telescopes,  by  means  of  an  instrument  of  this 
description  constructed  by  him  of  18  inches  aperture. 
According  to  Messrs.  Rutherford,  Bond,  and  Chacornac, 
this  companion  is  at  present  situated  at  about  10"  distance, 
nearly  following  Sirius.  It  remains  to  be  examined,  however, 
by  a  series  of  observations  of  distance  and  position  continued 
for  many  years,  1st,  Whether  this  star  really  is  a  satellite 
or  binary  companion  of  the  principal  star  —  a  conclusion 
to  which  some  have  jumped  (not  unnaturally);  and,  2nd, 
"Whether,  if  so,  its  attraction  will  explain  the  observed 
inequalities  of  proper  motion,  which  by  no  means  follows  of 
course:  far  more  so,  as  M.  Goldschmidt  assures  us  that, 
with  a  telescope  of  very  inferior  power  to  that  of  Mr. 
Clarke,  he  has  detected  no  less  than  six  small  companions 
of  Sirius  at  distances  from  10"  to  60".  Should  this  be 
verified,  we  have  our  choice  of  disturbing  influences;  and 
it  would  be  hard  if  the  minute  displacements,  respecting 
which  Messrs.  Auwers  and  Peters  agree  (or  any  other)  could 
not  be  plausibly  explained  antecedently  to  the  indispensable 
verification   of  a  real  physical  connexion.      Meanwhile  the 


702  OUTLINES    OP    A8TRONOMY. 

conclusions  of  these  geometers  rest  upon  observed  inequali- 
ties in  R.A.  only.  Professor  Safford,  of  Ann  Arbor.,  U.S., 
has,  however,  investigated  those  in  polar  distance,  and  finds 
that  they  are  alike  reconcileable  with  an  elliptic,  orbital 
motion,  with  one  not  incompatible  with  that  previously 
assigned,  and  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  newly  discovered 
star,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  been  observed,  is  really  the  dis- 
turbing body. 

(859  b  b.)  Spectrum  analysis  (see  Note  M)  has  of  late 
been  applied  by  various  observers  with  great  diligence  and 
success  to  the  light  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  even  to  that  of 
the  nebulas.  Those  of  the  stars  are  found  to  exhibit 
(variously  for  different  stars)  many  of  those  fixed  lines 
which  are  considered  characteristic  of  chemical  elements 
such  as  are  found  in  our  planet.  In  applying  this  method 
of  examination  to  Sirius,  however,  Mr.  Huggins  has  found 
that  the  brightest  of  three  lines  characteristic  of  hydrogen 
corresponds  to  a  position  in  the  spectrum  of  that  star  very 
slightly  differing  from  the  position  of  the  same  line  in  the 
solai  spectrum,  and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  the  index  of  re- 
fraction of  the  prism  employed  for  that  line  in  the  stellar 
spectrum  is  less,  by  a  minute  but  measurable  quantity,  than 
in  the  solar.  To  interpret  this  observation,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  undulator}'  theory  of  light  postulates, 
as  a  condition  indispensable  to  its  interpretation  of  the 
different  refrangibility  of  the  rays,  that  the  velocity  of  pro- 
pagation of  a  luminous  undulation  within  the  refracting 
medium  shall  depend  (according  to  some  law  depending  on 
the  physical  nature  of  the  medium)  on  its  wave-length  on 
arriving  at  the  refracting  surface;  or,  in  other  words,  on  the 
number  of  its  undulations  per  second  which  are  incident  on 
that  surface ;  the  longer  waves  or  less  number  per  second 
corresponding  to  the  lower  degree  of  refrangibility.  Sup- 
pose now  a  certain  ray  to  originate  in  Sirius  from  some 
vibratory  movement  of  a  particle  of  its  matter  producing 
isochronous  impulses  of  a  certain  determinate  frequency  on 
the  luminiferous  ether.  Sirius  being  at  any  definite  distance 
from  the  earth  at  the  moment  of  the  first  impulse,  that 
impulse  will  reach  the  prism  at  a  certain  moment;  and  were 


NOTES.  703 

the  star  and  earth  relatively  at  rest,  its  successors  would 
follow  it  up  and  reach  the  refracting  surface  at  intervals  of 
time  precisely  equal  to  those  of  their  origination.  But  if 
the  star  and  earth  be  receding  from  each  other  with  any 
uniform  velocity,  the  next  succeeding  impulses,  having  each 
in  succession  a  greater  and  greater  distance  to  travel,  will 
require  a  longer  and  longer  time  to  arrive ;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  intervals  of  time  between  the  arrivals  of  successive 
impulses  will  exceed  the  intervals  between  their  original 
production,  each  by  as  much  time  as  it  would  take  a  ray  of 
light  to  travel  the  distance  run  over  by  Sirius  from  the 
earth  between  two  consecutive  impulses.  Arrived  at  the 
prism  then,  the  ray  consisting  of  these  vibrations  will  have 
a  lower  refrangibility  than  if  the  distance  of  the  star  from 
the  earth  had  remained  unaltered ;  and  the  amount  of  this 
difference  being  ascertained  (by  a  most  nice  and  delicate 
process  of  observation),  the  ratio  of  the  relative  velocity  of 
recess  of  the  star  from  the  earth  to  that  of  light  can  be 
ascertained.  Referring  for  details  to  Mr.  Huggins'  memoir,* 
we  may  state,  as  his  final  conclusion,  41*4  miles  per  second 
for  this  relative  velocity,  of  which,  at  the  time  of  observa- 
tion, 12  miles  per  second  were  due  to  the  motion  of  the 
earth  in  its  orbit ;  leaving  29m,4  per  second,  or  2,540,000m 
daily,  for  the  increase  of  distance  between  Sirius  and  our 
system.  The  validity  of  this  conclusion  rests,  of  course,  on 
the  assumption  (for  in  the  absence  of  observation  of  other 
lines  in  the  spectrum  it  can  be  only  suchj  that  the  fixed  line 
observed  is  due  to  hydrogen,  and  not  to  some  other  (un- 
known) chemical  element. 

[Note  (K),  Art.  (896  a.) 
Several  objects  observed  as  nebulae  are  now  missing  from 
the  heavens.  They  are  such  as  have  been  (for  the  most 
part)  only  once  observed,  and  may  reasonably  be  supposed 
to  have  been  telescopic  comets.  This,  indeed,  has  in  one 
instance  proved  to  have  been  really  the  case ;  as,  by  tracing 
back  the  path  of  the  2nd  comet  of  1792  to  the  date  of  th-3 

•  Phil.  Tran*.  1868. 


704  OUTLINES    OF   ASTRONOMY. 

observation  of  a  nebula  discovered  by  Maskelyne  on  Feb 
14,  1793,  but  which  is  now  missing,  it  appears  to  have 
really  occupied  that  place  (R.A.  2h  39m,  N.P.D.  46°  15')  at 
that  time.  But,  besides  these,  there  are  cases  in  which  a 
nebula,  undoubtedly  such,  has  either  disappeared  and  re- 
appeared in  the  same  place,  or  has  undergone  some  remark- 
able change  of  brightness  ;  or,  lastly,  has  been  observed  as  a 
conspicuous  object  in  a  part  of  the  heavens  so  well-known 
as  to  make  it  exceedingly  improbable  that  it  should  have 
escaped  all  previous  observation. 

(896  6.)  On  the  11th  Oct.  1852,  Mr.  Hind  discovered  a 
nebula  in  Taurus,  previously  unnoticed— -in  R.A.  4h  14™, 
N.P.D.  70°  49'  (1860).  He  saw  it  repeatedly,  and  in  1855 
and  1856  it  was  reobserved  by  M.  D' Arrest.  On  the  3rd 
Oct.  1861,  M.  D'Arrest  missed  it.  "  Hujus  nebula}  .  .  . 
ne  umbram  quidem,"  he  says,  "  detegere  valeo.  Attamen 
semel  ac  saspius  a  me  annis  1855  et  1856  observata  est, 
3jusque  locus  quater  determinatus."  On  Dec.  29,  1861,  it 
was  again  seen,  though  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  in  the 
great  Pulkowa  refractor  by  M.  Otto  Struve,  after  which 
it  had  so  far  increased  in  brightness  on  March  22,  1862,  as 
to  bear  a  faint  illumination  of  the  wires. 

(896  c.)  On  Sept.  I,  1859,  Mr.  Tuttle  discovered  a  nebula 
not  previously  observed,  in  R.A.  18h  23m  55s,  N.P.D.  15°  29' 
48"  (1860).  This  nebula  is  described  by  M.  Auwers  as 
pretty  bright  and  elongated  in  form.  On  the  night  ol 
Sept.  24,  1862,  it  appeared  to  M.  D'Arrest  so  brilliant  and 
remarkable  that  he  considers  it  impossible  it  should  have 
been  overlooked  (if  then  so  conspicuous)  in  the  sweeps  made 
by  my  father  and  myself  over  that  part  of  the  heavens. 

(896  d.)  Mons.  Chacornac  has  recently  announced  in  the 
'  Bulletin  Meteor,  de  Paris,'  under  date  of  April  28,  1863, 
the  discovery  of  a  nebula  in  Taurus,  in  R.A.  5h  29m  49, 
N.P.D.  68°  52'  20"  (1860),  so  conspicuous  as  to  render  its 
non-previous  discovery  most  improbable,  in  a  portion  of  the 
heavens  so  frequently  under  inspection,  if  always  of  its 
present  brightness. 

C896  e.)  Certainly  the  last  place  in  the  heavens  in  which 
the  discovery  of  a  new  nebula  would  have  been  expected, 


NOTES.  705 

is  within  the  cluster  of  the  Pleiades.  Yet  here,  close  over 
Merope,  one  of  the  more  conspicuous  stars  of  that  cluster, 
on  October  19,  1859,  Mr.  Tempel  observed  a  large  bright 
nebula  which  he  took  for  a  comet,  and  was  only  undeceived 
when,  on  observing  it  next  night,  he  found  it  unchanged 
in  place.  On  Dec.  31,  1860,  it  was  seen,  though  with 
some  difficulty,  by  himself  and  Dr.  Pope,  with  the  six- 
feet  refractor  at  Marseilles.  Its  place  for  1860  is  R.A. 
3h  37m  52«j  N.P.D.  66°  40'  13".  M.  Auwers  describes  it  as 
15'  in  extent  and  triangular  in  form — but  conceives  that  it 
might  have  escaped  previous  notice  by  reason  of  its  proxi- 
mity to  so  bright  a  star  as  Merope.  Mr.  Hind  states  also 
that  he  has  often  suspected  nebulosity  about  some  of  the 
smaller  outlying  stars  of  the  Pleiades. 

(896/.)  Not  less  singular  and  startling  is  the  observa- 
tion by  Mr.  Pogson  of  the  bright  and  very  conspicuous  and 
well-known  nebula,  the  80th  of  Messier's  catalogue,  often 
observed,  and  described  as  a  compressed  and  beautiful  glo- 
bular cluster  of  very  minute  stars,  in  R.A.  16h8m41s, 
N.P.D.  112°  37'  34"  (1860).  While  examining  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  this  object  on  May  28,  1860,  his  attention  was 
arrested  "  by  the  startling  appearance  of  a  star,  7*8m,  in  the 
place  which  the  nebula  had  previously  occupied."  He  had 
seen  the  nebula  so  recently  as  May  9,  with  the  same  tele- 
scope and  power,  and  it  presented  nothing  unusual.  On 
June  10th  the  stellar  appearance  had  vanished,  but  the 
cluster  yet  shone  with  unusual  brilliancy  and  condensation. 
Professor  Luther  and  M.  Auwers  had  also  perceived  the 
change  so  early  as  [May  21st,  when  it  was  rated  as  a  star  of 
the  6*7  magnitude.  On  June  10th,  the  nebula  had  disap- 
]>eared  to  Mr.  Pogson,  though  M.  Auwers  never  quite  lost 
sight  of  it,  and  could  perceive  that  the  star  was  excentric. 
The  occurrence  of  a  temporary  or  a  variable  star  in  so 
peculiar  a  situation  is  assuredly  very  remarkable. 

(896^.)  Lastly, by  a  letter  from  Mr.  E.  B.  Powell,  of  Madras 
an  observer  of  too  much  experience  and  note  to  be  easily 
deceived  or  to  speak  on  light  grounds,  I  am  informed  that 
the  southern  end  of  the  very  remarkable  lemniscate-shaped 
vacuity  close  to  the  bright  central  star  in  the  nebula  about 

IS 


70(5  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

t;  Argus  (see  Plate  IV.  Fig.  2),  which,  when  the  drawings 
were  made  from  which  that  figure  was  taken,  was  closed  and 
terminated  by  a  strong  and  shaq  ly-cut  outline  (marked  by 
a  small  star  in  the  upper  edge  of  that  vacuity),  is  now  deci- 
dedly open !  More  recent  observations,  however  (by  Lieut. 
J.  Herschel),  with  an  achromatic  telescope  of  five  inches  aper- 
ture, accompanied  with  careful  drawings  of  the  appearance 
of  the  nebula(taken  on  Nov.  22-3.  1868),  make  it  evident — 
1 .  That  the  lemniscate  still  exists,  as  such,  though  (as  might 
be  expected)  not  so  strongly  defined  as  when  seen  with  an 
instrument  of  superior  power ;  2.  That  the  relative  situa- 
tions of  48  out  of  49  stars  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  tj, 
laid  down  in  the  drawings,  in  respect  of  the  principal  star, 
have  undergone  no  material  change,  the  49th  being  a  very 
minute  star  of  doubtful  identity ;  and,  lastly,  that  the 
principal  star  rj  itself,  though  greatly  diminished  in  lustre, 
occupies  most  decidedly  its  old  situation,  pretty  deeply 
immersed  in  the  brightest  portion  of  the  nebula  on  the  follow- 
ing or  eastern  side  of  the  lemniscate,  and  not  (as  stated  in 
the  last  edition  of  this  work,  on  what  we  considered  sufficient 
authority)  within  the  lemniscate  or  its  remains,  and  ov*  of 
the  nebulosity. 

This  is  perhaps  the  right  place  to  mention  that  a  general 
catalogue  of  nebula?  and  clusters  of  stars  (5,078  in  number), 
in  order  of  R.A.,  and  brought  up  to  1860,  with  precession 
for  1880,  and  descriptions,  prepared  by  the  author  of  this 
work,  has  been  published  by  the  Royal  Society  as  Part  I. 
of  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1864. 

(896  h  h.)  Spectral  observation,  as  already  mentioned, 
has  been  recently  applied  to  the  brighter  nebula?.  The 
light,  even  of  the  brightest  of  these  objects,  is  so  excessively 
feeble  (for  it  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  telescopes  afford  no 
means  of  increasing  the  intrinsic  brightness  of  a  surface), 
that  any  perception  of  delicate,  hair-like,  dark  lines  in  their 
gpectra  like  the  fixed  lines  in  that  of  the  sun,  is  not  to  be 
expected.  The  phenomena  which  they  exhibit,  however, 
are  very  peculiar,  and  more  in  analogy  with  those  of  flame, 
or  incandescent  gases,  than  with  solar  or  stellar  sources  of 
light.     The    brighter    globular    cluster,  indeed,   and    incite 


NOTES.  707 

ucbulse  of  irregular  forms,  which  are  either  clearly  resolved, 
or  evidently  of  a  resolvable  character,  give  stellar  spectra, 
i.e.  trains  of  light  of  all  gradations  of  refrangibility.  It  is 
otherwise  with  many  of  those  nebulae  of  Sir  W.  Herschel's 
4  th  class,  to  which  the  designation  "  Planetary  Nebulae " 
has  been  applied,  and  with  some  others  of  an  irresolvable 
character,  among  which  are  the  great  nebulae  in  Orion  and 
Argo.  The  light  of  these  is  either  monochromatic,  that  is, 
consisting  of  rays  of  one  definite  refrangibility  (correspond- 
ing in  all  of  them  hitherto  observed  to  the  nitrogen  line  in 
the  solar  spectrum,  or  to  the  light  emitted  by  nitrogen  gas 
rendered  incandescent  by  the  electric  discharge),  or  com- 
posed of  this  and  of  two,  and  in  some  few  cases  of  three, 
other  such  monochromatic  rays,  one  of  which  corresponds  to 
one  of  the  hydrogen  lines  in  the  solar  spectrum  Such,  in 
brief  summary,  are  the  remarkable  and  important  results 
obtained  by  Mr.  Huggins,*  and  fully  corroborated  by  the 
observations  of  Lieut.  J.  Herschel,  R.E.,  made  at  Bangalore, 
with  the  great  advantage  of  an  Indian  sky,  by  the  aid  of  a 
spectroscopic  apparatus  furnished  (with  the  telescope  already 
mentioned)  by  the  Royal  Society  for  observation  of  the 
solar  eclipse  of  August  18.  1868. |  If  any  hesitation 
should  remain  as  to  the  certainty  of  conclusions  from  the 
scrutiny  of  objects  so  excessively  faint,  it  will  be  removed 
by  a  fact  recorded  by  the  last-named  observer,  viz. : — that 
on  removing  the  slit  or  limiting  aperture  of  the  spectroscope, 
and  viewing  through  the  prism  the  whole  field  of  the  tele- 
scope directed  to  Messier's  46th  cluster,  a  rich  and  brilliant 
assemblage  of  stars,  including  among  them  the  planetary 
nebula  H.  IV.  39,  the  latter  was  seen  as  a  faint  patch  of 
light  in  the  midst  of  an  infinity  of  streaks,  the  continuous 
spectra  of  the  individual  stars.  u  Nothing,"  he  remarks, 
"  could  have  been  more  conclusive  as  a  test."  J  Had  the 
light  of  the  nebula  not  been  monochromatic  or  nearly  so, 
its  dilatation  by  the  prism  would  have  precluded  its  being 
seen  at  all  as  a  definite  object.  ] 

•   Phil.  Trans.  1864,  1868. 

t  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  xvi.  p.  451,  and  x»ii.  pp.  58,  lOA. 

%   Ibid.  xvii.  306 

r.r.  2 


708  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 


[Note  (L),  Art.  (858  a.) 

A  fundamentally  different  method  of  treating  the  problem 
of  the  sun's  proper  motion  from  any  of  those  described  in 
art.  857,  has  been  adopted  by  the  present  Astronomer-Royal, 
by  which  the  assumption  of  an  approximate  knowledge  of 
the  situation  of  the  "solar  apex,"  is  altogether  dispensed 
with.  It  consists  in  referring  the  absolute  proper  annual 
motions  both  of  the  sun  and  the  stars  used  in  the  enquiry, 
to  linear  coordinates  fixed  in  space,  and  treating  the  ques- 
tion as  a  purely  geometrical  one,  according  to  the  rules  of 
the  calculus  of  probabilities,  basing  his  procedure  on  two 
distinct  assumptions,  between  which  the  truth  must  lie, 
viz.: — 1.  That  all  the  "irregularities  of  proper  motion ,: 
(meaning  thereby  all  the  residual  amounts  of  annual  move- 
ment in  each  case,  which  are  not  accountable  for  by 
solar  motion),  are  mere  results  of  error  of  observatiou 
and  are  not  caused  by  any  real  motions  in  the  stars.  This 
is  evidently  an  extreme  supposition. — 2.  That  none  of  such 
residual  movements  are  due  to  error  of  observation,  but  all 
originate  in  real  stellar  movement.  This  is  as  clearly  an 
extreme  supposition  the  other  way.  Assuming  then  M. 
Struve's  classification  of  the  stars  according  to  a  scale  of 
distances  which  has  at  least  no  prima  facie  improbability, 
and  using  for  the  purpose  those  113  stars  of  a  catalogue  pre- 
pared with  great  care  by  Mr.  Main,  and  published  in  the 
*  Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society,'  which  indicate  great 
proper  motion,  he  arrives  at  the  following  conclusions  as  to 
the  situation  of  the  apex,  and  the  annual  parallactic  motion 
of  the  sun  as  seen  from  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  on 
each  of  these  two  suppositions. 

w  c  ...     ( Solar  apex  in  R.A.  256°  54';  N.P.D.  50°  31'. 

1st  Suppositionjp^^  motion  r,2f)9> 

„,  a  ...     \  Solar  apex  R.A.  261°  29';  N.P.D.  65°  16'. 

2d  Suppositionjparallaict.c  motiou  rH>li 

So  far  as   the  situation  of  the  apex   is  concerned,  both 
these  results  stand  in  what  (considering  the  nature  of  the 


NOTES.  709 

subject)  may  be  called  good  accordance  with  those  of  our 
art.  854.  The  parallactic  motion  (or  which  comes  to  the 
same,  the  actual  velocity  of  the  solar  motion),  is,  indeed, 
much  greater  than  that  of  art.  858.  But  this  evidently 
results  from  the  restriction  of  the  enquiry  to  stars  of  great 
proper  motion. 

(858  b.)  These  results  were  deduced  by  Mr.  Airy  in  a 
memoir  communicated  to  the  Roy.  Ast.  Soc.  in  1859.  The 
subject  has  since  been  resumed  (avowedly  in  extension  of 
the  same  principle  to  a  larger  list  of  stars),  by  Mr.  Dunkin, 
who,  using  the  same  geometrical  formulae,  but  basing  his 
results  on  the  observed  proper  motions  of  1167  stars,  819  in 
the  northern  and  348  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  of  all 
magnitudes,  and  all  {sensible)  amounts  of  proper  motion, 
arrives  at  the  following  results  on  either  of  Mr.  Airy's  tw<? 
extreme  suppositions : 

l8tSupPoSitio„||tS1^^4164.';N-P-D-5r5' 

2d  Supposition  JK3SS  ^Jftffi  N-P-D-  65°  "■ 

Agreeing  remarkably  (as  to  the  second  supposition,  which 
is  by  far  the  most  reasonable  of  the  two),  with  the  other, 
and,  as  regards  both,  exhibiting  an  almost  perfect  accordance 
in  respect  of  parallactic  motion  with  M.  Struve's  results  as 
given  in  art.  858. 

(858  c.)  A  very  extraordinary  circumstance  remains  to  be 
noticed.  From  the  general  agreement  of  all  the  results  of 
the  investigations  of  so  many  astronomers  and  mathema- 
ticians, entering  on  the  enquiry  in  such  various  ways,  and 
employing  such  a  multitude  of  stars  so  variously  combined, 
there  cannot  remain  a  shadow  of  doubt  either  as  to  the 
reality  of  the  solar  motion,  or  as  to  its  direction  in  space  to- 
wards a  point  very  near  to  R.  A.  259°,  N.P.D.  56°.  As  to  its 
velocity  there  is  also  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  not 
extravagantly  over-  or  under-estimated  in  the  statement 
above  given.  But  when  we  come  to  ascertain  by  calculation 
how  large  a  portion  of  the  whole  proper  motions  of  the  stars ; 


710  OUTLINES   OF   ASTRONOMY. 

how  much  of  that  general  residuum  or  caput  mortuum  alluded 
to  in  art.  856,  as  left  outstanding  after  precession,  aberration, 
and  nutation,  have  exercised  their  solvent  influences  on  it, 
remains  yet  unaccounted  for ;  we  shall  find  it  includes  by 
far  the  larger  part  of  the  total  phamuinenon  of  stellar  proper 
motion.  The  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  total  residua  (in 
seconds  of  arc),  uncorrected  for  the  proper  motion  of  the  sun, 
for  example,  in  Mr.  Dunkin's  1167  stars  are,  in  R.A., 
78*7583,  and  in  N.P.D.  63-2668.  And  when  corrected  for  the 
effect  of  that  motion  (so  concluded),  they  are  represented  in 
R.A.  by  75-5831,  and  in  N.P.D.  by  60-9084.  No  one 
need  be  surprised  at  this.  If  the  sun  move  in  space,  why 
not  also  the  stars  ?  and  if  so  it  would  be  manifestly  absurd 
to  expect  that  any  movement  could  be  assigned  to  the  sun 
by  any  system  of  calculation  which  should  account  for  more 
than  a  very  small  portion  of  the  totality  of  the  observed  dis- 
placements. But  what  is  indeed  astonishing  in  the  whole 
affair,  is,  that  among  all  this  chaotic  heap  of  miscellaneous 
movement,  among  all  this  drift  of  cosmical  atoms,  of  the 
laws  of  whose  motions  we  know  absolutely  nothing,  it 
should  be  possible  to  place  the  finger  on  one  small  portion 
of  the  sum  total,  to  all  appearance  undistinguishably  mixed 
up  with  the  rest,  and  to  declare  with  full  assurance  that  this 
particular  portion  of  the  whole  is  due  to  the  proper  motion 
of  our  own  system.] 

[Note  (M)  on  Art  (400)  vote*. 

The  reference  of  the  dark  lines  in  the  solar  spectrum  to  absorptive  action 
in  the  sun's  atmosphere  has  of  late  received  a  most  unexpected  confirmation, 
and  it  may  now  be  considered  as  almost  certain  that  they  owe  their  origin 
to  the  presence  in  that  atmosphere  of  the  vapours  of  metals  and  metalloids 
identical  with  those  which  exist  here  on  earth.  These  vapours,  or  many  of  them, 
have  been  shown  by  Kirchoff,  Bunsen  and  Fizeau  to  possess  the  singular  pro- 
perty when  present  in  an  unburnt  (or  metallic)  state  in  a  flame,  of  destroying  in 
the  spectrum  of  that  flame  rays  of  precisely  the  refrangibilities  of  those  which  they 
themselves  when  burning  emit  in  peculiar  abundance.  Though  there  is  some- 
thing so  enigmatical  as  almost  to  appear  self-contradictory  in  the  facts  adduced — 
the  conclusion,  especially  as  applied  to  the  most  conspicuous  of  all  the  lines  (one 
double  one  in  the  yellow,  marked  D  by  Fraunhofer,  and  which  owes  its  origin 
to  sodium)  seems  inevitable.  The  spectra  of  some  of  the  stars  seem  to  indicate 
the  presence  of  chemical  elements  not  identifiable  with  any  terrestrial  ones] 


NOTES.  7  1 1 

[Note  (N),  Art.  (905  a  a.) 

(d05  a  a.)  Since  the  publication  of  the  later  editions  of 
this  work,  meteoric  phenomena  have  engaged  the  assiduous 
attention  of  many  zealous  and  devoted  observers,  and  have 
acquired  an  especial  interest  from  the  reappearance,  in  1866, 
of  the  great  November  display  mentioned  in  art.  900,  under 
circumstances  which  render  it  an  epoch  in  what  may  hence- 
forward be  very  properly  termed  Meteoric  Astronomy. 
Before  giving  any  account  of  these,  however,  it  will  be  proper 
to  mention  that  by  the  exertions  of  a  Committee  of  the 
British  Association,  consisting  of  Mr.  Brayley,  Mr.  Glaisher, 
Mr.  Greg,  and  Mr.  A.  S.  Herschel,  acting  in  conjunction 
with  numerous  coadjutors  scattered  over  the  area  of  our 
island  (and  in  correspondence  with  M.  Heis,  Prof.  Haidinger, 
and  other  continental  observers  and  meteorologists),  observing 
on  the  plan  originally  followed  by  Benzenburg  and  Brandes 
(much  improved,  however,  and  singularly  facilitated  by  the 
use  of  a  series  of  charts  specially  constructed  on  the  gno- 
monic  projection  for  the  purpose  by  the  last-named  member 
of  the  committee),  a  vast  collection  of  observations  for  the 
determination  of  the  heights  of  appearance  and  disappearance, 
the  velocities,  and  paths,  of  individual  meteors,  has  been 
accumulated,  and  a  considerable  number  of  additional  radiant 
points  corresponding  to  dates  of  periodic  recurrence  other 
than  those  of  August  10  and  November  13,  determined. 
As  regards  the  heights  of  appearance  and  disappearance, 
and  the  velocities  (understanding,  of  course,  the  relative 
velocities  resulting  from  the  simultaneous  motions  of  the 
earth  and  the  meteor),  the  general  result  of  these  observa- 
tions seems  to  be:  1st,  to  assign aheight  intermediate  between 
20  and  130  British  statute  miles  above  the  earth's  surface, 
for  that  to  which  the  luminous  or  visible  portion  of  the 
trajectory  of  non-detonating  meteors  is  confined,  with  average 
heights  of  first  appearance  and  final  disappearance  of  70 
and  54  miles  respectively,  so  far  corroborating  the  evidence 
afforded  by  auroral  phenomena  of  the  extension  of  our 
atmosphere  much   beyond   the    usually  assigned   limits   of 


Jan.     2nd 

R.A.  234° 

April  20th 

„      277° 

Oct.    18th 

»        90° 

Dec.    12th 

„      105° 

71JJ  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY. 

45  miles;  2ndly,  a  relative  velocity  intermediate  between 
1 7  and  80  miles  per  second,  with  a  general  average  of  about 
34  miles,  fully  bearing  out  the  earlier  conclusions  of  Ben- 
zenburg  and  Brandes ;  and  3rdly,  a  series  of  radiant  points 
and  annual  epochs  of  which  the  following  (exclusive  of  those 
of  Aug.  10  and  Nov.  13)  are  the  most  remarkable  :  — 

N.  dec.  51° 
3.5° 
16° 
30° 

(905  b b.)  As  regards  the  November  display  : — On  tracing 
back  the  records  of  meteoric  phenomena  so  far  as  they  have 
been  preserved  by  history  or  tradition,  it  has  been  ascer- 
tained (chiefly  by  the  laborious  researches  of  Prof.  Newton, 
of  Newhaven,  U.S.),  that  no  less  than  twelve*  such  displays, 
well  characterized,  have  been  noticed  and  recorded  as  occur- 
ring from  the  year  a.d.  902  onwards  down  to  1833,  both 
inclusive,  viz.  in  the  years  a.d.  902,  934,  1002,  1101,  1202, 
1366,1533,  1602,  1698,  1799,  1832,  1833;  all  which  are 
comprised  within  a  chain  of  epochs  breaking  the  interval 
between  902  and  1833  into  periods  of  32,  33,  or  34  years 
each,  corresponding  to  an  average  of  33*24  (33^)  years,  or 
of  four  such  occurrences  in  133  years.  As  to  the  calendar 
dates  of  the  displays,  the  earliest,  in  a.d.  902,  bears  the  date 
Oct.  13.  o.s.,  and  the  others  advance  (with  some  considerable 
irregularities)  in  the  calendar  up  to  1833,  Nov.  13.  n.s.  Con- 
verting these  dates  into  Julian  days  current  (arts.  929,  930), 
we  find  them  to  be  respectively  2,050,799  and  2,390,879, 
the  difference  of  which,  340,068  days,  exceeds  931  tropical 
years  (  =  340,040d)  by  28  days ;  so  that  the  dates  advance 
in  the  calendar  at  an  average  rate  of  28  days  in  931  years, 
or  almost  exactly  3  days  in  a  century.  The  general  im- 
pression resulting  from  the  intervals  of  33  and  34  years 
between  the  great  displays  of  1799  and  1832,  1833,  that  a 
similar  one  might  be  expected  in  1866  or  1867,  was  by  this 
converted  almost  into  a  certainty  ;  and  on  the  strength  of 

*  That  of  Ai).  9:H,  Oct.  16.  o.s.  is  here  omitted.  It  seems  to  have  been  but 
a  feeble  exhibition,  an  irregular  precursor  of  the  more  normal  one  of  Oct.  14. 


NOTES.  713 

this  induction  a  grand  meteoric  exhibition  on  the  night 
between  November  13  and  14.  1866,  was  announced  as 
almost  sure  to  take  place,  and  all  observers  were  forewarned 
to  be  on  the  watch.  The  verification  of  this  prediction  will 
be  fresh  in  the  recollection  of  our  readers,  and  the  spectacle 
presented  by  the  heavens  on  that  night,  though  falling  short 
of  what  the  glowing  and  no  doubt  exaggerated  descriptions 
of  the  phenomenon  of  1799  might  have  led  some  to  expect, 
was  such  as  can  never  be  forgotten  by  those  who  witnessed 
it.  Those  who  were  not  so  fortunate  will  do  well  to  be  on 
the  watch  on  the  same  anniversary  in  the  current  year 
1867* 

(905  c  c.)  Attention  being  especially  directed  to  the  si- 
tuation of  the  radiant  on  this  occasion,  it  was  fixed  (in 
reference  to  the  ecliptic)  in  Ion.  142°  35';  lat.  10°  27'  N., 
at  a  point  between  the  stars  £  and  e  Leonis,  and  some- 
what above  the  star  marked  x  in  that  constellation  in  Bode's 
catalogue.  Now  the  longitude  of  the  earth  at  that  time,  as 
seen  from  the  sun,  was  51°  28',  so  that,  the  radiant  (in  con- 
firmation of  a  remark  made  by  Prof.  Encke  on  the  occasion 
of  the  display  of  1833),  if  projected  on  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  would  be  almost  exactly  in  the  direction  of  a 
tangent  to  the  earth's  orbit  at  the  moment,  or  in  '  the  apex 
of  the  earth's  way.'  Hence  it  follows,  that,  regarding  each 
meteor  as  a  small  planet,  it  must  have  been  revolving  {in  a 
retrograde  direction,  so  as  to  meet  the  earth)  either  in  a  circle 
concentric  with  the  earth's  orbit  (a  thing  in  itself  most 
improbable,  and  which  would  bring  about  a  rencontre  every 
year,  contrary  to  observation)  or  in  an  ellipse  having  either 
its  perihelion  or  its  aphelion  coincident,  or  very  nearly  so, 
with  the  point  of  rencontre  at  the  descending  node,  in  longi- 
tude 51°  28';  and  as  a  necessary  consequence  with  its  major 
axis  lying  in  or  very  nearly  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

•  On  that  occasion  (Nov.  13  and  14.  1867),  the  principal  display  took  place 
in  longitudes  much  westward  of  our  island.  At  Bloomingtnn,  Indiana,  U.S.  525 
were  seen  by  Professor  Kirk  wood  between  midnight  and  5k  \5m  a.m.  Off"  Mar- 
tinique, they  appeared  as  a  brilliant  shower,  and  at  Trinidad,  according  to  Com- 
mander Chimmo,  1600  were  counted  between  2b  a.m.  and  daylight;  while  at 
Nassau  in  the  Bahamas,  Captain  Stuart  and  his  co-observers  registered  1040 
between  lfc  O"  and  5'  34"  a.m. 


714  OUTLINES   OF    ASTKOMOMY. 

(905  dd.)  Admitting  the  meteors  to  be  revolving  planet- 
tiles,  the  recurrence  of  these  rencontres  at  average  intervals 
of  4  in  133  years  is  explicable  on  two  distinct  hypotheses  as 
to  the  kind  of  ellipse  described  by  the  meteoric  group.  It 
may  be  either  one  very  nearly  approaching  to  a  circle  de- 
scribed in  a  period  not  very  different  from  a  sidereal  year,  or 
a  very  elongated  one  described  in  the  exact  period  of  33 £  of 
such  years.  We  will  consider  the  cases  separately.  The 
first  supposition  admits  of  the  adoption  of  two  distinct 
ellipses : — 1st,  that  suggested  by  Prof.  Newton,  in  which 
the  rencontre  takes  place  at  the  aphelion  of  an  ellipse  de- 
scribed in  354d*57,  or  10d*67  short  of  a  sidereal  year,  corre- 
sponding to  a  semi-axis  0*981,  and  an  excentricity  0-0204; 
or,  2ndly,  that  proposed  by  the  writer  of  an  article  on  Me- 
teoric Showers  in  the  'Edinburgh  Review'  for  January, 
1867,  where  it  is  supposed  to  happen  at  the  perihelion  of  an 
ellipse  described  in  376d*56,  or  lld,33  more  than  a  year — 
corresponding  to  a  semi-axis  1*021,  and  an  excentricity 
0*0192.  In  the  first  of  these  ellipses,  a  meteor  revolving 
would  in  each  sidereal  year  gain  10°  50'  in  its  orbit  on  a 
complete  revolution,  and  in  the  other  would  lose  as  much  ;  so 
that  at  the  end  of  33  years,  in  the  former  case  it  would  be 
found  to  have  overshot  the  original  point  of  rencontre  by 
2°  30',  and  in  the  latter  to  fall  short  of  it  by  just  so  much  ; 
and  tracing  it  round  from  revolution  to  revolution,  it  will  be 
found  in  either  case  that  after  a  series  of  intervals  succeeding 
each  other  in  the  cycle  33,  33,  33,  34  years,  the  meteor  will 
always  be  found  so  near  the  original  point  of  rencontre  that 
an  extension  of  the  whole  group  so  as  to  occupy  1 1°  in  their 
common  orbit  will  render  extremely  probable,  and  one  of 
22°  will  ensure  its  penetration  by  the  earth  at  some  point  or 
other,  with  a  probability  of  such  penetration  taking  place 
twice  in  two  successive  years. 

(905  e  e.)  The  other  hypothesis,  suggested  by  Sig.  Schia- 
parelli  (Director  of  the  Observatory  at  Milan),  is  that  of 
a  rencontre  at  or  very  near  to  the  perihelion  of  an  ellipse  of 
33 £  years,  corresponding  to  a  semi-axis  10*340,  and  an  excen- 
tricity 0*9033 ;  the  rencontre  in  this,  as  in  the  other,  taking 


NOTES.  7)5 

piace  alsc  at  the  descending  node.  Such  a  period,  combined 
with  an  extent  of  the  group  on  the  orbit  such  as  would 
occupy  somewhat  more  than  a  year  in  passing  through  the 
node  (i.e.  T^-j  of  its  whole  circumference),  would  bring 
round  rencontres  in  precisely  the  same  cycle  of  years,  with 
a  fair  probability,  and  if  of  twice  that  extent  with  a  cer- 
tainty of  their  happening.  An  increased  extent  of  the  group 
to  somewhat  beyond  this  would  give  rise  to  a  frequent 
occurrence  of  two  or  even  three  rencontres  in  annual  succes- 
sion, and  would  therefore  cover  the  whole  series  of  recorded 
instances. 

(905  ff.)  The  regular  advance  of  three  days  per  century 
in  the  calendar  date  of  the  phenomenon  is  partly  accounted 
for  by  the  greater  length  of  the  sidereal  year  (which  brings 
the  earth  round  to  the  same  point  in  its  orbit)  as  compared 
with  the  tropical  year  (which  brings  it  to  the  same  longitude, 
reckoned  from  the  receding  equinox,  by  which  the  calendar 
is  regulated).  This  accounts  for  ld*4  per  century;  the 
remaining  ld*6  must  arise  from  a  slow  and  regular  advance 
in  the  place  of  the  node  to  the  amount  of  1°  36'  per  cen- 
tury, or  57"*6  per  annum,  due  probably  to  planetary  per- 
turbation, and  chiefly,  no  doubt,  to  the  disturbing  action 
of  the  earth  itself  in  its  successive  passages  through  the 
group. 

(905  g  g.)  On  either  of  the  two  former  orbits  the  velocity 
of  the  meteors  will  be  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  earth 
in  a  retrograde  direction,  whence  it  will  readily  appear  that  the 
true  inclination  of  the  orbit  will  be  almost  exactly  double 
the  apparent — that  is  to  say,  20°  54'.  In  the  case  of  the 
long  ellipse,  the  velocity  of  the  meteor  in  perihelio  will 
be  found  to  be  to  that  of 
the  earth  as  1*371  :  1,  so 
that  supposing  ac  to  be  the 
earth's  orbit,  and  bd  that 
of  the  meteor,  the  apparent  inclination  bad  being  10*  27% 
and  the  sides  bd,  da,  respectively,  1*371  and  1,  we  shall 
find  the  angle  dba  =  7°  13',  and  therefore  the  true  inclina- 
tion BDC=18°  31'. 


716 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


(905  h  h.)  The  supposition  of  minute  planetary  bodies 
revolving  in  a  nearly  circular  orbit  of  almost  exactly  the 
dimensions  of  the  earth's  in  a  retrograde  direction,  and  at  an 
inclination  not  greater  than  that  of  some  of  the  asteroids, 
stands  in  such  strong  opposition  to  all  the  analogies  of  our 
system,  as  to  render  it  in  itself  highly  improbable ;  add  to 
which,  that  (as  no  perturbative  action  could  possibly  have 
flung  them  from  without  into  such  an  orbit)  they  must  be 
supposed  to  have  so  circulated  for  countless  ages,  during 
which  time  their  innumerable  rencontres  with  the  earth 
must  have  torn  the  group  to  pieces,  and  scattered  all  its 
members  which  escaped  extinction  into  orbits  of  every  dif- 
ferent inclination  and  excentricity.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
ellipse  of  33y£  has  a  decidedly  cometary  character ;  and 
in  such,  retrograde  motion  is  not  uncommon.  By  a  most 
singular  coincidence,  remarked  almost  simultaneously  by 
Messrs.  Peters  and  Schiaparelli  (a  coincidence  too  close 
and  striking  to  admit  of  hesitation  as  to  their  community  of 
origin),  the  elements  of  the  first  comet  of  1866,  discovered 
by  M.  Tempel,  coincide  almost  precisely,  in  every  particular 
except  in  the  date  of  the  perihelion  passage,  with  those 
we  have  just  derived  from  the  very  simple  considerations 
adduced.     The  parallel  is  as  below  : — 


Perihelion  passage  . 
Perihelion  distance  . 
Excentricity  .  . 
Seini-axis  major  . 
]  nclination 

Long,  descending  node 
Periodic  time 
Motion     . 


Meteoric  Orbit. 

Tem  pel's  Comet. 

Nov.  13,  1866 

Jan.   11,  1866 

0-9893*  . 

0-976.5 

09033    . 

0-9054 

.10340       . 

10-324 

18°  31'      . 

17°  1S'-1 

51°  28'      . 

51    26-1 

33*-25 

33-176 

Retrograde     . 

Retrograde  f 

*  This  is  the  earth's  radius  vector  on  Nov.  13. 

t  The  computations  of  Sig.  Schiaparelli,  founded  on  a  somewhat  different 
(and,  we  are  inclined  to  think,  less  accurate)  situation  of  the  radiant  of  last 
November,  lead  him  to  assign  the  date  Nov.  10  for  the  perihelion  passage,  and 
to  the  perihelion  itself  the  longitude  56°  25,-9,  again  agreeing  well  with  that 
of  the  comet  in  question,  which  is  60°  28'.  But  we  have  preferred  (avoiding 
nil  niceties,  which,  in  the  actual  uncertainty  as  to  the  esact  place  of  the  radiant, 
arc,  after  all,  premature),  fur  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  to  present  the  ch;iin  of 
reasoning  in  a  form  rcrpiiring  almost  no  calculation. 


NOTES.  717 

(905  1 i.)  It  will  not  fail  to  have  been  observed  that  a 
major  semi-axis  10-34  with  a  perihelion  distance  1  will 
throw  the  aphelion  of  the  meteoric  orbit  to  a  distance  from 
the  sun=  19-68,  that  is  to  say,  but  a  short  distance  beyond 
the  orbit  of  Uranus ;  while  the  fact  of  the  axis  major  itself 
lying  exactly  or  at  least  very  nearly  in  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  a  plane  itself  very  little  inclined  to  the  orbit  of 
Uranus,  will  ensure  a  very  near  appulse  of  the  meteors  to 
that  planet  whenever  their  two  mean  motions  may  have 
brought  or  may  hereafter  bring  them  to  the  corresponding 
parts  of  their  orbits,  allowing  for  the  change  (if  any)  in 
the  position  of  the  axis.  We  say,  if  any,  for  it  is  not  ot 
necessity  the  same  as  that  of  the  node,  and,  though  cal- 
culable, has  not  as  yet  been  calculated.  This,  however, 
does  not  affect  the  conclusion  that  such  near  appulse  must 
at  soine  former  time  have  taken  place,  and  will  do  so 
ajjain.  M.  Leverrier,  to  whom  these  considerations  seem 
to  have  occurred  independently,  has  concluded  that  it  did 
take  place  about  the  year  a.d.  126  ;  and  the  motion  of  both 
bodies  being  very  slow  at  that  time  (the  velocity  of  the 
meteors  being  in  aphelio  only  O07  of  that  of  the  earth,  or 
only  1*32  mile  per  second),  they  would  remain  for  a  longtime 
within  the  influence  of  the  planet's  disturbing  power,  while 
at  the  same  time  that  power  would  be  acting  at  the  greatest 
advantage  to  produce  deflection  from  their  line  of  motion. 
Hence  that  illustrious  astronomer  was  led  to  conclude,  that, 
just  as  Jupiter  on  a  similar  occasion  seized  on  and  threw  into 
an  orbit  of  short  period  Lexell's  comet  (see  art.  585),  so  at 
that  epoch  a  wandering  group  of  planetules,  whose  existence 
would,  but  for  that  meeting,  have  never  become  known  to 
us,  was  deflected  into  the  ellipse  they  actually  describe. 
Sig.  Schiaparelli,  on  the  other  hand ;  considering  that  the 
semi-minor  axis  of  the  meteoric  ellipse  is  but  small  (0-441), 
so  that  by  reason  of  the  moderate  inclination  the  meteor  in 
its  course  can  never  rise  much  more  than  1^  radius  of  the 
earth's  orbit  above  its  plane ;  appears  disposed  to  attribute 
their  present  form  of  orbit  to  the  attraction  of  Jupiter 
or  Saturn,  within  whose  disturbing  influence  he  considers 


718 


OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 


that  they  must  at  some  period  or  other  have  passed ,  an 
opinion  which  appears  to  us  less  probable,  inasmuch  as  the 
disturbing  force  would  in  that  case  have  tended  chiefly  in  a 
direction  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  their  motion,  and 
(by  reason  of  the  much  greater  velocities  of  both  bodies} 
have  acted  for  a  much  shorter  time. 

(905  jj. )  For  the  meteors  of  the  10th  of  August,  adopting 
as  the  place  of  the  radiant  the  star  k  Persei,  assigned  by  the 
observations  of  Mr.  A.  S.  Herschel  in  1863,  and  assumhig 
the  orbit  to  be  a  parabola  (an  assumption  which  determines 
the  velocity  at  the  moment  of  rencontre,  being  to  that  of 
the  earth  regarded  as  describing  a  circle,  in  the  constant 
ratio  of  </2  :  1),  a  velocity  which  he  found  to  agree  tolerably 
well  with  that  directly  determined  by  Mr.  Herschel  and  his 
co-observers  on  the  same  occasion,  M.  Schiaparelli  has  also 
computed  the  elements  of  their  orbit.  And  again,  by  a 
coincidence  hardly  less  striking,  these  are  found  to  agree 
with  the  elements  of  the  great  comet  of  1862,  as  the  fol- 
lowing comparison  will  show  : — 


August  Meteors, 

Scbiaparelli'8 

Elements. 

Comet  III.  1862 

Elements  of 

Oppolzer. 

Passage  through  descending  Node 
Perihelion  Passage       - 
Longitude  of  Perihelion 
Longitude  of  Ascending  Node 

Perihelion  Distance     - 

Period 

1866,  Aug.  10;75 

—      July  23-62 

343°  38' 

138°   16' 

64°     3' 

0-9643 

Retrograde 

1 862,  Aug.  22'9 

344°  41' 

137°  27' 

66°  25' 

0-9626 

123-74 

Retrograde 

Without  supposing  the  orbit  "absolutely  parabolic,  an  ellipse 
of  long  period  (say  124  years)  would  equally  well  satisfy 
the  conditions  ;  but  to  make  the  rencontre  annual,  a  com- 
plete annular  or  elliptic  stream  of  meteors  would  be  required. 
The  radiant  point  of  the  August  meteors,  however,  seems 
hardly  so  definite  as  that  of  the  November  group,  the 
determination  in  different  years  by  different  observers  differ- 
ing considerably.  Both  these  considerations  would  seem  to 
authorize  the  ascription  of  a  far  higher  antiquity  to  the 
'utroduction   of  this  assemblage    into   our    system .  giving 


NOTES.  719 

time  not  only  for  the  individual  meteors  to  gain  or  lose 
upon  each  other  in  consequence  of  minute  differences  in 
their  periodic  time,  so  as  to  draw  out  the  original  group 
into  a  stream,  but  to  disperse  themselves  over  considerable 
differences  of  inclination  and  excentricity  by  the  effect  of  the 
earth's  perturbative  action,  while  all  the  phaenomena  of  the 
November  group  point  to  a  much  more  recent  origin. 

Note  (O),  Art.  (395). 

(395  b  b.)  The  total  solar  eclipse  of  Aug.  18. 1868,  which, 
commencing  not  far  from  Aden,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Red 
Sea,  traversed  the  whole  peninsula  of  India  from  Malwa  to 
Masulipatam,  and  pursued  its  course  eastward  and  south- 
ward across  the  Malayan  peninsula,  to  the  extreme  northern 
point  of  Australia,  afforded  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the 
critical  examination  of  the  marginal  protuberances  as  well 
as  the  phaenomena  of  the  corona ;  which,  if  seen  at  all  from 
a  station  on  the  central  line,  could  not  be  held  to  originate 
in  the  earth's  atmosphere  by  reason  of  the  great  breadth  of 
the  total  shadow  (at  least  115  miles).  Accordingly,  it  was 
eagerly  seized,  and  competent  observers,  well  furnished 
with  every  requisite  instrument  and  means  of  observation 
and  record,  took  up  their  stations  at  points  on  or  very 
nearly  adjacent  to  the  central  line.  The  unusual  duration 
of  the  total  obscuration,  being  nearly  six  minutes,  allowed 
ample  time  for  making  all  the  necessary  observations,  as 
well  as  for  securing  photographs,  which  last  desideratum 
was  successfully  accomplished  at  Guntoor  in  India,  by 
skilled  photographers  under  the  direction  of  Major  Tennant, 
as  also  at  Aden.  The  final  results  may  be  thus  briefly 
stated. — 1.  The  darkness  was  by  no  means  so  great  as  was 
expected :  doubtless,  owing  to  the  great  amount  of  light 
emitted  by  the  corona  and  the  marginal  prominences.  The 
light  of  the  former  gave  a  continuous  spectrum,  and  more- 
over was  found  to  be  distinctly  and  strongly  polarized ; 
everywhere  in  a  plane  passing  through  the  ]>oint  examined 
and  the  sun's  center.     This  establishes  beyond  all  possible 


720  OUTLINES    OP    ASTRONOMY. 

doubt  its  origin  in  reflection  from  a  solar  atmosphere  ex- 
terior to   the   photosphere   (or   at  least  of  some   sort  of 
envelope,  whether  atmospheric  or  nebulous  in  its  nature  and 
connexion  with  the  sun)  of  vast  extent,  though  probably  of 
small  density,  and  is  altogether  opposed  to  its  origination  in 
that  of  our  earth ;  our  sky  light  so  near  the  sun  exhibiting 
no  trace  of  polarization. — 2.  The  red  prominences,  which 
were  numerous  and  most  remarkable,  showed  no  sign  of 
polarization,   and   were,  therefore,  self-luminous.     One   of 
them,  the  most  conspicuous,  projected  like  a  horn  or  tall 
excrescence  to  the  distance  of  3'  10" 
from  the  true  limb  of  the  sun,  which 
corresponds  to  a  vertical  elevation   of 
90,200  miles   above  the   level  of  the 
photosphere.      Its   outline,    as   photo- 
graphed  at    Guntoor,  was   as   in   the 
annexed    diagram,   indicating    by   its 
markings  a  spiral  form,  like  that  which 
might   be  conceived  to  result  from  a 
combined     rotatory     and     ascensional 
movement,   as    of    a   vast   column   of 
ignited  vapour  rushing  upward  with  a 
pwirl   from   the   photosphere   into  the 
higher    regions    of    a    non-luminous    atmosphere. — 3.  The 
light  of  the  prominences  subjected  to  spectroscopic  examina- 
tion was  in  accordance  with  this  idea.    It  gave  no  continuous 
spectrum,  but  appeared  to  consist  of  distinct  monochromatic 
rays,  or  definite  bright  lines  (characteristic  of  incandescent 
gases).     Of  these,  M.  Janssen,  stationed  at  Guntoor,  saw 
six,  in  the  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  and  violet  regions  of  the 
spectrum ;  two  of  them  corresponding  to  Fraunhofer's  lines 
c,  F,  indicative  of  hydrogen.     Major  Tennant,  at  the  same 
station,  perceived  only  four,  viz. :  c  in  the  red,  and  d  in  the 
orange  (corresponding  respectively  to  hydrogen  and  sodium ) 
— one  in  the  green  near  f  (hydrogen),  and  a  fourth  seen 
with  difficulty  in  the  blue  near  to  G.     Lieut.  Herschel  at 
Jninkandi  (where  the  total  phase  of  the  eclipse  was  much 
interfered  with  by  passing  clouds)  perceived  distinctly  three 


NOTES.  721 

vivid  lines,  red,  orange,  and  bine,  and  no  others,  nor  any 
trace  of  a  continuous  spectrum.  The  orange  line  proved  by 
measurement  to  coincide  precisely  with  i>,  the  others  ap- 
proximated to  c  and  F,  and  probably,  the  difficult  circum- 
stances of  the  measurements  considered,  were  coincident 
with  those  lines.  M.  Rayet  at  Wall  Tonne,  in  the  Malayan 
peninsula,  noted  no  less  than  nine  brilliant  lines  correspond- 
ing to  the  solar  dark  lines  b,  d,  e,  b,  k,  two  adjacent  to  O, 
and  one  between  b  and  f  (probably  Barium).  These  ob- 
servations are  quite  decisive  as  to  the  gaseous  nature  and 
vehement  incandescence  of  the  prominences,  and  indicate 
astonishingly  powerful  ascensional  movements  of  what  might 
be  called  flame  (were  combustion  possible)  in  an  atmosphere 
reposing  on  the  photosphere. —  4.  Besides  these  hard  and 
sharply  defined  prominences,  were  also  seen  ranges  irregular 
in  form,  of  what  might  perhaps  be  considered  cloudy  or 
vaporous  matter,  of  less  intensity  and  softer  outline. 

(395  c  c.)  Reasoning  on  the  monochromatic  character  of 
the  light  emitted  by  incandescent  gases,  and  speculating  on 
the  extreme  probability  of  the  solar  prominences  being  in 
the  nature  of  tumultuous  ejections  of  such  gases,  it  had 
early  occurred  both  to  Mr.  Huggins  and  Mr.  Lockyer  that 
they  might  possibly  become  the  subject  of  spectroscopic 
study,  as  appendages  to  the  sun's  limb,  or  in  the  umbra?  of 
spots  unilluminated  by  photospheric  light,  without  the  ne- 
cessity of  waiting  for  the  rare  occurrence  of  a  total  eclipse. 
Accordingly,  during  the  two  years  immediately  preceding 
that  of  Aug.  18.  1868,  the  former  made  several  attempts 
with  various  spectroscopic  and  other  contrivances  (such  as 
viewing  the  projected  image  of  the  sun's  border  through 
combinations  of  coloured  glasses,  &c),  to  obtain  a  view  of 
them,  though  without  success ;  and  the  latter  had  applied 
for  and  obtained  from  the  Royal  Society  a  grant  for  the 
construction  of  an  apparatus  for  the  purpose,  which,  how- 
ever, was  not  completed  till  after  the  occurrence  of  the 
eclipse.  Meanwhile  the  actual  observation  of  the  mono- 
chromatic character  of  their  light,  and  the  exact  coincidence 
of  their  lines  with  situations  which  in  the  spectrum  of  the 

3a 


722  OUTLINES   OF    ASTRONOMY. 

photosphere  are  marked  by  a  deficiency  of  light,  at  once 
suggested  to  M.  Janssen,  as  it  did  also  to  Lieut.  Herschel, 
the  possibility  of  discerning,  or  at  all  events  of,  as  it  were, 
feeling  them  out,  the  former  by  means  of  the  spectroscope, 
the  latter  by  combinations  of  coloured  glasses.  M.  Janssen, 
on  the  day  immediately  following  the  eclipse,  put  his  con- 
ception into  practice,  and  at  once  succeeded.  Placing  the 
slit  of  his  spectroscope  so  as  partly  to  be  illuminated  by  the 
edge  of  the  photosphere,  and  partly  by  the  light  (from 
whatever  origin)  exterior  to  it,  he  found  the  spectrum  of  the 
former  portion  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  ray 
c  to  be  crossed  (as  might  be  expected)  by  that  dark  line. 
At  the  point  of  the  limb  to  which  his  examination  was  first 
directed,  nothing  was  seen  beyond.  But,  on  shifting  the 
point  of  examination  gradually  along  the  limb,  a  small  dot 
of  ruddy  light  was  perceived,  in  exact  continuation  out- 
wards of  the  dark  line,  which,  on  continuing  the  movement 
of  the  spectroscope  along  the  limb  in  the  same  direction, 
gradually  lengthened,  and  then  again  shortened:  thus  re- 
vealing the  existence  of  a  prominence  giving  out  that  par- 
ticular monochromatic  red,  whose  form  and  outline  he  was 
thus  enabled  to  trace  out.  Directing  his  attention,  in  like 
manner,  to  the  dark  line  f,  the  same  phenomenon  was 
repeated,  in  the  tint  proper  to  that  region  of  the  spectrum. 
At  some  points  it  was  also  observed  that  the  bright  line  of 
the  prominence  encroached  upon  and  extended  into  the 
corresponding  dark  line  of  the  photosphere. 

(395  d  d.)  Mr.  Lockyer's  apparatus  having  meanwnilc 
been  completed,  he  was  at  length  enabled  to  announce  (on 
Oct.  20)  that  after  a  number  of  failures  which  made  the 
attempt  seem  hopeless,  he  had  at  length  succeeded  in  ob- 
serving, as  part  of  the  spectrum  of  a  solar  prominence,  three 
bright  lines,  one  absolutely  coincident  with  C,  one  near  i>, 
and  one  nearly  coincident  with  F.  On  Feb.  16.  1869,  an- 
other practical  step  in  the  same  direction  was  made  by  Mr. 
Huggins,  who,  limiting,  by  an  ingenious  contrivance,  the 
light  admitted  to  his  spectroscope  to  rays  of  about  the  re- 
frangibility  C,  widening  the  alit  sufficiently  to  admit  of  the 


NOTES.  723 

whole  prominence  being  included  in  its  field,  and  absorbing 
the  light  of  other  refrangibilities  so  admitted  by  a  ruby  glas3, 
was  enabled  distinctly  to  perceive  at  one  view,  the  form  of 
the  prominence.  Almost  immediately  after,  Mr.  Lockyer 
succeeded  by  merely  widening  the  slit  of  his  spectroscope, 
trithout  the  use  of  any  absorptive  media,  in  obtaining  a  clear 
view  of  the  forms  in  question.  "  The  solar  and  atmospheric 
spectra  being  hidden,  and  the  image  of  the  wide  slit  alone 
being  visible,  the  telescope  or  slit  is  moved  slowly,  and  the 
strange  shadow-forms  flit  past.  Here  one  is  reminded,  by 
the  fleecy  infinitely  delicate  cloud-films,  of  an  English 
hedgerow  with  luxuriant  elms  ;  here  of  a  densely  inter- 
twined tropical  forest,  the  intimately  interwoven  branches 
threading  in  all  directions;  the  prominences  generally  ex- 
panding as  they  mount  upwards,  and  changing  slowly, 
indeed  almost  imperceptibly."  Lastly,  on  the  4th,  5th,  and 
6th  of  May,  Lieut.  Herschel  found  the  spectrum  of  the 
solar  envelope  to  be  visible  without  difficulty,  and  without 
other  aid  than  the  spectroscope  adapted  to  his  telescope, 
and  was  enabled  to  form  a  general  picture  of  the  distribution 
of  the  luminous  region  surrounding  the  sun.  Two  pro- 
minences were  in  particular  examined,  one  of  which  formed 
a  luminous  cloud  floating  1'  or  2'  above  the  surface.  He 
perceived  also  (now  for  the  first  time)  a  fourth  line  near  g 
(since  seen  repeatedly),  and  subsequently  another  between 
f  and  G.  On  this  last  occasion,  having  at  first  swept 
round  the  sun  and  found  nothing  particularly  worthy  of 
remark,  on  returning  to  the  point  of  departure,  he  perceived 
the  lines  much  more  brilliant  and  intense  than  usual,  and 
further  scrutiny  satisfied  him  that  he  had  been  witness  to  a 
u  violent  and  spasmodic  eruption  of  vapour  "  lasting  only  a 
few  minutes !  The  mode  in  which  he  was  enabled  thus  to 
discern  the  forms  of  the  solar  clouds  consisted  in  giving  to 
the  telescope  a  vibratory  motion  up  and  down,  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  persistence  of  luminous  impressions  on  the  retina, 
by  which  the  perception  of  the  total  form  of  an  object  results 
from  the  mental  combination  of  a  series  of  linear  sections  of 
its  area.     And  he  describes  the  appearance  of  these  solar 

a  a  2 


724  OUTLINES    OF    ASTRONOMY". 

clouds  as  "  very  similar  to  terrestrial — fleecy,  irregular- 
shaped,  and  illuminated ;  just  such  as  eclipses  have  told  us 
they  are."  We  have  thus  a  new  chapter  of  solar  physics 
opened  out,  the  commencement,  doubtless,  of  a  series  of 
grand  discoveries  as  to  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the 
great  central  body  of  our  system.  Mr.  Huggins  has  also 
applied  spectrum  analysis  to  the  comae  and  tails  of  comets 
in  which  he  considers  satisfactory  proof  to  exist  of  the 
presence  of  carbon. 


725 


- 
- 

H 

O 

■< 

H 
H 

•< 

— 

M 

O 

9 
It 

E 

< 


Si 

< 

X 

i 

H 
P 

I 

a 

OS 

- 
B 

H 

06 

C 

c 


I 


Sf- 


f-XBl(«XXXXXBjf«S«XXX(p«!XT. 

OTeom<nwe».  (nwerswcoeowwoowo'scr.  <ncr;er>co<n 


^  y)  A 


T  T  T  T  T  T 


8  .."E^*      •=  2  „  9-  2  « 
6£n  °  3  «  —  o  .=  .2  .=  =  .=  "a  « 

•E  S  S  g'E  5  §  E:o  §  g  B.I-5.1 

—   ^  u  q  ..   —   u   !.   *   «i  jj   -i   .     r  l 


'  *  2  '  ' 

ft       2- 

60  «   .S    »» 

"=S  a-s* 


«  • 

'53 

o  .3 


5    -*»Jt    *>    s    «    C    i  "5    Q»    »»    w1.4ti.fc-'>,  »< 

*    ?»**-•   fc  CQ.^*0     4    f.    «.   *0  »     C0Q.<X>     -•     p-    J^    p-    f.    ^     «.    <X> 


ooi^OO^«50ooi«Tf«cr-t~oooiO'"Woovu5to<er-i- 


5)e9i-vbT,««*e<oi>xoio-«nt")ioio(o 


c  c 


H 
M 

3 


tj. 


p-OQ.OQ.?-«(a>Ca    B  CQ.«o 


c  k  '  ■    ■ 

* r»  .  I    *    «  'siiitioQit 

E  1  _, ._  t"-      —  ft  ^  ._  * bi,._ 


p«^«oo  -  ^.  p«^>cn  <*  a.ea»o  •* 


«lOXO«05«*tt?*¥CM«-01-<«V!OlOS 

cioieioppooopjCy^r^^jiBKipJiT* 


•O<C>0<OU<CtpVIO'Olp>C<pWl^t-X0C»99l91^9 


'-    i i     ■         i    i   ft    i 

EZ'g  g.a  |  8-g  |i  I      „.••-•«  !.|J  S-.a 

a 


I  -5  |  E  &  60  S  §  5 1  &  60  &  2   I  I  :|  60-5  g.  I   g.  £  : 


?-«a 


O  »0    ^.fo     B- 


X «    "Oi    •'    ■•-inlONKOlfllOiOI'O-TICW- 

t~ X    ••    "OfClCr-OtKOtttOtOWOXlQ 


i\t  rlililii 


1 


*&5&6<Z&&5&55 


3    C 


726 


APPENDIX. 


">  T  .—         re    i    !»  •-•  'J 
<3  _h    >         u    - 
fctll;    £    8    3 


■g    (ft 

._  'E/S 


'So  3  '>,  o 


=   «  £   t»:=   „ 


«ocQ.<aco,«'C3a8oQ,e>.^ca,f-a   -  a  k   a  a  t-  k^>  ^tq,  b  t- 


H 

3Q 


£ 


"E.  S  .2  •- 


- 1  -s  1 :&  1 

<?  a  g  .2  3  .2 


,'S  «  2  a  3      E  g.§ 

s  I'l-a-S.! S'&'a^ §'11  ill 


8  5  ?  5  §5  aJJI  ST  o.  §p  a.£  .S  ?^»3o5? 

»!o<u!»uo<:<ujOtoOj><t«j!gh)Ouy 


OINOIISWIMSlWWWWMfflWCTIMINWOIOtOIMNN 


SJ         "3  <S    M  eft    3         ••"  -N    ^  IS    ai,rt    «  3  (Z  •—    3 

"g/3  ??it?  af-g.9.9  SstSyaS'EsSi^ 
BcfcO(i3<U<UUOOO^<fc<JOU'S!flOU 
8  «>    aOQ.b«sCQ./<15CQ.S;«o    <»»  u,  *w»  8    7    8    u>    p-CQito    P"  ?. 


L. 


00    .    C5  <J>  CN  C5  t-  »  *  t^.«o  Mtl»t««  «  »  oo  sue  Ol 

O     |(>!,f>q097«C*q<«>f),<3<p^0p00<X>pOO7«9«0»Oi 


'  >  w  __    '    '         '    '    '    3    •    '    '    •    ' ;=:=    ' 

■  *§.§_*§  3 .»  |8      =5  »>  <»  2'1      :=-S^»<ft|j2:= 

1 1  §  I  as  a  1  I  .§  1 1 1  i  1 1  f  .g  %%%i  -a  E" 

ir       a       a  or  a <^  a  ?*  »  »  ■<  «^»oa,  ?>  w  a  «»  <a 


APPENDIX. 


727 


II.  Synoptic  Table  of  the  Elements  of  the 

Planetary  System. 

N.B.  —  a  denotes  the  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  that  of  the  earth  heing 
t.tken  for  unity  ;  P  the  mean  sidereal  period  in  mean  solar  days ;  e  the  eccen- 
tricity in  decimal  parts  of  the  semi-axis;  i  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  to  the 
ecliptic  ;  Q  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node;  w  that  of  the  perihelion  from 
node  on  orbit ;  I,  the  mean  longitude  of  the  planet  at  the  moment  of  the  epoch 
E,  for  which  the  elements  are  stated ;  M  the  denominator  of  the  fraction 
expressing  the  mass  of  tlie  planet,  that  of  the  sun  being  1  ;  D  the  diameter  ir. 
miles  ;  A  the  density,  that  of  the  earth  being  1  ;  T  the  time  of  rotation  on  its 
axis;  d  the  mean  angnlar  equatorial  diameter  of  the  body  of  the  planet,  at  its 
mean  distance  from  the  earth,  in  seconds ;  «  the  ellipticity  of  the  spheroid,  a* 
a  fraction  of  the  equatorial  diameter;  y  the  inclination  of  the  axis  of  rotation 
to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  H  the  mean  intensity  ot  light  a:id  •  eat  received, 
from  the  sun,  that  received  by  the  earth  being  1.  The  asteroids  are  numbered 
in  their  order  of  discovery. 


1 

a 

P 

e 

i 

o 

The  Sun 

0 

/ 

ii 

5? 

Mercury 

0-3870981 

87  -9692. 680 

0-2054925 

7 

0 

9  1 

6 

Venus 

0-7233316 

224-7007869 

0-0068722 

3 

23 

28-5 

* 

Earth 

1  0000000 

365-2563612 

00167918 

i 

Mars 

1  -5236923 

686-9796458 

0-0931125 

1 

51 

6-2 

i 

Ceres 

27664313 

1680  650 

0-0805096 

10 

36 

27  8 

2 

Pallns 

2-7686906 

1683  103 

0-2400116 

34 

43 

87 

3 

Juno 

2-6707543 

1594*221 

0  2-65949 

13 

1 

9  0 

4 

Vesta 

2  «6 1668 2 

1325-640 

0  0890879 

7 

7 

55  7 

5 

Astra-a 

2-5778960 

1511-800 

01872123 

5 

19 

5-7 

6 

Hebe 

2-4246290 

1379-007 

0-2028856 

14 

46 

38-0 

7 

Iris 

2-3860360 

1346-212 

0-2312145 

5 

27 

53 -3 

8 

Flora 

2  201.5860 

1 193  004 

0-1567040 

5 

53 

8  0 

9 

Metis 

2  3860333 

1346-211 

0-1238156 

5 

36 

7-3 

10 

Hygeia 

8  1511972 

2043  200 

00993911 

3 

48 

471 

11 

I'arthenope 

2-4524062 

1402-770 

0-0990197 

4 

37 

0  9 

12 

Victoria 

2  3344916 

1302-756 

0-2178214 

8 

23 

1-5 

19 

Egeria 

2-57629'70 

1510  400 

00867520 

16 

31 

54-9 

14 

Irene 

2-5863965 

1519  288 

0  1656725 

9 

7 

27  -3 

15 

Eunomia    - 

26441373 

1570*452 

01868308 

11 

43 

35-2 

16 

Psyche 

2-9263840 

1828-493 

0*134 1854 

3 

3 

r.8  6 

17 

Thetis 

2-4732811 

14'.  0  721 

0  1276441 

5 

36 

5  6 

18 

Melpomene 

2-2956321 

1270-430 

0  2174420 

10 

8 

58-6 

19 

Fortuna 

2-4415662 

1393  481 

0-1572326 

1 

32 

30  2 

20 

Ma-silia 

2  -4089 122 

1365-621 

01442977 

0 

41 

111 

21 

Lutrtia 

2-4347444 

1387-643 

0-1617091 

3 

5 

2T0 

22 

Calliope 

2  9094987 

1812-699 

01019602 

13 

45 

28  4 

23 

Thalia 

2  6282154 

1556-291 

0-2321817 

10 

13 

131 

'24 

Themis 

3  14394 15 

2036  147 

0-1170627 

0 

48 

5 16 

2.5 

Phocea 

2  3999822 

1358-033 

0-2547900 

21 

34 

549 

26 

Proserpina  - 

2  6552100 

1580-319 

00871572 

3 

3i 

38  0 

27 

Euterpe 

2-3463460 

1312760 

01736210 

1 

35 

30-3 

28 

Bcllona 

2  7784700 

1691986 

01500986 

9 

21 

26-3 

29 
30 

Atiiphitrite 
Urania 

2-5536647 
2-3654133 

1490  542 
1328-795 

0  0737850 
01 2761 42 

6 
2 

7 
6 

49  8 
1*8 

31 

Euphr  isyne 

3-1571421 

2048*988 

0  2181494 

26 

26 

OH) 

t2H 

APPENDIX. 

s 

// 

P- 

•     ; 

i 

32 

1 

Pomona 

2  5887137   j 

1521-332 

0-0802144 

o      /       u     j 
5  28  51-6  I 

33 

Polyhymnia 

2-8650620  • 

1771-328 

0  3381960 

1    56    18  '.)   j 

34 

Circe 

2-6870950  1 

1608-877 

0  1056 142 

5  26  37-5   : 

35 

Leueolhea  • 

3-0060548 

1 903  -680 

0-2186315 

8    10  32  1 

36 

Atalanta     -   ! 

2-7479006 

1663-792 

0-2971309   : 

18   41   51-6 

37 

Fides 

2  6421 -73 

1568-674 

01748927 

3     7    10  5 

:J8 

Leda 

2-7401483 

1656  758 

01554322 

6  58  25-3 

39 

Laetitia 

2  76998^0 

1683-862 

01 11 1018 

10  20  58-3 

40 

Iliinnoiiia   - 

2  2677226 

1247-335 

0  0463143 

4   15  52-8 

41 

Daphne' 

2  -7  665  5'2  6 

1680  725 

0  "2690810 

16      3    13  7    i 

4'i 

Isis 

2  439999 

1392-14 

0-2256143 

8  34   29-8 

43 

Ariadne 

2-203358 

1194  61 

01675933 

3  27   39  1 

44 

Nysa 

2-424741 

137910 

0- 1503545 

3  41   HO-9 

45 

Eugenia 

2-720510 

1638-98 

0-0822361 

6   34  57-0  | 

[   16 

Hestia 

2-526151 

1466*52 

0  1646660 

2   17  36-7 

47 

Aglaia         • 

2-880197 

1785  38 

0-1324005 

5     0     9-6 

48 

Doris 

3-109420 

2002  71 

0  0769467 

6  29  40-2 

49 

Pales 

3  080259 

1971-60 

0-2385024 

3     8  45-1 

50 

Virginia 

2-649741 

1575-45 

0-2873290 

2  47   36  9 

51 

Neniausa    - 

2-365579 

1328-94 

0  0662400 

3  47   53-0 

52 

Europa 

3-099773 

1993-39 

0-1014745 

7  24  40-3 

53 

Calypso 

2620957 

1549-84 

0-2038207 

5     6   42-7 

54 

Alexandra  - 

2-714864 

1633  88 

01966174 

11   47    11-3 

55 

Pandora 

2-759621 

1674-45 

01 420334 

7    13   28-1    j 

56 

Melete 

2-5971 10 

1528  74 

0-2370434 

8      1   50-8 

57 

Mnemosyne 

3-157288 

2049-13 

0-1041157 

15      8      1-6   ; 

.58 

Concordia  - 

2-694441 

1615-48 

0-0401686 

5      16  7J 

1  59 

Olyinpia. 

2-713870 

1632-98 

01 173539 

8  37    41-3 

60 

Echo 

2-39.5088 

135219 

01847386 

3  34   18  7   j 

61 

Danae 

3-003978 

1901-71 

01684354 

18    16  329   ! 

!  62 

Enito 

3-130695 

2023-29 

0  1709820 

2   12  2S-9   ; 

j  63 

Au-onia 

2-393785 

1352-78 

0-1247228 

5  46  54  5 

64 

Angelina     - 

2-680557 

1603  01 

0-1290952 

1  19  51-5  ; 

[  65 

Maximiliana 

3-419842 

230998 

0-1201719 

3  28     9-5 

66 

Maia 

2-663544 

1587-77 

0-1339165 

3     2  24-6 

67 

Asia 

2-420277 

1375-29 

01848482 

5  59  27-3 

68 

Leto 

2-722658 

1640-92 

01697847 

8    10  16-5 

69 

Hesperia    - 

2-994932 

1893  12 

01  745242 

8  28  25-0 

70 

Panopea 

2-629115 

1557  09 

01950190 

11  31  56-5 

71 

Niobe 

2-756159 

167130 

0  1737289 

23   18  29-5 

72 

Feronia 

2-274958 

1253-31 

0  1164641 

5  25  55-2 

73 

CI  y  tie 

2-665541 

1589-56 

0-0454381 

2  24  57-6 

74 

Galatea 

2-575212 

1509-45 

0-2554310 

3   15  43  8 

75 

Eurydice    - 

2-665856 

1589  84 

0  3054377 

4  59     8-8 

76 

Freia 

3-188960 

2080-04 

00302110 

2    13     30 

77 

Frijrga 

2  673752 

1596-91 

0-1358136 

2  27   55-2 

78 

Diana 

j     2  626316 

1554  60 

0-2066804 

8   39  47  0 

79 

Euryix.nie- 

|     2-444173 

1395-71 

0-195332!) 

4   36   50-£ 

80 

Sa|>pho 

2-296375 

1271-05 

0-2v.0al78 

8  36  479 

81 

Terpsichore 

28504-28 

1757-77 

02100461 

7  55   220 

82 

Alcmene     - 

2-764144 

167857 

0-2299055 

2  50  34 

U 

Jupiter 

5-2027760 

4332-5848212 

00481626 

1    18  51-3 

h 

Saturn 

9-5387861 

107592198174 

00561502 

2  29  35-7 

y 

Uranus 

191823900 

306868208296 

0-0466683 

0  46  28-4 

y) 

Neptune 

3005660 

60186-6385 

0  0084962 

1   47     0-6 

Al'I'KNIMX.  729 

Synoptic  Table  of  Elements  (continued). 


8 

m 

L 

E 

■:- 

o 

/ 

n 

0 

' 

it 

o 

i 

ii 

4 

V 

4.5 

57 

30  9 

74 

21 

46-9 

166 

0 

48  6 

1801.  Jan. 

1-0,  G. 

s 

74 

54 

12-9 

128 

43 

53  1 

11 

33 

30 

Do. 

r 

- 

. 

99 

30 

5-0 

100 

39 

10  2 

Do. 

j 

48 

0 

3-5 

332 

23 

56-6 

64 

22 

55-5 

Do. 

1 

80 

48 

47  9 

148 

27 

14  1 

25 

44 

50-6 

1864.  Oct. 

120,  G. 

S 

172 

42 

151 

122 

4 

481 

354 

44 

38  9 

1864.  Sept. 

6  0,  G. 

3 

170 

52 

4-9 

54 

44 

96 

268 

18 

46  8 

1864.  June, 

8  0,  G. 

4 

103 

23 

117 

250 

38 

10  3 

52 

34 

2  6 

1863.  Nov. 

23  0,  G. 

5 

141 

25 

43  5 

135 

20 

26  3 

262 

24 

22  5 

1864.  June, 

26  0,  G 

6 

138 

37 

214 

15 

22 

126 

269 

8 

16  9 

1862.  May, 

31  0,  B 

7 

259 

48 

13-3 

41 

19 

33  5 

8 

9 

6  5 

1862.  Sept. 

12-0,  W. 

8 

110 

17 

48  6 

32 

54 

28-3 

68 

48 

31-9 

1848.  Jan. 

1  0,  B. 

9 

68 

31 

58*4 

71 

32 

190 

248 

1 

48-7 

1863.  Mav, 

30  0.  B. 

It) 

286 

43 

55-0 

2(4 

49 

57  7 

316 

54 

16-7 

1862.  Apr. 

26  0,  G. 

11 

125 

5 

561 

317 

21 

4-7 

304 

51 

4-5 

1862.  July, 

21  0.  B. 

12 

235 

33 

34  9 

301 

56 

36-0 

312 

33 

524 

1857.  Aug. 

2-0,  G. 

13 

43 

19 

45-4 

1 19 

0 

16  2 

111 

51 

594 

1864.  Jan 

10  o.  F. 

14 

86 

42 

K-8 

180 

6 

33  -9 

98 

57 

33-4 

1862.  June, 

1  o,  G.  ' 

I J 

293 

58 

2<>-7 

27 

37 

24-7 

107 

0 

24  5 

1862.  Jan. 

30  0,  W". 

16 

150 

34 

1  6 

14 

44 

57  6 

226 

7 

32  6 

1863.  Apr. 

29  5,  YV. 

n 

1 25 

21 

37  2 

260 

40 

8-1 

245 

5 

11 

1860.  July, 

120.  B. 

m 

150 

4 

SO  7 

15 

9 

58-0 

l'»7 

39 

20  9 

1858.  Mar. 

6  0,  G. 

19 

211 

27 

18-2 

30 

29 

32  3 

41 

51 

13  5 

1860.  Nov. 

8-0,  B 

80 

206 

42 

30  8 

98 

26 

22-4 

351 

y 

39  8 

1863.  Aug. 

29  5,  B 

S] 

80 

30 

56  2 

326 

27 

06 

349 

21 

33  0 

1860.  Jan. 

190,  G 

22 

66 

36 

218 

56 

34 

131 

224 

46 

26-6 

I860.  Jan. 

00,  B  J 

29 

67 

39 

12-0 

124 

9 

6-7 

141 

3 

59-3 

1862.  Feb. 

19  0,  W.  ! 

•J4 

36 

11 

481 

139 

49 

24-2 

62 

24 

39  7 

186'.'.  Oct. 

23  0,  G  ' 

25 

214 

3 

01 

302 

53 

58-3 

108 

4 

27-7 

1863.  Jan. 

13  0,  B  1 

*. 

45 

55 

3  4 

234 

50 

23-9 

61 

14. 

30  0 

I860.  Feb. 

6  0,  G  | 

•27 

93 

46 

22  1 

87 

40 

8-9 

311 

56 

4-5 

1863.  July, 

23-0,  K. 

Sfl 

144 

41 

9-9 

122 

5*5 

29  6 

66 

3 

57-4 

1832.  Mar. 

24  0,  B  1 

29 

356 

28 

37-9 

57 

23 

121 

283 

40 

58-5 

1863.  June, 

30  0,  B.  | 

30 

308 

16 

8-4 

30 

52 

49  6 

73 

59 

95 

1862.  Dec. 

17  0,  B 

91 

31 

28 

40  0 

94 

1.4 

6  4 

155 

10 

34  1 

1862.  Mar. 

9  O,  B  ! 

39 

220 

47 

37-3 

194 

2 

32-3 

6 

29 

1-5 

1862.  Oct. 

1  o,  W.  ; 

33 

9 

6 

44-1 

342 

27 

53  9 

285 

39 

12-6 

1863.  May, 

28-5,  \V.  ! 

:i4 

184 

42 

23  0 

150 

14 

45-2 

105 

34 

22-0 

1863.  Jan. 

3-0,  B. 

35 

355 

51 

20-9 

201 

26 

271 

69 

52 

4-3 

1863.  Nov. 

16-5,  B 

30 

359 

10 

46-4 

42 

38 

20 -O 

71 

20 

46-7 

1861.  Jan. 

0  0,  B 

|7 

8 

9 

37  -4 

66 

4 

28-2 

42 

34 

35  2 

1856.  Jan. 

0-0  B 

SB 

296 

27 

34-9 

100 

51 

44  3 

112 

58 

27  6 

1856.  Jan. 

0  0,  B 

19 

157 

20 

6-6 

2 

11 

36  7 

146 

41 

34-5 

1856.  Jan. 

1-0,  B. 

M 

93 

34 

23-7 

1 

2 

41-" 

225 

47 

29  8 

1863.  Mav, 

12  0,  B. 

u 

179 

2 

301 

2  Jt) 

5 

20  1 

335 

S 

217 

1862.  Sept  23  435,11. 

12 

84 

31 

6-9 

317 

59 

39 -2 

247 

46 

19-5 

I860.  Jan. 

10.  B. 

•IS 

264 

35 

52-7 

277 

50 

504 

132 

1 

30  2 

1863  Jan. 

o-o,  B. 

■n 

HI 

3 

5  2 

HI 

28 

29  3 

116 

18 

19  1 

1860.  Jan. 

28 -o,  B 

44 

148 

5 

51-8 

229 

51 

52-7 

294 

SI 

2-8 

1858.  Jan. 

0  0,  B 

i*; 

181 

33 

41  1 

354 

43 

56  3 

86 

7 

34-3 

1863.  Jan. 

0  0,  B. 

■17 

4 

11 

52  2 

313 

53 

08 

116 

M 

11-4 

1859.  June, 

17-0.  B. 

1* 

185 

14 

13  2 

76 

52 

38  5 

16 

6 

47  0 

1858.  Feb. 

3-0.  B. 

730 


APPENDIX. 


! 

1 

a 

tr 

L 

K 

o 

/ 

i> 

u 

/ 

ii 

0 

, 

ii 

4 

49 

290 

29 

4-2 

32 

31 

406 

159 

34 

55  3 

1860. 

Jan. 

28  o.  1? 

50 

173 

86 

12-2 

9 

51 

30  3 

8» 

16 

52  2 

1863. 

Jan. 

oo,  B. 

51 

175 

39 

11-2 

175 

10 

53-1 

177 

11 

25  3 

1858. 

Mar. 

25-5,  M. 

52 

129 

57 

165 

lol 

54 

57-2 

136 

20 

51-4 

1858. 

Jan. 

oo.  B 

53 

144 

1 

52-5 

92 

47 

35-8 

239 

19 

16-8 

1863. 

May 

31  5,  B. 

54 

313 

49 

0-7 

294 

53 

461 

149 

40 

21  6 

1861. 

Jan. 

8  o,  B 

57 

10 

57 

29-1 

11 

28 

S8-6 

28 

26 

57-6 

1858. 

Dec. 

30  0,  B.  ; 

56 

194 

25 

59-4 

293 

37 

37  9 

62 

16 

45-7 

1862. 

Dec. 

18  0,  B  i 

57 

200 

5 

25  I 

52 

53 

13  0 

28 

35 

25  6 

1860. 

Jan. 

1  0,  B  j 

58 

161 

11 

39-8 

180 

17 

24  0 

162 

28 

261 

1860. 

Jan. 

O-O,  B  ' 

59 

170 

22 

31-4 

16 

54 

44-4 

190 

6 

18  6 

1863. 

Jan. 

0-0,  B.  ! 

60 

191 

59 

47-3 

98 

30 

17  3 

232 

27 

11-8 

1863 

Jan. 

0<\  B. 

61 

334 

16 

57-9 

342 

44 

12-7 

73 

6 

25  4 

1869. 

Jan. 

()•(),  B.  | 

62 

126 

12 

55-1 

34 

0 

8-2 

176 

1 

23  2 

1863. 

Mar. 

25  5.  B. 

6? 

338 

3 

48-9 

269 

41 

0-7 

177 

7 

9  1 

1861. 

Mar. 

5  0.  B. 

64 

311 

4 

46  9 

123 

43 

503 

182 

57 

5-4 

1861. 

May 

28  0.  B. 

65 

158 

53 

48-7 

258 

22 

171 

192 

17 

21  4 

1861. 

Mai- 

1 8  0.  B. 

66 

8 

13 

12  5 

38 

13 

4-7 

188 

42 

32  5 

1861. 

May 

27  o,  \V. 

67 

202 

40 

10  1 

306 

18 

47-9 

313 

38 

23-3 

1862 

Jan. 

0  0,  B 

68 

44 

37 

54-7 

358 

57 

32  0 

282 

33 

47  2 

1862. 

Jan. 

C-O.  B. 

69 

186 

59 

4  0 

111 

8 

42-0 

164 

2 

21  0 

1861. 

June 

3  0,  B. 

70 

48 

16 

27  8 

299 

47 

31  6 

250 

34 

161 

1861. 

June 

0  0.  B. 

71 

316 

18 

48-4 

221 

58 

46-8 

322 

15 

20  8 

1861. 

Sept. 

25  5,  B 

72 

207 

37 

131 

S09 

48 

37-9 

22 

52 

55-9 

1863. 

Jan. 

0  0,  B. 

73 

7 

32 

189 

61 

33 

51-1 

189 

47 

11-9 

1*62. 

May 

26  0,  VV. 

74 

200 

29 

20-2 

6 

41 

36-5 

0 

31 

29-4 

1862. 

Sept. 

16-0,  B. 

75 

359 

52 

191 

334 

40 

12  1 

4 

40 

23-1 

1862. 

Nov. 

0  0,  W. 

76 

212 

29 

32-5 

67 

10 

17  9 

28 

48 

2-8 

1862. 

Oct. 

24-5,  G. 

77 

2 

7 

1-7 

58 

9 

1-3 

39 

95 

26-4 

1863. 

Jan. 

0  0,  B. 

78  334 

2 

34-2 

121 

13 

59-2 

173 

41 

43  8 

1863. 

May 

8  5,  B. 

79 

■  206 

42 

4O-0 

44 

20 

33- 1 

45 

50 

133 

1S64. 

Jan. 

l-O.  3.  , 

80 

218 

31 

18-8 

355 

7 

20-7 

6! 

25 

323 

1865. 

Dec. 

3-0.  B.  | 

J81 

2 

31 

45  1 

48 

17 

296 

89 

35 

164 

1864. 

Nov. 

13(),  B. 

i«2 

26 

50 

33 

131 

12 

48 

94 

4 

41 

1865. 

Jan. 

0-0,  B. 

* 

98 

26 

18-9 

11 

8 

346 

112 

15 

2.5-0 

1801. 

Jan. 

10,  G. 

•» 

111 

56 

37-4 

89 

9 

298 

135 

20 

65 

Do. 

l±f 

72 

59 

35-3 

167 

31 

161 

177 

48 

23-0 

Do. 

La 

130 

7 

3P9 

43 

17 

803 

33  K 

6 

0-4 

1850 

Jan. 

10,  G. 

Synoptic  Table  of  Elements  (continued.  See  357  a,  Note  F  ) 


1 

M 

D 

d 

A 

T 

1 

y 

H 

- 

( 

ii 

b 

m   • 

o 

i 

" 

o 

1 

882000 

1923-64 

025 

609 

7  — 

82 

15 

45940 

? 

4865751 

3183 

6-89 

1-14 

21 

5  — 

- 

. 

6-674 

* 

401839 

8108 

17-55 

084 

23 

21  — 

- 

- 

1-911 

* 

359551 

7925-648 

- 

1-00 

23 

56  41 

66 

3-2 

6 

1000 

298 

6* 

2680337 

4546 

6-46 

0-72 

24 

37  22-7 

59 

41 

49 

0-431 

6-7 

n 

1047  871 

90734 

37-91 

024 

9 

55  VI  3 

86 

54 

30 

0036 

16-8- 

h 

3501-600 

76791 

17-50 

o-ii 

10 

16  0-4 

61 

•l<> 

— 

0-011 

w 

20470 

35307 

3-91 

0-20 

- 

. 

- 

0-003 

^ 

18780? 

39793? 

2-88 

015 

- 

- 

- 

000 

APPENDIX. 


731 


Names  of  Discoverers  and  Dates  of  Discovkuy 
of  the  Asteroids. 

Jan.  1.  1801. 
Mar.  28,  1802. 
Sept.  1,  1804. 
Mar.  29,  1807. 
Dec.  8,  1 845. 
July  1,  1847. 
Aug.  13,  1847. 
Oct.  18,  1847. 
Apr.  25,  1 848. 
Apr.  12,  1849. 
May  11,  1850. 
Sept.  13,  1850. 
Nov.  12,  1850. 
May  19,  1851. 
July  29,  1851. 
Mar.  17,  1852. 
Apr.  17,  1852. 
June  24,  1852. 
Aug.  22,  1852. 
Sept.  19,  185'2. 
Not.  15,  1852. 
Not.  16,  1852. 
Dec.  15,  1852. 
Apr.  5,  1853. 
Apr.  6,  1853. 
May  5,  1853. 
Nov.  8,  1 853. 
Mar.  1,  1854. 
Mar.  1,  1854 
Mar.  1,  1854. 
July  2?,  1854. 
Sept.  1,  1854. 
Oct.  26,  1854 
Oct.  28,  1 854. 
Apr.  6,  1854. 
Apr.  19,  1855. 
Oct.  5,  1855. 
Oct.  5,  1 855. 
Jan.  12  1856. 
Feb.  8,  1856. 
Mar.  1.  1856. 
May  22,  1856. 
May  23,  1856. 
Apr.  15,  1857. 
May  27,  1857. 
June  28,  1857. 
Aug  16,  1857. 
Sept.  15.  1857. 
Sept.  19,  1857. 
Sept.  19,  1857. 
Oct.  4,  1857. 
Jan.  22,  1858. 
Feb.  4,  1858 
Apr.  4,  1858. 
Apr.  11,  1858. 
Sept.  10,  1858. 


Ceres 

Piazzi 

Pallas 

Olbers 

Juno 

Harding 

Vesta 

Olbers 

Astraea 

Hencke 

Hebe 

Hencke 

Iris 

Hind 

Flora 

Hind 

Metis? 

Graham 

Hygeia 

Gasparis 

Parthenope 

Gasparis 

Victoria 

Hind 

Egeria  ? 

Giisparis 

Irene 

Hind 

Eunomia 

Gasparis 

Psyche 

Gasparis 

Thetis 

Luther 

Melpomenp 

Hind 

Fortuna 

Hind 

IWassilia 

Gasparis 

Lutetia 

Goldschmidt 

Calliope 

Hind 

Thalia 

Hind 

Themis? 

Gasparis 

Phocea 

Chacornac 

Proserpina 

Luther 

Euterpe 

Hind 

Bellona 

Luther 

Amphitrite 

f  Marth 
\  Pogson 

Urania 

Hind 

Euphrosyne 

Ferguson 

Pomona 

Goldschmidt 

Polyhymnia 

Chacornac 

Circe 

Chacornac 

Leucothea 

Luther 

A  talari  ta 

Goldschmidt 

Fides 

Luther 

Leda 

Chacornac 

Laetitia? 

Chacornac 

Harmonia 

Goldschmidt 

Daphne 

Goldschmidt 

Isis? 

Pogson 

Ariadne 

Pogson 

Nysa 

Goldschmidt 

Eugenia? 

Goldschmidt 

Hestia  ? 

Pogson 

Aglaia 

Luther 

Doris 

Goldschmidt 

Pales? 

Goldschmidt 

Virginia 

Ferguson 

Nemausa '            , 

Laurent 

Europa 

Goldschmidt 

Calypso 

Luther 

Alexandra 

Goldschmidt 

Pandora 

Searle 

732 


APPENDIX. 


Melete 

Goldschmidt 

Sept.  S,  1857. 

i 

Mnemosyne 

Luther 

Sept.  22,  1 859. 

Concordia 

Luther 

Mar.  24,  1 860. 

Olympia 

Chacornac 

Sept.  13,  1860. 

Echo 

Ferguson 

Sept.  15,  1860. 

Danae 

Goldschmidt 

Sept.  9,  1860. 

Erato 

Lesser 

Sept.  14,  I860. 

Ausonia 

Gasparis 

Feb.  11.  1861. 

Angelina 

Tempel 

Mar.  6,  18ol. 

Maximiliaua 

Tempel 

Mar.  10,  1861. 

Maia 

Tuttle 

Apr.  10,  1861. 

Asia 

Pogson 

Apr.  18,  1861. 

Leto 

Luther 

Apr.  29,  1861. 

Hesperia 

Sciaparelli 

Apr.  29,  1861. 

Panopea 

Goldschmidt 

May  5,  1861. 

Niobe 

Luther 

Aug.  IS;  1861. 

Feronia 

Peters 

Jan.  2<>,  186V. 

Clytie 

Tuttle 

Apr.  7,  1862. 

Galatea 

Tempel 

Aug.  29,  1862. 

Eurydice 

Peters 

Sept.  22,  1862. 

Freia 

D'Arrest 

Nov.  14,  1862. 

Frigga 

Peters 

Nov.  12,  1862. 

Diana 

Luther 

Mar.  15,  1863. 

i 

Eurynomc 

Watson 

Sept.  14,  1863. 

Sappho 

Pogson 

May  3,  1864. 

Terpsichore 

Tempel 

Sept.  30,  1864. 

Alcmene 

Luther 

Nov.  27,  1864. 

Note. — Many  of  the  names  of  the  Aster  >ids  appear  to  us  very  unhappily 
chosen.  Thus,  confusion  is  verv  likely  to  arise  in  printing  or  speaking,  between 
Iris  and  lsis,  Lutetia  and  Lastitia,  Thetis  and  Metis,  Thetis  and  Themis,  Vesta 
and  Heitia,  Hygeia  and  Egeria,  Egeria  and  Eugenia,  Pallas  and  Pales.  Is  it 
too  much  to  hope  that  the  discoverers  of  the  interfering  members  of  these  pairs 
will  reconsider  their  names?  It  is  not  yet  too  late:  the  Nymphs,  Dryads, 
Oceanidae,  &c,  afford  an  infinite  choice  of  classic  names,  graceful  and  eupho- 
nious. Metis  is  known  to  few  as  a  mythological  name,  Pales  to  fewer  as  that  of 
a  female  divinity,  Nemausa  to  none  as  the  name  of  anybody  (the  ancient  name 
nf  Nismes  "vas  Nemausa*). 

III. 

Synoptic  Table  op  the  Elements  of  the  Okbiti 
of  the  Satellites,  so  far  as  they  are  known.* 

1.   Tub  Moon. 


Mean  distance  from  earth    - 

Mean  sidereal  revolution 

Mean  synodical  ditto 

Exeentriciiy  of  orbit 

Mean  revolution  of  nodes    - 

Mean  revolution  of  apogee  - 

Mean  longitude  of  node  at  epoch     - 

Mean  longitude  of  perigee  at  ditto  - 

Mean  inclination  of  orbit    - 

Mean  longitude  of  moon  at  epoch   - 

Mass,  that  of  earth  being  1, 

Diameter  in  miles  - 

Density,  that  of  the  earth  being  1,  - 


60' -2734  3300 
27d -321661418 
29d  "5305887 15 
0054908070 
<>793"  -391080 
3232d  57/5343 

13°  53'    17"  7 
^66     10       7    -5 

5        8    39  -96 
118      17       8-3 
0-011364 
2164-6 
0-55654 


•  The  distances  are  expressed  in  equatorial  radii  of  the  primaries.  The 
epoch  is  Jan.  1.  1801,  unless  otherwise  expressed.  The  periods,  &c,  are  «.» 
pressed  in  mean  solar  dnys. 


APPENDIX. 


733 


< 

C/1 


13 

■  cc 


oo  «»  i-  o> 

co  cm  ^  w 

l»  05  oo  cm 

—  :>  x  f 


|1 

o  o 

Keg 

M 
h 


ZM 

o-,| 

Hi 
II 

5 


3*- 
■P  o 


»  co  >o  CM  ^* 

.    O  —  «5  S 
CM 

•  o  o  o  o 


o  O  C  O  O 


~  i-  i-  ii 
«i  v  cn  to 

«  «o« 

—  w 


Q   ©>  CO  O 
55  CO  00  1^ 

CO  00  00  *l* 

CM  —  •«•  co 
x  oo  oo  er,  <o 

^.—  so  i-  co 


< 
X 

i 
9 


c  d 
8.1 

a*    a 


T  51  '0  «£ 
»o  «•  C>  >o 


60 

E 

*  a 


O  O  O  GS 


oo  to  00  00  O  * 

.  #   CO  T   V  CM 

-    X  — I  00  O  <■  — 

1    ««5   T    f   V   T  CM 


H      i      } 

-a  tc  2 

s  «  — 
x  _ 

£-J  I 

li  _!; 
.£  "O    H 

H  5^ 

0  JJ  I 

if  J? 

<B  w 

1  »  .. 
Jhl 
"-•     01     U 

lJ    «  '— 


8  8  I  f  I  8     8 


t»<oieoo  ocotO 
ooifflaocflso 
co  —  co  co  >o  ^  ao  "-.  . 

GO  00  CO  00  "5  — •  r-  co 


I  "3. 

E-g 

on    a 


1  S 

•'TL 


o  .5        a.  E"  5 

•St  =£  8.S 

■s  Etrc  i 

*   §    3    St  —    - 


CM  CM  —   CM   T    it 

-r^cooo  —  «fl  -;  r-  eo 
B  CO  «i  —  TMt         >o 

_  CM  00  ~  r-  CM  CM  f»  r- 

—  CM         CM  -•  .""  cm 

■WO  —  —  w*»o-  <r. 

—  CM  i~ 


S  W  H  Q  OS  [H  I  JS 
"-'  cm  co  V  «r>  co  t-^  ot 


c  *J3  E 


[J 


-    3   -    S  - 


C  n  *e  IP  S 


-222 
K  .E  "2 

■sli  f 

3-.=    £    "" 

;-  a 

J  If 

_   u 

1  -5 


S    J! 

>. 

-3^3 

4>  .- 
U    > 

c  s 

si   =_: 


;^* 


J<    O  .«    n        .5 

o^i-,  &.-:  ■ 
>-  ^.  •—  —       o 

r?    .     &  '—    *£  1 

£  la  °-h'- 

If  is- 


734 


APPENDIX. 


p     -2 


< 

C 


-  V 

—  W 

3D     = 

»4 


o    bo^t  « 

«j    B   «~-    * 

s  5  *•  .r 

c    y  •—  _= 

■    *   s  o  Js 

«              o 

..   x 

"8  |jl 

1 

i  g  y  ji 

c 

si*! 

*o 

0!          r?    k 

e 

-ms  w 

•o 

ed  a 

in 
165' 

retr 

a) 

1 
1 

CO 

a  *c  tb-= 

o    C,  e 

55 

The  orbits  are  in 
58'  to  the  ecli 
node   is   in   loi 
Their    motion 
nearly  circular 

a! 

D 

c 

2 

O-  <M  » 

5 

"T   CO    Ol   ip 

c 

r-  O  (o  <>) 

—  —  ©» 

£ 

1 

tf  p  n  » 

e 

o 

»     6   00   —   <N 

3 

CN          «  i-i 

o 

e» 

8     OlOOtOh 

£ 

(N  <N  «C 

__ 

V 

_     <M  «  <0  — 

« 

"O 

in 

,   n  *eo  n 

i*ii 

■ 

Sue 

s 

2 

Ariel 
Umbr 
Titani 
Obero 

0 

—  o»  tn  v 

o 


II  < 


•2r§ 


4?s 


Ch      'So 


b5 


=    4> 

._   o 

60  s 

B    * 
O    « 

i-3  ^ 


—  o 

CI  «» 

„  2 
"  ? 

>  - 
S  8 

J*. 

«Bb 

.  o 

""  55 


APPENDIX. 


735 


- 
o 

< 

V 

Q 
O 

M 

« 

w 
Ph 

fa 
o 

00 

H 

w 

- 


-  s 

£2 


V  •w  *- 

00  0>  "0  Q  CO   0»    9* 

«  co  »o  «S  oi  :£  »; 

-i  O  n 


CO   <£> 


to  ■»  «o 

-H     «     V 


w-ss 


<o  <°  55 
S  «o  9  ~ 

«  *  «o  g  £  S  J 

1>   50 


P  1    «. 

O  o»  *  *>  **       >o 

w  •*  CO  H  ON  """  ir> 

00  a    o  oo    • 

*  «  Ol  O)  -  "•  O 

00          TT  O  — ' 


S  ?•  « 


Ql    a' 


s& 


00   ^ 

«o  —        -•  N 

c*  t-  >c  ^ 

oo  SI  -1     o 

to  *  "*  "5  a  5 

«o  «  o  «o  g; ,= 

?   •*   00  Q 


o>  ",  ^  OT  v 


3   S 

CO  ~ 


*-«    (73    V    _    ,_ 

c  oo  oo  2  £  oo 

^620 

t-  *»■  00         w 


5s 

2^ 


00  "*   o><£   (o    6C 

o  »-  A  K    h 

is--°sl 


»•  P  C8  -  it  *  a. 


•f   x 


0)    3 

81 


•-  it 
k  5 


-*- •£« 111 


£J1*J*M 

if-  E  u.o.£  uo-3 

=  ^  a  E  =  c  «  2 

o.       «  5--  6  c  c 

i d a»i*.i  S331 

o    W.S^  —  U.    3    - 

»!  J     a     O     „  =  JS 

>-    -  .C     _   .♦*  -rt    S      r 


.3-0  B«f 

«c  sico>.  :  t 

.a   o  ®  —  "  *  •* 

Si!?     ^1j- 

c£a,,.OC3i> 

3"rt!Ka<<jJ>oS 

^a  2"°  ='£'E.>: 

0  -5  5  o  tbcT  3 

_  ^:  «*.       '-'a*      — 
c~    o    «    ^  l.  —  "O 

••ooE-;k     «i 

JJ    2  "-3    O    es—    »Too 

"53  E|  S£  E  o 

1  2  S  «*2_  E  "3  o 

0  o5  O  *~        —    B 

-  3  ccS  " u  = : 

£  e       n  u  «•  b  ■"  Ji 

B    3     .  '>   w    *  "5    «    £ 

1  is       c—  -  jz  ^ 
cj   in   e  —  —  ' 


If"   a       ■* 

_   3  E       «  .5  ~ 
k  £  *•  r  o       csffi''' 


736 


API'KNDIX. 


l'.LKMENTS    OF    THE     OltB'T      OF     THE      KaHTII      AS      COMPUTED      BY     M.      T.FVKHKIER, 

roR   Intervals  or   10,000   Years,  from    1(0,000  Years  before  a.i>.    Iboo 
to  100,000   Years  after  that  date.* 


1 

Kpoch. 

Kxrentricity. 

Longitude  of 
.Perihelion. 

tarlina 

io.v 

Longitude  of  JJ. 



100,000 

00473 

O                ' 

316      18 

3 

45 

31 

0 

96 

34 

— 

90,(100 

00452 

340       2 

2 

42 

19 

76 

17 

— 

80,000 

00398 

4      13 

1 

18 

58 

73 

47 

— 

70,000 

0-0316 

27      22 

1 

13 

58 

136 

8 

— 

60,000 

00218 

46        8 

2 

36 

42 

136 

29 

— 

50,000 

0-0131 

50      14 

3 

40 

11 

116 

9 

— 

40,000 

00109 

28     36 

4 

3 

1 

91 

59 

— 

30,000 

00151 

5     50 

3 

41 

51 

66 

49 

— 

20  000 

0-0188 

44        0 

2 

44 

12 

41 

34 

— 

10,000 

00187 

78     28 

1 

24 

35 

16 

39 

0 

0-0168 

99     30 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

+ 

10,000 

0-0155 

134      14 

1 

14 

26 

148 

15 

+ 

20,000 

0-0047 

192     22 

2 

7 

46 

124 

29 

+ 

30,000 

0-0059 

318     47 

2 

S3 

19 

100 

29 

+ 

40,000 

00124 

6     25 

2 

27 

53 

75 

SI 

f 

50,000 

0-0173 

38        3 

1 

51 

54 

48 

13 

+ 

60,000 

0-0199 

64     SI 

0 

51 

52 

10 

47 

+ 

70,000 

0-0211 

71        7 

0 

34 

35 

220 

38 

+ 

80,000 

0-0188 

101      38 

1 

45 

40 

170 

15 

+ 

90,000 
100,000 

0-0176 
0-0189 

109      19 
114        5 

2 

40 

56 

139 

3 

3 

2 

57 

109 

57 

KxCENTRICITV    AND    LONGITUDE     OF     THE     PERIHELION     OF    THE     Earth's    OhbIT 

for    a    Million    of    Years    Past    and   to    Come,  as    computed    by    Mr. 
Croli,  {Phil.  Mat/.  April  1866). 


Number  of 
Years  before 
tCpOCll  1800. 

Kxccntricity. 

Longitude  of 
Perihelion. 

Number  of 
Year*  after 
Epoch  1800. 

Exrentricity. 

Longitude  of 
Perihelion. 

1,000,000 

00151 

o 

248 

2s> 

50,000 

001 73 

o 
38 

12 

950.000 

0-0517 

97 

51 

100,000 

00191 

114 

50 

900,000 

0-0102 

1S5 

2 

1 50.000 

0-0353 

201 

57 

850,000 

00747 

239 

28 

200,000 

00076 

303 

30 

800,000 

0-0132 

343 

49 

250.000 

00286 

350 

54 

750,000 

0-0575 

27 

18 

300.000 

00158 

179 

29      | 

700,000 

00220 

208 

13 

350,000 

00098 

201 

40 

650,000 

0-0226 

141 

29 

400.000 

0()429 

6 

9       1 

600,000 

0-0417 

32 

34 

450.000 

00231 

98 

s-      ! 

550,000 

00166 

251 

50 

500,000 

0-05S4 

157 

26 

500,000 

00388 

19S 

56 

550,000 

0-0259 

287 

31 

450,000 

0-0308 

356 

52 

600,000 

00395 

285 

43 

400,000 

00170 

290 

7 

650,000 

00169 

144 

3 

350,000 

0-0195 

182 

50 

700,000 

00357 

17 

12 

300,000 

0-0424 

23 

29 

750.(H)() 

0-019.5    . 

0 

53 

250,000 

00258 

59 

39 

800,000 

00639 

140 

98 

200,000 

0-0569 

168 

18 

850,000 

0-0144 

176 

41 

150,000 

0-0332 

242 

56 

900,000 

0-0659 

291 

!6 

100,000 

00473 

SI6 

2 

950,000 

0O086 

11.5 

lA      1 

50,000 

0OI31 

50 

3 

1 ,000,000 

00528 

57 

21 

0 

0-0168 

99 

30 

1 

*   t'oimaissaiice  des  Temps  pour  fan  1843 


Al'I'KXDIX. 


73* 


Elements  or   Ameroius   MKOTHtSa  since   1864. 




83 

Beatrice 

it 

P 

1389-78 

e 

I 

2-437244 

0*0859251 

o 

5 

0 

SO 

84 

Clio  - 

2-361823 

1325-77 

0-2361542 

9 

22 

255 

85 

lo      - 

2683884 

1579-14 

0-1908907 

11 

53 

9-7 

86 

Semele 

3*090786 

1984  73 

0  2049113 

4 

47 

44-6 

87 

Sylvia 

3  494110 

2385-66 

0-0823511 

10 

50 

56-9 

88 

Thislte 

2-768885 

1682-89 

0-16.51097 

5 

14 

30-1 

89 

Julia  - 

2-549835 

148719 

0-1803041 

16 

11 

25  5 

90 

Antiope 

3-138789 

203115 

0-1747166 

2 

16 

47  8 

91 

fligina 

2-491717 

1436-63 

0-0662013 

2 

9 

31-6 

92 

Uudina 

3-191618 

2082-65 

01031710 

9 

57 

30 

93 

Miner*,  a 

2-755910 

1671-07 

01 402670 

8 

36  31-8 

94 

Aurora 

3-160410 

2052-12 

0-088931--' 

8 

5 

18-5 

95 

Arethusa     - 

3*068786 

1963-58 

0-1465338 

12 

51 

1-5 

i      96 

iEgle 

3-054500 

1949-71 

0-1 402763 

16 

6 

31-1 

97 

Clotho 

2-668621 

159231 

0-2568941 

11 

44 

58  4 

98 

99 

100 

Ianthe 

2-684535 

1606-58 

0-1891891 

15 

32 

351 

Hecate 

2-993973 

1892-21 

01690456 

6 

9 

50-4 

101 

Helena 

2-573119 

1507-61 

01 394040 

10 

4 

19  5 

102 

Miriam 

2-662367 

1586-72 

0-2547668 

5 

6 

3-3 

103 

Hera 

2-702265 

1622-52 

0-0806707 

5 

21 

35-2 

104 

Clymene     - 

3-179809 

2071-09 

0-1973404 

2 

53 

267 

105 

Artemis 

2-379975 

1341-06 

0-1761972 

21 

38 

590 

1    106 
1 

Dione 

3-201010 

2091-84 

0-1950237 

4 

41 

33-2 

ft 

o 

„ 

83 

27 

S3 

31-2 

84 

337 

22 

11 

85 

203 

53 

27  0 

86 

87 

55 

521 

87 

76 

24 

4-6 

88 

277 

42 

52  5 

89 

311 

30 

11-7 

90 

71 

14 

59-6 

91 

11 

41 

34  8 

92 

102 

52 

32-7 

93 

5 

4 

11  4 

94 

4 

34 

36 -4 

95 

244 

22 

SI -4 

96 

322 

51 

4  3 

97 

160 

36 

34-8 

98 

354 

16 

43-2 

99 

100 

128 

16 

59  -3 

101 

343 

35 

01 

102 

211 

32 

43-2 

103 

135 

56 

56-4 

104 

43 

46 

421 

105 

187 

54 

1-8 

106 

62 

42 

38  9 

193 
339 
322 

28 
336 
308 
353 
301 

68 
333 
275 

44 

30 
164 

65 
147 

343 
328 
355 
326 

62 
242 

35 


49  32 
11  58 
35  52 
39  6 
59  9 

50  52 
17  8 

1  28 

54  3 

21  56 
38  16 
37  19 

22  34 
16  51 
S3  36 
43  7 

0 
40 

9 
15 
II 
36 
37 


46-1 
51  0 
10-2 
4-8 
55  4 
17-8 
53-6 


339 
353 
102 
39 
251 
304 
330 
351 
281 
278 
342 
159 
127 
275 
126 
150 


49 
48 
36 
12 
32 
59 
44 
44 
27 
25 
40 
47 
59 
11 
8 
25 


35  1 
43-6 
43  6 
571 
58-3 
21-7 
57-1 
29-6 
18  8 
58  8 
154 

3  2 
11-2 

51 
500 
16  9 


1866. 

1865- 

1867. 

1866. 

1866. 

1866. 

1866. 

1866. 
J  869. 

1867. 
1 1867. 

1870 
[1869. 

1870. 

1868. 

1868. 


Oct 

Nov. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

May. 

Aug. 

Aug. 

Oct. 

June. 

Jan. 

Oct. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Jan. 


1-5,  B 

ISO,  B. 

OO,  B 

20-0,  B. 

16  42,  B. 

4  -5,  B. 

31-0,  B. 

28  0,  B 

30  O,  B 

0-0,  B. 

2  0,  B 

0  0,  H. 

0  0,  B. 

0  0,  B. 

0-0,  B 

0  0,  B. 


316  7  52  7  1868.  Jul  v.  11-0,  B. 

346  33  18  1  1868.  Sept.  14  0,  B. 

303  28  54-OJ1868.  Jan.  OO,  B. 

0  2  161  11868.    Oct.  13  0,  B. 

18  24  14-21368.   Sept.  14-0,  B. 

348  54  8-0  1868.    Oct.  130,  B. 

22  25  0  2   1868.    Oct  110.  B. 


3   H 


788 


NOTES 


Names  of  Discoverers  and  Dates  of  Discovert. 


83 

Beatrice 

Caspar  is 

April  26,  1865. 

84 

Clio 

Luther 

Aug.  25,  1865. 

85 

Io 

Peters 

Sept.  19.  1865. 

86 

Semele 

Tietjen 

Jan.  4,  1866. 

87 

Sylvia 

Pogson 

May  16,  1866. 

88 

Thisbe 

Peters 

June  15,  1866. 

89 

Julia 

Stephan 

Aug.  6,  1866. 

90 

Antiope 

Luther 

Oct.  1,  1866. 

91 

iEgina 

Stephan 

-Nov.  4,  1866. 

92 

Undina 

Peters 

July  26,  1867. 

93 

Minerva 

Watson 

Aug.  24,  1867. 

94 

Aurora 

Watson 

Sept.  6.  1867. 

95 

Arethusa 

Luther 

Nov.  23,  1867. 

96 

^gle 

Coggia 

Feb.  17,  1868. 

97 

Clotho 

Tempel 

Feb.  17,  1868. 

98 

Ianthe 

Peters 

April  18,  1868. 

99 

Borelly 

May  28,  1868. 

100 

Hecate 

Watson 

July  11,  1868. 

101 

Helena 

Watson 

Aug.  15,  1868. 

102 

Miriam 

Peters 

Aug.  23,  1868. 

103 

Hera 

Watson 

Sept.  7,  1868. 

104 

Clymene 

Watson 

Sept.  13,  1868. 

105 

Arwmis 

Watson 

Sept   16,  1868. 

10« 

1/ioiie 

Watson 

Oct.  10,  1868- 

APPENDIX. 


/39 


CI  —  WJ  t-  W   «S  r-  CI 


■)  ji  tp  x  «5 

Ol  flO   T  00  Cf) 


— j  O  X  C  t-  - 
oiiot>«,«ijx-'  /,  OaatC-Nni- 
x~-«O'<rc0t*t©i-x>oxr^  —  v  v  r- 


_.  >o  a  <o  eo 


O   X 

X    °    — 

x  ^  x 

©  <N   C* 

£  Q  <*>  -- 
S5-5 


«  n  °* 


o  «i  o» 

wx  «; 

X  «0  <r 


<o  5 


^1 


So* 

T5  X 

fc  —  s 


■r    —      U    — 


«  ri       S3 

o        — 


.=  ■-  .«* 


—    B.8 

'•So 


.§  2  5 


*-r 


I  to* 

•3  8|£ 


•s  c 


2  ~  5 


111 

1  ft  » 

t£  -C    * 

£  >-    1 

a  o 

(52  1 

I 

3 

i  c  "2  _=  "9 

■  2*  1 

8  0*5  o 

lap  **       • 

is  -  J:  i- 

kS    3S 

JS  .2-5  !f 


.   w  k      b      V      « 

•   1"  U     j     >.   ' 

t:  ^  a.  o-  a 

S"o   1  .  6  o  c 


3  12 


741 


INDEX. 


H.B.  The  references  are  to  the  articles,  not  to  the  pages. 

. . .  attached  to  a  reference  number  indicates  that  the  reference  extend*  to  the  article  cited,  and 
sereral  subsequent  in  succession. 


Abkrratiox  of  light  explained,  329. 
Its  uranographical  effects,  333.  Of 
an  object  in  motion,  335  How  dis- 
tinguished from  parallax,  805.  Sys- 
tematic, 862. 

Aboul  We/a,  705. 

Acceleration,  secular,  of  moon's  mean 
motion,  740. 

Adams,  506.  767. 

Adjustment,  errors  of,  in  instruments, 
136.  Of  particular  instruments.  (See 
those  instruments.) 

jEtna,  portion  of  earth  visible  from,  32. 
Height  of,  32.  note. 

Ayathochs,  eclipse  of,  933.  b.,  and 
Table  of  Ems,  art.  926. 

Air,  rarefaction  of,  33.  Law  of  den- 
sity, 37.  Refractive  power  affected 
by  moisture.  41. 

Airy  (G.  B.,  Esq.),  his  results  respect- 
ing figure  of  the  earth,  220.  Re- 
searches on  perturbations  of  the 
earth  by  Venus,  726.  Rectification  of 
the  mass  of  Jupiter,  757. 

Albategnius,  430. 

AM,  821. 

Altitude,  used  to  find  time,  1:29. 

and  azimuth  instrument,  187. 

— — *,  equal,  method  of,  188. 

Andromeda,  nebula  in,  874. 

A  nyle  of  position,  204.  Ofsituation,31 1. 

Anyles,  measurement  of,  163.  167. 
Hour,  107. 

Anyular  velocity,  law  of,  variation  of, 
350. 

Anomalistic  year,  384. 

Anomaly  of  a  planet,  499. 

Annular  nebulae,  875. 

Antarctic  circle,  364.  382. 

Apex  of  aberration,  343.  Of  parallax, 
343.  Of  refraction,  343.  Solar,  854. 
Of  shooting  stars,  902.  904. 

Aphelion,  368 


Apogee,  368.  Of  moon,  406.  Period 
of  its  revolution,  687. 

Apsides,  406.  Revolution  of  lunar,  409. 
Motion  of,  investigated,  675.  Ap- 
plication to  lunar,  676...  Motion 
of,  illustrated  by  experiment,  692. 
Of  planetary  orbits,  694.  Libration 
of,  694.  Motion  in  orbits  very  near 
to  circles,  696.  In  excentric  orbits, 
697... 

Arago,  387.  395.  432.  776  J.  877. 

Arcs  of  meridian,  how  measured,  211. 
Measures  of  some,  216.  Russian, 
Indian,  and  French,  223,  a. ,  Note  D. 

Arctic  circle,  364.  382. 

Areas,  Kepler's  law  of,  352...,  490. 

Argelander,  his  researches  on  variable 
stars,  820...,  on  sun's  proper  mo- 
tion, 854. 

Aryo,  nebula;  in,  887.  Irregular  star  i\ 
in  constellation,  830.  896.  g.,  Note  K. 

Ariel,  551. 

Aristillus,  430. 

Ascension,  right,  108.  (See  Right  as- 
cension.) 

Asteroids,  their  existence  suspected 
preyious  to  their  discovery,  505. 
Appearance  in  telescopes,  525.  Gra- 
vity on  surface  of,  525.  Elements, 
Appendix,  Synoptic  Table.  Total 
mass  of,  inconsiderable,  525.  List 
of  discoverers,  and  dates  of  dis- 
covery.    (See  Synoptic  Tables  ) 

Astraa,  discovery  of,  505. 

Astrometer,  783. 

Astronomy.  Etymology,  1 1.  General 
notions,  11. 

Atmosphere,  constitution  of, 33...  Pos- 
sible limit  of.  36.  Its  waves,  37. 
Strata,  37.  Causes  refraction,  38. 
Twilight,  44.  Total  mass  of,  242. 
Of  Jupiter,  513.  Of  the  sun,  see 
Sun.     Of  the  moon,  431. 

At  raction  of  a  sphere,  446 — 450.  (  Set 
Gravitation. )     To  a  spheroid,  238. 


742 


INDEX. 


Augmentation  of  moon's  apparent  dia- 
meter. 404. 

Augustus,  his  reformation  of  mistakes 
in  the  Julian  calendar  (919.).  Era 
of,  926. 

Aurora  Borealis,  115. 

Australia,  excessive  summer  tempera- 
ture of,  369. 

Auzout,  158.  note. 

Averages  of  results,  their  use,  137. 

Axis  of  the  earth,  82.  Rotation  per- 
manent, 56.  Major,  of  the  earth's 
orbit,  373.  Of  sun's  rotation,  392. 
Polar,  its  exact  lentith,  223.  a  , 
Note  D.     Equatorial,  longer,  ib. 

Axis  of  a  planetary  orbit.  Momentary 
variation  of, earned  by  the  tangential 
force  only,  658.  660.  Its  variations 
periodical,  661...  Invariability  of. 
and  how  understood,  668. 

Azimuth,  103 — and  altitude  instru- 
ment, 187. 


B 


Babinet,  huitorviongi  ivimeter.Note  E. 
Ztoi/y,  hisobservation  of  annular  eclipse 

of  the  sun,  425.     His  beads,  425. 
Barometer,  nature  of  its  indication,  33. 

Use  in  calculating  refraction,  43. 

In  determining  heights,  287. 
Base,  measurement  of,  273. 
Beads,  Haily's,  425. 
Beer  and  Maedler,  their  work  on  the 

moon.  429- 
Belts  of  Jupiter,  512.    Of  Saturn,  514. 
Bessel,  his  results  respecting  the  figure 

of  the  earth,  220.    Discovers  paral- 
lax of  61  Cygni,  812. 
Biela's  comet,  579... 
Biol,  his  aeronautic  ascent,  32. 
Birt.  his  examination  of  lunar  craters, 

430,  a..  Note  H. 
Bissextile,  932.    Omar's  proposal  for 

its  periodical  omission.  Note  A.  on 

art,  926. 
Bode,  his  (so-called)  law  of  planetary 

distances,  505.   Violated  in  the  case 

of  Neptune,  507- 
Boguslawski,  remarkable  observation 

of  Halhy's  comet  by,  571.  note. 
Bohittnberyvr,  his  principle  of  collima- 

tion,  179. 
Bond,  Prof.,  his  observations  of  interior 

ring  of  Saturn,  521.    His  discovery 

of  an  eighth  satellite  of  Saturn,  548. 
Borda,  bis  principle  of  repetition,  198. 
Hoiirard,  his  suspicion  of  extraneous 

influence  on  Uranus,  760. 


Bincstrr  (  Sir  D.),  his  polarizing  eye- 
piece, 204.  d. 

B.  i'lt/t  geometric  system  of  weights 
mid  measures,  '22:5.  a..  Note  D. 

Broun,  his  torsion  gravimeter.  Note 
E. 


('. 


Casar.  bis  reform  of  the  Human  calen- 
dar, 917. 

Calendur,  Julian. 917.    G  regorian,  9 1 4. 

Calms,  equatorial,  244. 

Carrington,    solar    phenomenon    ob 
served   by,  387.  c,   Note   G.     His 
researches  on  the  sun's  spots,  il,. 

Cause  and  effect,  439.  and  note. 

Cavendish,  his  experiment,  776.  h 

Center  of  the,  earth,  80.  Of  the  sun,  462. 

of   gravity,    360.       Revolution 

about,  452.    Of  the  earth  and  moon, 
452.     Of  the  sun  and  eanh,  451. 

Centrifugal  force.  Elliptic  form  of  earth 
produced  by.  224.  Illustrated,  225. 
Compared  with  gravity,  229.  Of  a 
body  revolving  on  the  earth's  sur- 
face, 452. 

Ceres,  discovery  of,  505. 

Cftallis  (Prof.),  506.  note. 

Charts,  celestial,  111.  Construction 
of,  291  .   Bremiker's,  506.  and  note. 

Chinese  records  of  comets,  574.  Ot 
irregular  stars,  831. 

Chronometers,  how  used  for  detet min- 
ing differences  of  longitude,  255 

Circle,  arctic  and  antarctic,  95.  Verti- 
cal, 100.  Hour.  106.  Divided,  163 
Meridian,  174.  Reflecting,197.  Re 
peating,  198.  Galactic,  793.  Mural 
163. 168.  Arctic  and  antarctic,  364. 
312      's  co  ordinate,  181. 

Clamp,  163. 

Clarke  (Alvan),  his  detection  of  a 
companion  of  Sirius,859.  a..  Noted. 

Clarke  (Capt.  A.  H.),  his  computation 
of  the  dimensions  and  figure  of  the 
earth.  223.  a  ,  Nine  I). 

Clausen,  his  orbit  ot  comet  of  1843, 
596. 

Clepsydra,  150. 

Climate,  366...  Secular  changes  of, 
369.  A...,  701. 

Clock,  151.  Error  and  rate  of.  bow 
found,  253. 

Clockwork  applied  to  equatorial.   18*. 

(Jioidx.  greatest  height  of,  34.    Map  i 
lanic.892...    S.dar,  Note  O.  39".  dd. 

Clusters  of  stars,  864...  Globular.  867. 
Irregular,  869. 


INDEX. 


743 


Colli /nation,  line  of,  185. 

Collimator,  floating,  178.  Bohnen- 
berger's,  179. 

Coloured  stars,  851... 

Cohort,  his  maps,  284. 

Col'.res,  307. 

Comets,  554.  Seen  in  day-time,  555. 
590.  Tails  of,  556... 566.  599.  Ex- 
treme tenuity  of,  55N.  General  de- 
scription of.  560.  Motions  of,  and 
described,  561...  Parabolic,  564. 
Elliptic, 567...  Hyperbolic, 564.  Di- 
mensions of,  F,65.  Of  Halley,  567... 
Of  Caesar,  578.  OfEncke,576.  Of 
Biela,  579.  Its  subdivision  into  two, 
580.  OfFaye,  584.  Of  Lexell,585. 
Of  De  Vico,  586.  Of  Brorsen,  587. 
Of  Peters,  588.  Synopsis  of  elements 
(Appendix).  Increase  of  visible  di- 
mensions in  receding  from  the  sun, 
571.580.  Great,  of  1843,  589...  Its 
supposed  identity  with  many  others, 
594...  Interest  attached  to  subject, 
597.  Cometary  statistics,  and  con- 
clusions therefrom.  601.  Conclu- 
sions from  the  phenomena  of  their 
tails,  570.  Possible  cause  of  their 
acceleration  of  period,  570.  Heat 
sustained  by,  592.  Principal  dis- 
coverers of,  597.  Periodic,  form  two 
distinct  families,  601.  a.  Of  1680, 
573.  Of  1556,  =574.  Orbits  of,  iden- 
tical with  those  of  meteors,  905. 
%i. .;,/.,  Note  N. 

Commensuralnlity  (near)  of  mean  mo- 
tions: of  Saturn's  satellites,  550.  Of 
Uranus  and  Neptune,  669.  and  note. 
Of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  720.  Earth 
and  Venus,  726.      Effects  of,  719. 

Compensation  of  disturbances,  how  ef- 
fected, 719.  725. 

Compression  of  terrestrial  spheroid,  22 1 . 

Configurations,  inequalities  depending 
on,  655... 

Conjunctions,  superior  and  inferior, 
469.  473.  Perturbations  chiefly  pro- 
duced at,  713. 

Consciousness  of  effort  when  force  is 
exerted,  439. 

Congelations,  60.  301.  How  brought 
into  view  by  change  of  latitude,  52. 
Rising  and  setting  of,  58. 

Copemican  explanation  of  diurnal  mo- 
tion, 76.  Of  apparent  motions  of 
■tin  and  planets,  77. 

Correction  of  astronomical  observa- 
tions, 324...  — s.  Uranographical 
summary,  view  of,  342...  Order  of 
application  of,  345. 


Craters,  lunar,  their  great  sixe  ex- 
plained, 4 SO.  a.,  Note  H.  Models 
of  by  Mr.  Nasmyth,  437. 

Culminations,  125.  Upper  and  lower, 
126. 

Cycle,  of  conjunctions  of  disturbing 
and  disturbed  planets,  719.  Meto- 
nic,  926.  Callippic,  ib.  Solar,  921. 
Lunar,  922.  Of  indictions,  923.  Of 
eclipses,  426. 

Cyclones,  245.  a. 


1). 


Darkening  glasses,  204.  e. 

Dates,  Julian  and  Gregorian,  interval 
between,  how  computed,  927... 

Dawes  (  Rev.  W.  R. ),  his  mode  of  ob- 
serving solar  spots,  204.  e.  His  dis- 
covery of  the  sun's  interior  enve- 
lope, 389.  a.  His  observation  of 
interior  ring  of  Saturn,  521.  His 
discovery  of  bright  spots  on  Jupi 
ter's  belts,  512.  Of  an  eighth  satel 
lite  of  Saturn,  548. 

Day,  solar,  lunar,  and  sidereal,  143. 
Ratio  of  sidereal  to  solar,  305.  909. 
911.  Solar  unequal,  146.  Mean 
ditto,  invariable,  908.  Civil  and  as- 
tronomical, 147.      Intercalary,  916. 

Days  elapsed  between  principal  chro- 
nological eras,  926.  Rules  for  rec- 
koning between  given  dates,  927. 
Formula*  for,  Note  C.  Of  week  not 
the  same  over  the  globe,  257.  And 
nights,  their  inequality  explained, 
365. 

Dec/ivation,  105.  How  obtained,  295. 
Parallels  of,  113. 

Dejinitions,  82. 

Z)e/a7iWf''W.,Esq.),  his  strreographs  of 
the  moon,  430-  a.,  Note  H.  His  pho- 
tographs of  the  sun.  400  a.  His  veri- 
fication of  the  willow-leaved  struc- 
ture of  its  surface,  387.  a.,  Note  G. 

Degree  of  meridian,  how  measured,  210. 
...Error  admissible  in,  215.  Length 
of  in  various  latitudes,  216.  221. 

Density  of  earth,  how  determined,  776. 
a.  b. 

Densities  of  sun  and  planets,  508.  6. 
(  See  also  Synoptic  Table.) 

Dioweters  of  the  earth,  220,  221.  Of 
planets  synopsis,  Appendix.  {Sir 
also  each  planet.) 

Dilatation  of  comets  in  receding  from 
the  sun,  578 

Diminution  of  gravity  at  equator,  231. 

Dione,  548. 


7*4 


INDEX. 


Dip  of  horizon,  23. 

sector,  18,  19. 

Discs  of  stars,  816. 

Distance  of  the  moon,  403.;  the  sun, 
357.;  fixed  stars,  807.  812...;  of 
the  earth  and  planets  from  the  bun, 
hitherto  overrated,  correction  re- 
quired, 357.  a.,  Note  F. ;  polar,  105. 

Districts,  natural,  in  heavens,  302. 

Disturbing  forces,  455.  Of  sun,  on 
moon,  606.  Nature  of,  609,..  Ge- 
ueral  estimation  of,  611.  Nume- 
rical values,  612.  Unresolved  in 
direction,  614.  Resolution  of,  in 
two  modes,  615.  618.  Effects  of 
each  resolved  portion,  616...  On 
moon,  expressions  of,  676.  Geo- 
metrical representations  of,  676.  7 1 7. 

Diurnal  motion  explained,  58.  Pa- 
rallax, 339.     Rotation,  144. 

Double  refraction,  202.  Image  mi- 
crometer, a  new,  described, 203.  Co- 
met, 5fiO.     Nebulae,  878. 

Double  Stars,  898...  Specimens  of 
each  class,  836.  Orbital  motion 
of,  839.  Subject  to  Newtonian  at- 
traction, 843.  Orbits  of  particular, 
843.  Dimensions  of  these  orbits, 
844.848.  Coloured,  851...  Appa- 
rent periods  affected  by  motion  of 
light,  863. 

Dove,  his  law  of  temperature,  370.  Of 
rotation  of  winds,  '245.  a. 

Drainage  basins,  289. 


E. 

Earth.  Its  motion  admissible,  15. 
Spherical  form  of,  18.  22...,  419. 
Optical  effect  of  its  curvature,  25. 
Diurnal  rotation  of,  52.  Uniform.  56. 
Permanence  of  its  axis,  57.  Figure 
spheroidal,  207.  219...  Dimensions 
of,  209.  210.  220.  233.  a.,  Note  I). 
Elliptic  figure  a  result  of  theory, 
229.  Temperature  of  surface,  how 
maintained,  336.  Appearance  as 
seen  from  moon,  4S6.  Velocity  in 
its  orbit,  474.  Disturbance  by  Ve- 
nus, 726.  Density  of.  776.  a.  b. 
S  >lid  content  of,  776.  /. 

Eclipses,  411...  Solar,  420,  Note  O. 
Lunar,  421...  Annular, 425.  Periodic 
return  of,  426.  Number  possible  in 
a  year,  426.  Of  Jupiter's  satellites, 
266.  538.  Of  Saturn's,  549.  Total 
of  sun,  phenomena  of,  395.  Ancient, 
their  use  in  fixing  dates,  933... 


Elliptic,  305...  Its  plane  slowly  vari- 
able, 306.  Cause  of  this  variation 
explained,  640.  Poles  of,  307.  Li- 
mits, solar,  412.  Lunar,  527.  Ob- 
liquity of,  305,  306. 

Egyptians,  ancient,  chronology,  912. 

Elements  of  a  planet's  orbit,  493.  Va- 
riations of,  652...  Of  double  star  or- 
bits, 843.  Synoptic  table  of  planet- 
ary, &c.  Appendix. 

Ellipse,  variable,  of  a  planet,  653.  Mc  - 
nientary  or  osculating,  C54. 

Elliptic  motion  a  consequence  of  gra- 
vitation, 446.  Lawsof,489...  Their 
theoretical  explanation.  491. 

Ellipticity  of  the  Earth,  208.  221.  Of 
its  meridians.  223.  a..  Note  D.  Of 
its  equator,  ib.     Of  Jupiter,  512.  a. 

Elongation,  33 1 .  Greatest,  of  Mercury 
and  Venus,  467. 

Enceladus,  548.,  note. 

Encke,  comet  of,  57  6.  Hrs  hypothesis 
of  the  resistance  of  the  ether,  577. 

Epoch,  one  of  the  elements  of  a  planet's 
orbit,  496.  Its  variation  not  inde- 
pendent, 730.  Variations  incident 
on,  731.  744. 

Equation  of  light,  335.  Of  the  center, 
375.  Of  time,  379.  Lunar,  452. 
Annual,  of  the  moon,  738.  Men- 
strual, of  the  sun,  528. 

Equator.  84.  1 12.  Of  the  earth  some 
what  elliptic,  223.  a.,  Note  D. 

Equatorial,  185. 

instrument,  84.  112. 

calms,  224. 

Equilibrium,  figure  of,  in  a  rotating 
body,  224.  Exemplified  by  an  ex- 
pel iment,  225 

Equinoctial,  97.  1 13.    Time,  148.  935. 

Equinox.  293.  303.  307.  362. 

Equinoxes,  precession  of.  318.  Its  ef- 
fects, 313.  In  what  consisting, 3 14... 
Its  physical  cause  explained,  642... 

Eras,  chronological  list  of,  926. 

Erratic  stars.  297. 

Eirors,  classification  of,  133.  Instru- 
mental, 135...  Of  adjustment,  136. 
Their  detection,  140.  Destruction 
of  accidental  ones  by  taking  means. 
137.     Of  clock,  how  obtained,  293. 

Establishment  of  &  port,  754. 

Ether,  resistance  of,  577. 

Evection  of  moon,  748. 

E>olute  of  ellipse,  219,  220. 

Excentricitics,  stability  of  Lagrange's 
theorem  respecting,  701. 

Excentricity  in  a  divided  circle,  how 
eliminated,  141.    Earth's  orbit,  354. 


INDEX. 


745 


1'ast  and  future,  see  tables  in  Ap- 
pendix. How  ascertained,  377.  Of 
the  moon's,  405.  Momentary  per- 
turbation of,  investigated,  670.  Ap- 
plication to  lunar  theory,  688.  Va- 
riations of,  in  orbits  nearly  circular, 
696.  In  excentric  orbits.  697  Per- 
manent inequalities  depending  on, 
719. 


Fucuue  of  the  sun,  388.  Explained, 
395.  a. 

Faye,  comet  of,  584.  and  Appendix. 

Field  of  view,  160. 

Fixed  stars.      See  Stars. 

Fizeau,  his  measure  of  the  velocity  of 
light.  545. 

Flora,  discovery  of,  505. 

Focus,  upper.  Its  momentary  change 
of  place,  670.  671.  Path  of,  in  virtue 
of  both  elements  of  disturbing  force, 
704.  Traced  in  the  case  of  the 
moon's  variation,  706...  And  par- 
allactic inequality,  712.  Circulation 
of.  about  a  mean  situation  in  planet- 
ary perturbations,  727. 

Force,  metaphysical  conception  of,  439. 

Forced  vibration,  principle  of,  650. 

Forces,  disturbing.  See  Disturbing 
force. 

FohcuuU,  his  pendulum  experiment, 
245.  c  His  gyroscope,  245.  A.  H>' 
determination  of  the  velocity  ol 
light,  357.  a..  Note  F. 

Friction  as  possibly  a  source  of  the 
sun's  heat,  400."  905.  a...,  387  c  c. 
Note  G. 


Galactic  circle,  793.   Polar  distance,  ib. 

Galaxy  composed  of  stars,  302.  Sir 
W.  HerschePs  conception  of  its  form 
and  structure,  786.  Distribution  of 
stars  generally  referable  to  it,  786. 
Its  course  among  the  constellations, 
787...  Difficulty  of  conceiving  its 
real  form,  792.  Telescopic  analysis 
of,  797.  In  some  directions  unfa- 
thomable, in  others  not,  798. 

Gaffe  (  Dr. ).  506.  Finds  Neptune  iwi 
place  indicated  by  theory,  768.  First 
notices  the  interior  ring  of  Saturn, 
522. 


Galloway,  his  researches  on  the  suti's 
proper  motion,  855. 

Gatcoigne,  158. 

Gaaparis  (Sig.  De),  discovers  a  new 
planet  (Appendix). 

Gauging  the  heavens,  793. 

Geocentric  longitude,  503.  Place,  371. 
497. 

Geodesical  measurements, — their  na- 
ture. 247. 

Geography,  111.  129...  205... 

Glaisher,  his  balloon  ascent,  32. 

Glasses,  darkening,  204.  c. 

Globe,  artificial,  an  experiment  with, 
245.  j 

Globular  clusters,  865-  Their  dynami- 
cal stability,  866.  Specimen  list  of, 
867. 

Golden  number,  922. 

Goodricke,  iiis  discovery  of  variable 
stars,  821. 

Goldschmidt.  (See  Asteroids.)  His 
observations  of  Sirius,  859.  a.,  Note 
J. 

Gravitation,  how  deduced  from  phseno- 
mena,  444...  Elliptic  motion  aeon- 
sequence  of,  490... 

Gravity,  center  of,  see  Center  of  gravity. 

Gravity  diminished  by  centrifugal 
force,  23 1 .  Measures  of,  statical,  'J34. 
Dynamical,  235.  Force  of,  on  the 
moon,  433...  On  bodies  at  surlace 
of  the  sun,  440.  Of  other  planets, 
see  their  names. 

Greenwich,  latitude  of,  123. 

Gregorian  reform  of  calendar,  915. 

Gyroscope,  245.  A... 


H. 

Habitability  of  the  moon,  436.  a,  b. 

Hadley,  his  sextant,  194.  His  expla- 
nation of  the  trade  winds.  (Set 
Winds.) 

Hallty.  His  comet,  567.  Notices 
acceleration  of  moon's  motion,  740. 
First  notices  proper  motions  of  the 
stais,  852. 

Hansen.  Hisdetection  of  long  inequa- 
lities in  the  moon's  motions,  745... 

Hording  discovers  Juno,  505. 

Harvest  moon,  428.  b. 

Heat,  supply  of,  from  sun  alike  in 
summer  and  winter,  368.  Howatfeci- 
ed  by  changes  in  the  earth's  orbit, 
369.  b...    How  kept  up,  400.   Sun'i 


746 


INDEX. 


»xpenditure  of, estimated,  397.  Re- 
ceivea  from  the  sun  by  different 
planets,  508.  Endured  by  comets 
in  perilielio,  592. 

Hebe,  discovery  of,  505. 

Heights  above  the  sea,  how  measured, 
286.     Mean  of  the  continents,  289. 

Heliocentric  place,  372.  498   500. 

Heliometer,  201. 

Helioscope,  204.  e. 

Hemispheres,  terrestrial  and  aqueous, 
281. 

Henche  discovers  Hebe  and  Astra-a, 
505. 

Henderson.,  his  determination  of  the 
parallax  of  a  Centauri,  807. 

Herschel  (Sir  Wm.),  discovers  Uranus., 
595,  and  two  satellites  of  Saturn, 
548.  His  method  of  gauging  the 
heavens,  793.  Views  of  the  struc- 
ture of  the  Milky  Way,  786.  Of 
nebular  subsidence,  and  sidereal  ag- 
gregation, 869.  874.  His  catalogues 
of  double  stars,  835.  Discovery  of 
their  binary  connexion,  839.  Of 
the  sun's  proper  motion,  854.  Clas- 
sifications of  nebulae,  868.  879.  note. 

Herschel  (Miss  C),  comets  discovered 
by,  597.    Nebula  discovered  by,  874. 

Herschel  (Prof.  A.  S.),  his  observations 
of  meteors,  Note  N.  905.  aa.,jj. 

Herschel  (Lieut.  J.),  his  observations 
of  nebula,  Note  K.  896.  g.,  896  /*  h. ; 
of  solar  eclipses,  Note  O. 

Hind,  his  calculation  of  the  return  of 
comets,  574.  Classification  of  comets, 
601. 

Hipparchvs,  281. 

Hodgson,  his  observations  of  a  pheno- 
menon in  the  sun,  387.  a.,  Note  G. 

Horizon,  22.  Dip  of,  23.  195.  Ra- 
tional and  sensible.  74.  Celestial, 
98.  113.      Artificial,  173. 

Horizontal  point  of  a  mural  circle,  how 
determined,  175. 

Horrockes,  158. 

TTour  circles,  136.  113.     Glass,  150. 

JIuygins  (  VV.,  Esq. ),  his  observations  on 
new  star  in  Corona,  «31.  ;  on  the 
spectra  of  nebulae,  Note  K.  896. 
h  h  ;  of  the  red  prominences  project- 
ing from  the  sun,  Note  O  ;  of  the 
tails  of  comets,  Note  O.  395.  d  d ; 
of  Sirius,  Note  J.  859.  b  b. 

Humboldt,  his  determination  of  the 
mean  heights  of  continents,  289. 

Hurricanes,  245.  b, 

Flyptrion,  518. 


I. 


Iupetus,  548. 

Illumination  of  field  of  view,  204.  a. 
Red,  its  advantages,  204.  b.  Of 
wires,  204  b. 

Immersions  and  emersions  of  Jupiter's 
satellites,  538... 

Inch,  British,  remarkable  relation  of 
to  the  length  of  the  earth's  axil  of 
rotation,  223.  a.,  Note  D. 

Inclination  of  the  moon's  orbit,  406. 
Of  planets' orbits  disturbed  by  ortho- 
gonal force,  619.  Physical  impor- 
tance of,  as  an  element,  632.  Mo- 
mentary variation  of, estimated,  6:53. 
Criterion  of  momentary  increase  or 
diminution,  635.  Its  changes  peri- 
odical and  self-correcting,  636.  Ap- 
plication to  case  of  the  moon.  638. 

Inclinations,  stability  of,  Lagrange's 
theorem,  639.  Analogous  in  their 
perturbations  to  excentricities,  699. 

Indictions,  923. 

Inequality.  Parallactic  of  moon,  71-'. 
Great,  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  720... 

Inequalities,  independent  of  excentri- 
city,  theory  of,  702...  Dependent 
on,  719. 

7««r/-«wen<-making,  its  difficultit-s,l 3 1. 
Equatorial.  185.    Alt-azimuth,  187. 

Instrumental errors, how  detected,  1 39.. . 

Instruments,  theory  of,  140... 

Intercalation,  916. 

Iris,  discovery  of,  505... 

Iron,  meteoric,  888. 

his.     (See  table  of  Asteroids. ) 

J. 

James  (Sir  H.),  his  projection  of  the 
sphere.  283.  His  measure  of  at- 
traction of  Arthur's  Seat,  776.  e. 

Julian  period,  924.  Date,  930.  Re- 
formation,  918 

Juno,  discovery  of,  503. 

Jupiter,  physical  appearance  and  de- 
scription of"  511.  Klli|)ticity  of, 
512.  Belts  of,  512.  Gravity  on 
surface,  508.  Satellites  of.  .510. 
535.  Their  use  for  determining 
longitudes.  266.  Seen  without  sa- 
telhtes,  543.  Density  of,  50S.  b. 
Recommended  as  a  photometric 
standard,  783.  Elements  of,  etc. 
{See  Synoptic  Table,  Appendix.) 


INDEX. 


747 


Jnpitf  and  Sut»ni,  'heir  nmtti.il  per- 
IllrtWliiilH.  "00.  720... 

K. 

Kater,  his  mode  of  measuring  small 
intervals  of  time,  150.  His  colli- 
mator, 178. 

Kepkr,  liis  laws,  352.  487.  4:59.  Their 
physical  interpretation,  490... 

L. 

Lmygbig  <-f  tidrs.  753. 
Lagranyt.  nis  theorems  respecting    the 
stability  ol   the   planetary  system, 
639.  6  69.  701. 

Laplace  accounts  for  the  secular  acce- 
leration of  the  moon,  740. 

Carina,  eclipse  of,  933.  And  Table. 
920. 

Ltisstll,  his  observation  of  spots  on 
Jupiter's  belts,  512.  His  discovery 
of  Ariel  and  Uu.brL  1,  557.  Of  an 
eighth  satellite  of  Saturn,  Hype- 
rion, 548.  His  observations  at 
Malta,  551 

Latitude,  terrestrial,  88.  Parallels  of, 
89.  How  ascertained,  1 19.  129.  Ho- 
mer's mode  of  obtaining,  248.  On  a 
spheroid,  247.  Celestial,  308.  He- 
liocentric, how  calculated,  500.  Geo- 
centric. 503.  ( )f  a  place  invariable, 
31.     Of  Greenwich,  123. 

Laws  of  nature  how  arrived  at,  139 
Subordinate,  appear  first  in  form  of 
errors,    139.     Kepler's,  352.  487... 

I  .cap-year.  917. 

Level,  spirit,  176  Lines,  289.  Sea. 
285.     Strata,  287. 

Leverrier,  506,  507.  767. 

Lexell,  comet  of,  585. 

Libration  of  the  moon,  435.  How 
availed  of  for  stcreoscopy,  430.  a., 
Note  H.     Of  apsides,  694. 

Light,  abcrrati'  >n  of,  33 1 .  Velocity  of, 
331.  How  ascertained,  545.  Over- 
rated, its  correction,  357.  a.,  Note  F. 
Equation  of,  335  Extinction  of,  in 
traversing  space,  798.  Distance  mea- 
sured by  its  motion,  802...  Of  certain 
Mam  compared  with  the  sun,  817... 
Effect  of  its  motion  in  altering  ap- 
parent period  of  a  double  star,  863. 
Zodiacal,  897. 

Limit*,  ecliptic.    {See  Ecliptic  limits.) 

Local  time,  252. 

Lockyer  (J.  N.,  Esq.),  his  spectro- 
scopic observations,  Note  O. 


/.ii/iriiianii,  hi>  charts  t.f  the  moon,  4-t7. 

Li'iidim,  center  of  the  terrestrial  hemi- 
sphere, 284. 

Longitude,  terrestrial,  90.  How  deter- 
mined, 121.  251...  By  chronometers, 
255.  By  signals,  264.  By  electric 
teJegraph.  262  By  shooting  stars, 
265.  By  Jupiter's  satellites,  &c,  266. 
By  lunar  observations,  2C7...  Celes- 
tial, 308.  Mean  and  true,  375.  He- 
liocentric, 500.  Gc<>centric,372. 503. 
Ol  Jupiter's  satellites,  curious  rela- 
tions of,  5  42. 

Lunar  distances,  367...  Volcanos  and 
craters.  430.  a..  Note  H. 

Lunation  (synodic  revolution  of  the 
moon),  its  duration,  418. 


M 


Muclear,  his  measurement  of  arc  at 
the  Cape,  2.'0.  Hi-  rediscovery  ol 
d' Arrest's  com  t.  601.  It. 

Magellanic  clouds,  892... 

Magnetic  storm,  remarkable,  387.  a. 
Note  G. 

Magnetism,  terrestrial,  connected  with 
spots  on  the  sun,  394.  c. 

Magnitudes  of  stars,  780...  Common 
and  photometric  scales  of,  780... 
And  Appendix. 

Main,  his  observation  of  Saturn,  522.  a. 

Maps,  geographical,  construction  of, 
273.  Celestial,  290...  Of  the  moon, 
437.  Projections  used  in,  246. 280... 

Ma>k,  meridian.  19<>. 

Mars.  phas.  s  ol,  484.  Gravity  on  sur- 
face, 508.  Continents  and  seas  of, 
510.  Elements  (Appendix),  no- 
tation on  its  axis,  510 

Maskelyne,  his  measure  of  attraction  of 
a  mountain,  776.  e. 

Masses  of  planets  determined  by  their 
satellites,  532.  By  their  mutual 
perturbations,  7"'7.  Ot  Jupiter's 
satellites,  758.  Of  the  moon,  759. 
Of  the  sun  and  planets,  over-esti- 
mated, correction.  3;  7.  a.,  Note  F. 

Mean  motions  of  Jupiter's  satellites, 
singular  relation  of,  542.  Do.  of 
Saturn's,  550. 

Menstrual  equation,  528. 

Mercator's  projections,  281.  283. 

Mtrcury,  synodic  revolution  of,  472. 

Velocity  in  orbits,  474.    Station. iry 

points  of,  476.  Phascs,477.  Greatest 

elongations,  482.     Transits  of,  483. 

I      Heat  received  from  >un.  508.    Phy- 


748 


INDEX. 


sieal   appearance   and   description, 
509.     Elements  of  (Appendix). 

Meridian,  terrestrial,  85.  Celestial,  101. 
Line,  87.  190.  Circle,  174.  Mark, 
190.  Arc,  how  measured,  210.  Arcs, 
lengths  of,  in  various  latitudes,  216. 
Length  of  a  degree  of,  in  feet,  221. 

Messier,  his  catalogue  of  nebulae,  865. 

Mtteors,898.  Periodical, 900...  Heights 
of,  904.  Recent  discoveries  respect- 
ing, Note  N.  Of  Aug.  10  and  Nov. 
13,  their  orbits,  905.  H.jj.,  Note  N. 

Metis,  discovery  of,  505. 

Michell,  his  invention  of  the  torsion- 
balance,  776.  h.  Its  application  to 
measure  density  of  the  earth,  776.  i. 
His  speculation*  on  the  distribution 
of  stars,  833. 

Micrometers,  199...  Double  image, 
200...     Position,  204. 

Milky  way.     (See  Galaxy,  302.) 

Mimas,  550.,  and  note. 

Mines,  oscillations  of  pendulum  in, 833. 

Mir  a  Ceti,  «20. 

Mitchell  (Miss),  her  discovery  of  a 
comet,  558.  597. 

Month,  lunar,  418.  934.  note. 

Moon,  her  motion  among  the  stars,  401. 
Distance  of,  403.  Magnitude  and 
horizontal  parallax,  404.  Augmen- 
tation, 404.  Her  orbit,  405.  Revo- 
lution of  nodes,  407.  Apsides,  409. 
Occultation  of  stars  by,  414.  Phases 
of,  4 1 6.  Brightness  of  surface.  4 1 7., 
note.  Redness  in  eclipses,  422.  Si- 
dereal and  synodic  revolution,  418. 
Physical  constitution  of,  429...  Des- 
titute of  sensible  atmosphere,  431. 
Mountains  of,  430.  Volcanic  cra- 
ters of,  430.  a.,  Note  H.  Climate, 
431...  Inhabitants,  434.  Hal >i la- 
bility, 436.  a,  b.  Libration,  435. 
Visible  in  total  eclipse,  424.  note. 
Harvest,  428.  b.  Influence  on  wea- 
ther, 432.  and  note.  Rotation  on 
axis,  435.  Appearance  from  earth, 
436.  Maps  and  models  of  437, 430.  a. 
Stereographic  representation  of,  ib. 
Real  form  of  orbit  round  the  sun, 
452.  Gravity  on  surface,  508.  Her 
mass  and  density.  (Sec  Synoptic 
Table  of  Elements,  III.)  Motion  of 
her  nodes  and  change  of  inclination 
explained.  638...  Motion  of  apsides, 
676...  Variation  of  excentricity, 
688...  Parallactic  inequality,  712. 
Annual  equation,  738.  Evcction, 
748.  Variation,  705...  Tides  pro- 
duced by,  751. 


Motion,  apparent  and  real.  15.  Diur- 
nal, 52.  Parallactic,  68.  Relative 
and  absolute,  78...  Angular,  how 
measured,  149.  Proper,  of  start, 
852...    Of  sun.  854. 

Mountains,  their  proportion  to  the 
globe,  29.  Of  the  moon,  430.  At- 
traction of,  776.  d. 

Mowna  Koa,  32. 

Mural  circle,  168. 

N. 

Nabonassar,  era  of,  926. 

Nadir,  99. 

Nasmyth  ( Jas.,  Esq),  his  discovery  cl 
the  willow-leaved  structure  of  the 
sun's  photosphere,  387.  a ,  Note  G. 
His  model  of  lunar  craters.  Note  L 

Nebula,  classifications  of,  868.  879. 
note.  Law  of  distribution,  868. 
Resolvable,  870.  Elliptic,  873  Of 
Andromeda,  874.  Annular,  875. 
Planetary,  876.  Coloured,  ib.  Dou- 
ble, 878.  Of  sub-regular  forms,  881, 
882.  Irregular,  883.  Of  Orion, 
885.  Of  Argo,  887.  Of  Sagit- 
tarius. 888.  OfCygnus,  891.  Miss- 
ing, 896.  a.,  Note  K.  Variable,  ib. 
General  catalogue  of,  ib.  Spectro- 
scopic observations  of,  Note  K. 

Nehvhtr  hypothesis.  872. 

Nebulous  matter,  871.  Stars,  880. 
'  Neptune,  discovery  of,  506  768.  Per- 
turbations produced  on  Uranus  by, 
analysed,  765...  Place  indicated  by 
theory,  767.  Elements  of,  771... 
Perturbing  forces  of,  on  Uranus, 
geometrically  exhibited,  773.  Their 
effects,  774...  Its  periodic  time,  774. 

Newton,  his  theory  of  gravitation,  490 
...ft  passim. 

Nodes  of  the  sun's  equator,  390.  Of 
the  moon's  orbit,  407.  Passage  of 
planets  through,  460.  Of  planetary 
orbits.  495  Perturbation  of,  620... 
Criterion  of  their  advance  or  recess, 
622.  Recede  on  the  disturbing  or- 
bit. 624...  Motion  of  the  moon's, 
theory  of,  638.  Analogy  of  their 
variations  to  those  of  perihelia, 
699. 

Nomenclature  of  Saturn's  satellites, 
548.,  note. 

Nonagesimal  point,  how  found,  310. 

Noon,  mean  and  apparent,  378. 

Normal  disturbing  force  and  its  effect  -. 
618.  Action  on  excentricity  and 
ocvihelion,  673.     Action  on  lunar 


1M.IA. 


749 


apsides.  676.  Of  Neptune  on  Ura- 
nus, its  effects,  775. 

Nubecula,  major  and  minor,  892... 

Number,  golden.  922. 

Nutation,  in  what  consisting,  321. 
Period,  322  Common  to  all  celes- 
tial bodies,  323.  Explained  on  phy- 
sical principles.  648.  Mode  of  cor- 
recting for,  325. 


O. 

Oberon,  551. 

Object  glass,  divided,  201. 

Objects,  test  for  telescopes,  836. 

Obliquity  of  ecliptic,  303.  Produce! 
the  variations  of  season,  362. 
Slowly  diminishing,  and  why,  640. 

Observation,  astronomical,  its  pecu- 
liarities, 138. 

Occultation,  perpetual,  circle  of,  113. 
Of  a  star  by  the  moon,  413...  Of 
Jupiter's  satellites  by  the  body 
541.     Of  Saturn's,  549. 

Others  discovers  Pallas  and  Vesta,  505. 
His  hypothesis  of  the  partial  opacity 
of  space,  798. 

Omar,  his  proposal  for  a  rule  for  bis- 
sextiles, Note  A.,  926. 

Opacity,  partial,  of  space,  798. 

Oscillations,  forced  principle  of,  650. 

Orbits  of  planets,  their  elements  (Ap- 
pendix) of  double  stars,  843.  Of 
comets.     (See  Comets.) 

Orthogonal  disturbing  force,  and  its, 
effects,  616.  619. 

Orthographic  projection,  280. 

P. 

Palitzch  discovers  the  variability  of 
Algol,  821. 

Pallas,  discovery  of,  505. 

Palm  trees,  their  disappearance  from 
Judaea,  369.  c. 

Parallactic  instrument,185  Inequality 
of  the  moon,  712.  Of  planets,  713. 
Unit  of  sidereal  distances,  804.  Mo- 
tion, 68- 

Parallax,  70.  Geocentric  or  diurnal, 
339.  Heliocentric,  341.  Horizontal, 
355.  Of  the  moon,  404.  Of  the 
sun,  357  479.  481.  Over-estimated, 
its  probable  correction,  357,  a., 
Note  F.  Of  Mars,  ih.  Annual,  of 
stars,  800.  How  investigated,  805... 
Of  particular  stars.  812,  813.  815. 
Systematic,  862.  Effect  of,  on  lunar 
distances,   271.      As   a   uraw  gra- 


phical correction,  341.    Calculation 
of,  338. 

Paris,  longitude  of,  262. 

Peak  of  Teneriffe,  32. 

Pendulum- clock,  89.  A  measure  of 
gravity,  285. 

Pendulum  used  as  a  measure  of  gra- 
vity, 235.  Seconds,  length  of,  225 
Foucault's,  245.  c...  Used  to  mea- 
sure density  of  the  earth,  776./,  g. 

Penumbra,  420.  Of  solar  spots.  (See 
Spots.) 

Perigee,  368.  a.     Of  the  moon,  406. 

Perihelia  and  excentricities,  theory  of, 
670... 

Perihelion,  368.     Of  the  earth,  its  pe- 
riod of  revolution,  366.  b.     Effect 
of  its  revolution  on  eeasons,  369.  b. 
Longitude  of,  495.   Passage,  496. 
Heat  endured  by  comets  in,  592. 

Period,  Julian,  924.  Of  Planets  (A  p.) 

Periodic  time  of  a  body  revolving  at  the 
earth's  surface,  442.  Of  planets,  how 
ascertained,  486.  Law  of,  488.  Of  a 
disturbed  planet  permanently  al- 
tered,  734... 

Periodical  stars,  820...  List  of,  825. 

Perspective,  celestial,  114. 

Perturbations,  602...  Of  Uranus  by 
Neptune,  767... 

Peters,  his  researches  on  parallax,  815. 
On  proper  motions  of  stars,  859. 

Phases  of  the  moon  explained,  4 1 6. 
Of  Mercury  and  Venus,  465.  477. 
Of  superior  planets,  484. 

Photographic  representation  of  the 
moon,  457. 

Photometric  scale  of  star  magnitudes 
780. 

Photometry  of  stars,  783. 

Piazzi  discovers  Ceres,  505. 

Picard,  158. 

Piddington  on  Cyclones,  245.  d. 

Pigott,  variable  stars  discovered  by, 
824... 

Places,  mean  and  true,  374.  Geometric 
and  heliocentric,  371.  497. 

Planetary  nebulae,  876...  Note  K. 

Planets,  299.  455.  Apparent  motions, 
457...  Stations  and  retrograda- 
tions,  459.  Reference  to  sun  as 
their  center,  462.  Community  of 
nature  with  the  earth,  463.  Ap- 
parent diameters  of,  464.  Phases 
of,  465.  Inferior  and  superior,  476. 
Transits  of  (see  Transit).  Motions 
explained,  468.  Distances,  how 
concluded,  471.  Periods,  how  found, 
472.  Synodical  revolution,  472.486 


750 


INDEX. 


Superior,  their  Mat  ions  And  retrogra- 
datioii8,  485.  Magnitude  of  orbits, 
how  concluded,  485.  Elements  of. 
495.  (See  Appendix  for  Synoptic 
Table.)  Densities.  508.  Physical 
peculiarities,  &c,  5o'.i...  Illustration 
of  their  relative  sizes  and  distances, 
526.  Division  into  classes,  525.  a. 
Plaiitamour,  his  calculations  respecting 

the  double  comet  of  Biela,  583. 
Pleiades,  865.     Assigned  by   Madler 
as  the  central  point  of  the  sidereal 
system,    861.      Bright    nebula  dis- 
covered in,  896.  a..  Note  K. 
Plumb-line, direction  of,  23.  Useof,  in 
observation,  175.  On  a  spheroid,  i  1 9. 
/'eysoR,hisobscrvaiion  of  variable  stars, 
825.    Discovery  of  a-teroids.    {8c-> 
Synoptic  Table.)     His  observation 
of  a  temporary  star  in   a  globular 
cluster,  896.  «.,  Note  K. 
Polar  distance,  105.   Point,  on  a  mural 

circle,  170.  172. 
Polarization,  387. 
Polarizing  eye-piece,  204.  d 
Poles,  83.  112,  1  13.     Of  ecliptic,  307. 
Their  motion  among  the  stars.  317. 
Pole-star,  95.     Useful  for  finding  the 
latitude,  171.  Not  always  the  same. 
318.     What,  at  epoch  of  the  build- 
ing of  the  pyramids,  319. 
Pores  or  the  sun's  surface,  387.     Ex- 
plained, 398.     Iu  what  consisting, 
387.  a.,  Note  G. 
Position,  angle  of,  204.  Micrometer,  ib. 
Pouillet  (M.),  his  measure  of  solar  ra- 
diation. 397.  a.,  note. 
Powell  (E.  B.,  Esq.),  his  elements  of 
double  star  orbits,  843.     His  ob- 
servations of    a    variable    nebula, 
896.  a..  Note  K. 
Powell  (Prof.),  his  explanation  of  the 

gyroscope,  345./ 
Prasepe,  Cancri,  86.j. 
Precession  of  the  equinoxes.  312.     In 
what  consisting,  314...  Effects,  313. 
Physical  explanation,  642... 
Priming  and  lagging  of  tides,  753. 
Principle  of  areas,  490      Of  forced 
vibrations,  650.    Of  repetition,  198. 
Of  conservation   of  vis  oiva,  663. 
Of  collimation.  i/8. 
Prkckard(Rev.  ('.),  his  verification  of 
the  wil.ow-leaved  structure  of  the 
sun's  photospher  ,  387,  a.,    Note G. 
Proble-n  of  three  bodies.  608. 
Problems  in  plane  astronomy,  127.. 
309... 


Projection  of  a  star  on  the  moon's  limb, 
414.  note. 

Projections  of  the  sphere,  280...  A 
simple  and  convenient  described, 
283.  Of  equal  areas,  283.  b. 
J  Proper  motions  of  the  stars,  852.  Of 
Sirius,  inequalities  in,  859.  Probable 
explanation  of,  859.  a..  Note  J.  Of 
the  sun,  853.  858,  a.,  Note  L. 

Pyramids,  319. 


a 


Radial  disturbing  force,  615... 
Radiation,  solar,  on  planets,  508.    On 

comets,  592. 
Rate  of  clock,  how  obtained,  293. 
Reading  off,  methods  of,  165.     Oppo- 
site effect  of  in  eliminating  errors,  141. 
Redfield  on  hurricanes,  245.  d. 
Reduction   of   astronomical    observa- 
tions, 336. 
R- fleeting  circle,  197. 
R'flictors,  large,  how  coll imated,  204.  f. 
Reflexion,  observations  by,  173. 
Reformu Hon  of  calendar  by  Caesar,  9 18. 
By  Augustus,  919.     By  Pope  Gre- 
trorv,  932.     Proposal  by  Omar  for, 
«06",  Note  A. 
Refraction,  38.    Astronomical  and  its 
effects,  39,  40.  Measure  of,  and  law 
of  variation,  43.     How  detected  by 
observation,   142.     Terrestrial,  4  4. 
How  bext  investigated.  191. 
Reid  (Sir  W.),  on  hurricanes,  245.  d. 
Repetition,  principle  of.  198. 
Resistance  of  ether,  577. 
Retrogradalions  of  planets,  459.      Of 

nodes      (See  Nodes.) 
Reversal,  principle  of,  161. 
Revnaud  (M  ),  his  speculations  on  va- 
riation of  climate,  369.  e.  note. 
Rhea,  548.  note. 

Right  ascension,  108.  How  deter- 
mined, 293. 
Rings  of  Saturn,  dimensions  of,  514. 
Phenomena  of  their  disappearance, 
515...  Equilibrium  of,  518...  Mul- 
tiple, 521,  and  Appendix.  Interior, 
521...  Appearance  of,  from  Saturn, 
522.  Attraction  of,  on  a  point  with- 
in. 735.  note. 
Rising  and  setting  of  celestial  objects 

time  of,  128. 
Rittenhonse,  his  principle  of  collima- 

tion,  178. 
Rockets  used  as  signals  for  longitude 
545. 


INDKX. 


761 


/faw  (Earl  of),  his  great  reflector,  870. 
8S2.  Hisaccountofnebulae,870.882. 

Rotation,  diurnal,  58.  Its  effect  on 
figure  of  the  earth,  224.  Of  the 
e<mh  demonstrated,  231...  Paral- 
lactic, 68.  Of  planets,  509...  Of 
Jupiter,  512.  Of  fixed  stars  on  their 
Hxes,  820. 

Riimker  (Madame),  her  discovery  of 
a  comet,  597. 

Russell,  his  charts  and  globe  of  the 
moon,  437. 


S. 


Sadler,  two  sunrises  and  sunsets  ob- 
served by,  in  one  day,  26. 

Safford  (Professor),  his  researches  on 
the  proper  motion  of  Sirius,  85i».  a., 
Note  J. 

Saros,  426. 

Satellites  of  Jupiter,  511.  Of  Saturn, 
518.547.  Nomenclature  of,  548.  note. 
.Remarkable  relation  of  periods 
among,  550.  Discovery  of  an 
eighth,  548.  Of  Uranus.  523.  552. 
Of  Neptune,  524.  553.  Used  to  de- 
termine masses  of  their  primaries, 
532.  Obey  Kepler's  laws,  533. 
Eclipses  of  Jupiter's,  535...  Longi- 
tude determined  by  (see  Longitude). 
Relations  among  their  motions,  542. 
Other  phaenomena  of,  540.  Their 
dimensions  and  masses,  540.  Dis- 
covery, 544.  Velocity  of  light  as- 
certained from,  545. 

Saturn,  remarkable  deficiency  of  den- 
sity, 508.  Rings  of,  514.  (See 
Rings.)  Physical  description  of, 
514  Satellites  of,  547.  and  Appen- 
dix. (See  also  elements  in  Appen- 
dix.) 

"ichehallien,  its  attraction  measured, 
776.  e. 

S~hmidt,  his  observations  of  solar 
eclipses,  395. 

Schubert  (Gen.),  his  determination  of 
the  dimensions  and  figure  of  the 
earth,  223.  a.,  Note  D. 

Schwabe,  his  discovery  of  periodicity 
of  solar  spots,  394.  a.  Of  excentri- 
city  of  Saturn's  rings,  519.  note. 

Sea,  proportion  of  its  depth  to  radius 
of  the  globe,  31.  Its  action  in  mo- 
delling the  external  form  of  the 
earth,  227. 

Seasont  explained,  362...  Tempera- 
ture of,  366. 

Sector,  zenith,  192. 


Secular  variations,  how  detected,  385 
Explained,  655... 

Selenography,  437. 

Sextant,  193... 

Sh/jilow,  dimensions  of  the  earth'6  4.'2. 
428.  Cast  by  Venus,  267.  Of  J  u- 
piter's  satellites  seen  on  disc,  540 

Shooting  stars,  115.  Used  for  finding 
longitudes,  265.  Periodical,  900. 
(See  Meteors.) 

Sidereal  time,  110.  143.  910.  Year. 
(See  Year.)    Day,  144.    (See  Day.) 

Signals,  rocket,  545.  Telegraphic, 
259... 

Signs  of  zodiac,  380. 

Sirius,  its  parallax  and  absolute  light, 
818.  Its  revolution  about  an  unseen 
center,  859.  Small  companions  of. 
859.  a.,  Note  J.  Its  recess  from  the 
sun,  do.  8.59.  b  b. 

Situation,  angle  of,  311. 

Solar  cycle.  921. 

Solstices,  363. 

Spuce,  question  as  to  its  absolute 
transparency,  798. 

penetrating  power,  803 

Sphere,  95.  Projections  of,  280.  At- 
traction of,  735.  note. 

Spherical  excess,  277. 

Spheroid,  attraction  of,  238. 

Spheroidal  form  of  Earth  (see  Earth) 
produces  inequalities  in  the  moon's 
motion,  749. 

Spots  on  Sun,  389...  Seen  with  naked 
eye,  387. 394.  a.  Size  of,  386.  Na- 
ture of,  389.  Movements  of,  3<>0. 
Duration  of,  394.  Periodicity  of, 
394.  a.  Connection  with  our  sea- 
sons, 39 -f.  b. 

Spring,  proposed  use  of  for  determining 
variation  of  gravity,  274. 

Standard*  of  length,  weight,  and  ca- 
pacity, 223.  a.,  Note  D. 

Stars,  visible  by  day.  61.  Fixed  and 
erratic,  297.  Fixed,  777...  Their 
apparent  magnitudes,  778...  Com- 
parison by  an  astrometer,  783.  Law 
of  distribution  over  heavens,  785... 
alike  in  either  hemisphere,  794. 
Parallax  of  certain,  815.      Discs  of, 

816.  Real  size  and  absolute  light, 

817.  Periodical,  820...  Temporary, 
827.  Irregular,  830.  Missing,  832. 
Double.  833...  Coloured,  851,  and 
note.  Proper  motions  of,  852.  Ir- 
regularities in  motions  accounted 
for,  859.  Clusters  of,  864...  Ne- 
bulous, 879...  Nebulous-double, 
880. 


752 


INDEX. 


Stationary  points  of  planets.  459.  How 
determined,  475.  Of  Mercury  and 
Venus,  476. 

Stereograms  of  the  moon,  430.  a.,  Note 
H. 

Stereographic  projection,  281. 

Sticklastad,  eclipse  of,  926.  and  Table. 
933.  c. 

Stones  meteoric,  899.  Great  shower 
of,  ib. 

Struve,  his  researches  on  the  law  of 
distribution  of  stars.  793.  Discovery 
of  parallax  of  a  Lyrse,  813.  Cata- 
logue and  observations  of  double 
stars,  835. 

Struve  (Otto),  his  researches  on  proper 
motions,  854.  His  conjecture  of  the 
inciease  in  breadth  of  Saturn's  ring, 
522.  a. 

Style,  old  and  new,  932. 

Sun,  oval  shape  and  great  site  on 
lioiizon  explained,  47.  Apparent 
motion  not  uniform,  347.  Beams 
converging,  115.  Orbit  elliptic,  349. 
Greatest  and  least  apparent  diame- 
ters. 348.  Actual  di>tanee,  357. 
Overrated,  its  probable  correction. 
357.  a.,  Note  F.  Magnitude,  358. 
Rotation  on  axis,  359.  :'6'().  Note  G. 
387.ee.  Mass,  449.  Physical  con- 
stitution, 386*.  Spots,  ib...  Its  par-  ] 
allax,  355.  Light,  not  polarized, 
387.  note.  Its  interior  envelope, 
.589.  o.  Its  pores,  387,  3«7.  a., 
Note  G.  Willow-leaved  structure 
of  its  photosphere,  ib.  Facula;,  388. 
Situation  of  its  equator,  390... 
Maculiferous  zones  of,  393.  At- 
mosphere, 395.  Its  rose-coloured 
clouds,  395.  Note  O.  395  b  b.  Re- 
lative illumination  of  center  and 
borders,  386...  395.  Temperature, 
396.  Expenditure  of  heat,  397. 
Action  in  producing  winds,  &c.  399. 
Speculation  on  cause  of  its  heat, 
400.  and  note,  905.  a,  b.  Eclipses, 
420.  Density  of,  449.  Natural 
center  of  planetary  system,  462. 
Distance,  how  determined,  479.  Its 
size  illustrated.  526.  Action  in  pro- 
ducing tides,  751.  Proper  motion 
of,  854...  858,  a,  b,  c,  Note  T.. 
Absolute  veloiity  of,  in  space,  858. 
Central,  speculations  on,  861. 

Sunsets,  two  witnessed  in  one  day,  26. 

Superposition  of  small  motions,  607. 

Survey,  trigonometrical  nature  of,  274. 

Synodic  revolution,  418.  Of  sun  and 
moon,  ib. 


System,  solar,  its  motion  ir  space, 
858... 

T. 

Tails  of  comets,  spectra  of,  Note  0. 
395.  dd. 

Tangential  force  and  its  effects,  618. 
Momentary  action  on  perihelia,  673. 
Wholly  influential  on  velocity,  660. 
Produces  variations  of  axis,  ib... 
Double  the  rate  of  advance  of  lunar 
apsides,  686.  Of  Neptune  on 
Uranus,  and  its  effects,  774. 

Telegraphic  signals,  259... 

Telescope,  54.  Its  application  to  as- 
tronomical instruments,  117.  For 
viewing  the  sun.    (See  Helioscope.) 

Telescopic  sights,  invention  of,  158 
note. 

Temperature  of  earth's  surface  at  dift'e- 
rcnt  seasons,  366.  In  South  Africa 
and  Australia,  369.  Of  the  suu, 
396. 

Temporary  stars,  827... 

Tethys,  548.  note. 

Thales.  eclipse  of,  933.  a.  926.  Table. 

Theodolite,  192.  Its  use  in  survey ii!g, 
276. 

Theory  of  instrumental  errors,  141.  Of 
gravitation,  490...  Of  nebulous  sub- 
i-idence  and  sidereal  aggregation, 
872. 

Thomson  (Prof.  Sir  W.),  his  estimate 
of  the  sun's  expenditure  of  heat. 
.'597.  a.  His  theory  of  the  sou.ee  of 
do.,  905.  a. 

Tides,  a  system  of  forced  oscillations, 
651.  Explained,  750...  Priming 
and  lagging  of.  753.  Periodical  in- 
equalities of,  755.  Instances  of  very 
high,  756. 

Time,  sidereal,  110.  847.  911.  Local, 
129.  152.252.  Sidereal  and  solar, 
143.  Mean  and  apparent  sidereal. 
327.  Measures  angular  motion, 
149.  How  itself  measured,  150... 
Very  small  intervals  of,  150.  Equi- 
noctial, 257.  925...  Measures,  units, 
and  reckoning  of,  906...  Required 
for  light  of  stars  to  reach  the  earth, 
802. 

Titan,  548.  note. 

Titius  (  Prof.),  his  law  of  planetary  dis- 
tances, 505.  note. 

Torsion  balance  used  to  measure  den- 
sity of  the  earth,  776  «'.  Torsion 
balance  to  measure  the  variation  of 
gravity,  Note  E. 


IN  LEX. 


753 


Tradt  winds,  239... 

Transit  instrument,  159... 

7'run.sits  of  stars,  152.  Of  planet* 
across  the  sun,  467.  Of  Venus,  479 
...  Mercury,  483.  Of  Jupiter's  satel- 
lites acro>s  disc,  540.  Of  their  sha- 
dows, 549. 

Transparency  of  space,  supposed  by 
Olbers  imperfect,  798. 

Transversal  disturbing  force,  and  its 
effects,  615... 

Triangles  ill-conditioned,  275.  On  an 
ellipsoid,  276. 

Trigonometrical  survey,  274. 

Tropics,  93.  380. 

Twilight,  44. 


U. 


Umbra  in  eclipses,  420.  Of  Jupite  \ 
538. 

Umbriel,  551. 

Uianography,  111.  300. 

Urnnographicnl  correcions,  342... 
Problems,  127...  309... 

Uranotr.etry,  118. 

Uranus,  discovery  of,  505.  Heat  re- 
ceived from  sun  by,  508.  Physical 
description  of,  523.  Satellites  of, 
551.  Perturbations  of  by  Neptune, 
760...  Old  observations  of,  760 
Its  periodic  time,  776.  Its  action 
on  the  November  meteors,  905.  hh. 

V. 

Vanishing  point  of  parallel  lines, 
116.     Line  of  parallel  planes,  117. 

Variable  stars,  820.  et  seq. 

Variation  oi  the  moon  explained,  7 05. . . 

Variations  of  elements,  653.  Perio- 
dical and  secular,  655.  Incident  on 
the  epoch,  731. 

Velocity,  angular,  of  sun  not  uniform, 

350.  Linear,  of  sun  not  uniform, 

351.  Of  planets.  Mercury,  Venus, 
and  Earth,  474.  Of  light,  545.  Over- 
estimated, its  probable  correction, 
357  a.,  Note  F.  Of  shooting  start, 
889.904.  OfSirius,  NoteJ.859.Aft 

Venus,  synodic  revolution  of,  4 72.  Sta- 
tionary points,  476.  Velocity  of,  474. 
Phases,  477.  Point  of  greatest 
brightness,  478.     Transits  of,  479. 


Physical  description  and  appear- 
ance, 509.  Inequality  in  earth's 
motion  produced  by,  726.  In  that 
of  the  moon,  743... 

Vernier,  165.  197. 

Vertical,  prime,  102.     Circles,  100. 

Vesia,  discovery  of,  505. 

Via  Lactea.     ( See  Galaxy. ) 

Villarceau  (M.  Yvon),  his  orbits  of 
double  stars,  843. 

Volcanos,  lunar.  430.  a.,  Note  H. 

W. 

Watershed,  289. 

Watherson,    his   theory   of  the   sun's 

heat,  905.  a. 
Weight  of  bodies  in  different  latitudes, 

322.     Of  a  body  on  the  moon,  508. 

On  the  sun,  450. 
Wfieatstone,  his  measurement  of  the 

velocity   of  electricity,    545.      Hi.* 

method  of  stenographing  the  moon. 

437.  a..  Note  I. 
Whipple,  his  photographs  of  the  moon, 

437. 
Willow-leaved  forms  observed  in   the 

sun's  photosphere,  387.  a.,  Note  G. 
Winds,  trade,  240... 
Winnecke  (M),  his  proposal  for  ob- 
serving the  parallax  of  Mare,  357.  a.. 

Note  F. 
Witie  ( Madame),  her  models  of  the 

moon,  437. 
Wolf,  his  period  of  the  solar  .-nots. 

394.  a. 
Wollaston  (Dr.),  his   estimate  of  tlie 

comparative  light  of  the  sun,  moon. 

and  stars,  817... 


Year,  sidereal,  305.  Tropical,  383 
Anomalistic,  384.,  and  day  incom- 
mensurable. 913.  Leap,  914.  O' 
confusion,  917.932.  Beginning  of 
in  England  changed,  932. 


Zenith,  99.     Sector,  192. 

Zodiac,  305. 

Zodiacal  light,  897. 

Zones  of  climate  and  latitude   382 


3c 


PRINTED    BY 

KPOTTISWOODB    AND    CO.,    NKW-8TREBT    SyPAIU: 
LONDON 


Plate.// 


fi'/.J 


/■•to.  2 


/■if  J 


KAdUrd.sc 


London  i  Longmans  <Sr  Co 


Pla.lt  Iff 


London :  Longmajia   &>  Co. 


' 


f 


■  MM 


Plare  B 


Fij-'l. 


.      1>     *  i 


"^  i  > 


** 


HAdUrd  »c 


k 


PLATK    XXII 


Mi 


H.Adl«.rd.sc 


s4 portujn  of  ths  Jiooris  surface,  fmm  awt*h  >  h\\  VJVasmvth. 


London  i  Longmans  Ic  Co. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


QB 

M3 

H57 

1878 

C.2 

PASC 


