THE 


REALM OF THE NEBULJ3


BY EDWIN HUBBLE 

OF THE 

MOUNT WILSON OBSEKVATOiiY 
CARNEGIE INSTITUTION OF WASHINGTON 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD 
1936 



All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced, in 
whole or in part, in, any form (except by reviewers for the 
public press), witho\it written permission from the publishers. 


Printed in the United States of America 



THE SILLIMAN FOUNDATION 

In the year 1883 a legacy of eighty thousand dollars was left to the 
President and Fellows of Yale College in the city of New Haven, to be 
held in trust, as a gift from her children, in memory of their beloved and 
honored mother, Mrs. Hepsa Ely Silliman. 

On this foundation Yale College was requested and directed to es- 
tablish an annual course of lectures designed to illustrate the presence 
and providence, the wisdom and goodness of God, as manifested in the 
natural and moral world. These were to be designated as the Mrs. Hepsa 
Ely Silliman Memorial Lectures. It was the belief of the testator that 
any orderly presentation of the facts of nature or history contributed to 
the end of this foundation more effectively than any attempt to empha- 
size the elements of doctrine or of creed ; and he therefore provided that 
lectures on dogmatic or polemical theology should be excluded from the 
scope of this foundation, and that the subjects should be selected rather 
from the domains of natural science and history, giving special promi- 
nence to astronomy, chemistry, geology, and anatomy. 

It was further directed that each annual course should be made the 
basis of a volume to form part of a series constituting a memorial to 
Mrs. Silliman. The memorial fund came into the possession of the Cor- 
poration of Yale University in the year 1901; and the present work 
constitutes the twenty-fifth volume published on this foundation. 




PREFACE 


T his book consists of the Silliman Lectures, de- 
livered at Yale University in the autumn of 1935, 
with the addition of an introductory chapter. The 
subject is The Realm of the Nebulae, which is the portion 
of the universe, thinly populated with nebulae, that can be 
explored with existing telescopes. The discussion, since it 
was designed for a general audience, is necessarily in- 
complete, but it includes most of the important questions 
concerning which definite statements can be made at the 
moment. The subject is presented from the observer’s 
point of view; the rich field of theoretical literature has 
scarcely been touched. With these limitations, the book is 
believed to furnish an authentic picture of a typical case 
of scientific research in the process of development. 

The writer is responsible for whatever is not specifi- 
cally attributed to others. He gratefully acknowledges an 
indebtedness to his colleagues at the Mount Wilson Ob- 
servatory; in particular, to Milton Humason, who has 
contributed almost the whole of the recent data on nebu- 
lar spectra and red-shifts, to Walter Baade, whose inter- 
ests and exact knowledge range over the entire field of 
nebular research, and to Sinclair Smith, who is investi- 
gating the physical constitution of nebulae and of clusters. 
In the field of cosmology, the writer has had the privilege 
of consulting Richard Tolman and Fritz Zwicl^ of the 
California Institute of Technology. Daily contact with 
these men has engendered a common atmosphere in which 
ideas develop that cannot always be assigned to particu- 
lar sources. The individual, in a sense, speaks for the 
group. 

The conquest of the Realm of the Nebulae is an achieve- 



viii 


THE REALM OF THE NEBUL-E 


ment of great telescopes. It began with the identification 
of nebula; as independent stellar systems, comparable 
with our own system of the Milky Way. Once the nature 
of the nebulae was known, methods of estimating dis- 
tances were readily developed, and the new field was open 
to investigation. 

The instrument which definitely established the identi- 
fication — and enlarged the domain of positive knowledge 
a thousand-million-fold — is the Hooker telescope — the 
100-inch reflector of the Mount Wilson Observatory of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington. It is the largest 
telescope in operation, it has the greatest light-gathering 
power, and it penetrates to the greatest distance. For 
these reasons, it defines the present extent of the observ- 
able region of space, and it has contributed the most sig- 
nificant data to the study of the region as a sample of the 
universe. 

In recognition of the unique role which the 100-inch has 
played in the progress of nebular research, the illustra- 
tions in this book are nearly all reproductions of photo- 
graphs made with the great telescope. The only exceptions, 
Plate XII and parts of Plates I and II, are reproductions 
of photographs made with the companion of the 100-inch, 
namely, the 60-inch reflector of the Mount Wilson Observa- 
tory. The reproductions were prepared at the Observatory 
by Ferdinand Ellerman and Edison Hoge. 

Finally, the writer wishes to express his gratitude to 
Godfrey Davies, of the Huntington Library, who has 
criticized the form of presentation. His kindly interven- 
tion has very materially reduced the number of obstacles 
which the reader would otherwise have encountered. 

E. H. 

Mount Wilson Observatory, 

February, 1936. 



CONTENTS 


Intkoduction ....... 1 

Scientific research; the language of astronomy; units of dis- 
tance; apparent magnitudes; absolute magnitudes; period- 
luminosity relation for Cepheids; nebulae and external galax- 
ies ; designation of individual nebulae. 

I. The Exploration of Space .... 20 

Eeceding horizons ; the theory of island universes ; the nature 
of the nebulae, (a) the formulation of the problem, (b) the solu- 
tion of the problem; the inhabitants of space; the realm of 
the nebulae, (a) the distribution of nebulae, (b) the velocity- 
distance relation; the observable region as a sample of the 
universe. 

II. Family Traits of Nebulje .... 36 

The classification of nebulae; the common pattern; elliptical 
nebulae; spirals; normal spirals; barred spirals; sequence of 
spirals ; sequence of regular nebulae ; additional characteristics ; 
irregular nebulae; the standard nebulae; features which vary 
systematically through the sequence, (a) spectral types, (b) 
colors, (c) resolution, (d) relative frequency of types; sum- 
mary. 

III. The Distribution of Nebulje ... 58 

Nebular surveys; distribution over the sky; galactic obscura- 
tion ; obscuring clouds ; the absorbing layer ; the general field ; 
large-scale distribution over the sky ; large-scale distribution in 
depth; small-scale distribution; groups of nebulae; clusters of 
nebulae. 

IV. Distances of Nebul.® ..... 83 

Development of criteria of distances; novae in spirals; resolu- 
tion of nebulae ; Cepheids ; the nebulae as comparable galaxies ; 
additional criteria of nebular distances. 



X 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


V. The Velocity-Distance Eelation . . . 102 

Early spectrograms of nebulae; the first radial velocity; Sli- 
pher ’s list of radial velocities ; interpretation of the data ; solar 
motion with respect to the nebulae ; the K-term as a function of 
distance; the velocity-distance relation; Humason^s list of 
radial velocities ; clusters ; isolated nebulae ; significance of the 
velocity-distance relation. 

VI. The Local Group ..... 124 

Members of the local group; the galactic system; the Magel- 
lanic Clouds; Messier 31; Messier 32; NGC 205; Messier 33; 
NGC 6822; IC 1613; possible members of the local group; 
summary. 

VII. The General Field ..... 152 

Criteria of distances ; brightest stars ; uncertainties in the cri- 
terion of brightest stars ; application of the criterion of bright- 
est stars, (a) the luminosity-function for resolved nebulae, (6) 
distance of the Virgo cluster, (c) velocity-distance relation; 
calibration of the velocity-distance relation; luminosities of 
cluster-nebulae; effect of selection on statistical criteria of dis- 
tances; luminosities of field-nebulae; dimensions of nebulae; 
masses of nebulae. 

VIII. The Eealm of the Nebula . . . 182 

Surveys to successive limits; distribution of nebulae in depth; 
quantitative description of the distribution ; internebular 
space ; the observable region ; effects of red-shifts on apparent 
luminosity; the number-effect; the energy-effect; effects of 
red-shifts and observed departures from uniformity; theories 
of cosmology. 


Index 


203 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATES 

Outer Region op the Great Spiral in Andromeda (Mes- 
sier 31) . . . . Frontispiece 

I. Types op Nebul® (Elliptical and Irregular 

Nebulae) ..... Facing page 40 


II. Types op Nebulae (Normal and Barred Spirals) . 42 

III. Group op Nebuljb (NGC 3185, 3187, 3190, 3193) . 78 

IV. The Corona Borealis Cluster .... 80 

V. Nov^ IN Messier 31 86 

VI. Cepheids in Messier 31 94 

VII. Spectra op Nebulae 104 

VIII. The Velocity-Distance Relation . . . 118 

IX. Messier 31 138 

X. Messier 33 142 

XI. IC 1613 146 

XII. NGC 6946 and IC 342 148 

XIII. NEBULiE IN THE VlRGO CLUSTER .... 164 

XIV. The Depths op Space ..... 192 

FIGURES 

1. The Sequence op Nebular Types .... 45 

2. Nebular Diameters along the Sequence op Types 

(m = 10) ........ 49 

3. Apparent Distribution op Nebul.®, Showing Ef- 

fects OP Galactic Obscuration .... 62 

4. Schematic Representation op the Absorbing Layer 65 

5. Obscuration by the Absorbing Layer as Shown by 

THE Apparent Distribution op Nebule . . 66 

6. Distribution op Nebule when Observations Are 

Partially Corrected for Galactic Obscuration . 68 

7. Frequency-Distribution op Samples op Various 

Sizes 74 

8. Light Curves op Four Cepheids in Messier 31 . 95 

9. The Formulation op the Velocity-Distance Rela- 

tion 114 



xii THE REALM OF THE NEBULAE 

10. Apparent Distribution op Members op the Local. 


Group 127 

11. Frequency-Distribution op ms — mx, . . . 161 

12. Velocity-Distance Relation prom Brightest Stars 167 

13. Velocity-Distance Relation for Field-Nebula . 168 

14. Velocity-Distance Relation for Clusters . . 169 

15. Distribution in Space op Nebula with the Same 

Apparent Luminosity ..... 174 

16. Apparent Distribution op Nebula in Depth . . 186 



TABLES 


I. Maqnitudb-Difpekences and Luminosity-Ratios . 11 


II. Diameter-Luminosity Relation .... 51 

III. Spectral Types and Colors op Nebula . . 53 

IV. Relative Frequencies op Nebular Types . . 55 

V. Members op the Local Group .... 126 

VI. Absolute Magnitudes op Various Types op 

Nebula 176 

VII. Diameters op Nebula 178 

VIII. Spectrographic Masses op Nebula . . . 180 




THE REALM OF THE NEBULAE 


INTEODUCTION 

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 

S CIENCE is the one human activity that is truly pro- 
gressive. The body of positive knowledge is trans- 
mitted from generation to generation, and each con- 
tributes to the growing structure. Newton said, ‘‘If I 
have seen farther it was by standing on the shoulders of 
giants. Today, the least of the men of science com- 
mands a wider prospect. Even the giants are dwarfed by 
the great edifice in which their achievements are incor- 
porated. What a Newton might see today, we do not know. 
And tomorrow, or a thousand years hence, even our 
dreams may be forgotten. 

This remarkable attribute of science is bought at a 
price — the strict limitation of the subject matter. “ Sci- 
ence, as Campbell remarks, “deals with judgments con- 
cerning which it is possible to obtain universal agree- 
ment.^’^ These data are not individual events, but the 
invariable associations of events or properties which are 
known as laws of science. Agreement is secured by means 
of observation and experiment. The tests represent ex- 
ternal authorities which all men must acknowledge, by 
their actions if not by their words, in order to survive, 
i Science, since it deals only with such judgments, is 
necessarily barred from the world of values. There no ex- 
ternal authority is known. Each man appeals to his pri- 
vate god and recognizes no superior court of appeal. 
Wisdom is a personal achievement and is difficult to 
transmit. Sarton writes : 

1 Sarton has traced this quotation to Bernard of Chartres who died in 
1126. Isis, No. 67, 107, 1935. 

2 Norman Campbell, What Is Science? (1921), p. 27; quoted with permis- 
sion of the author and the publisher (Methuen, London). 



2 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


The saints of today are not necessarily more saintly than those of 
a thousand years ago ; our artists are not necessarily greater than 
those of early Greece; they are likely to be inferior; and, of 
course, our men of science are not necessarily more intelligent 
than those of old ; yet one thing is certain, their knowledge is at 
once more extensive and more accurate. The acquisition and sys- 
temization of positive knowledge is the only human activity that 
is truly cumulative and progressive.® 

The special methods of science are efficient and power- 
ful when they are used within their proper field — ^the re- 
gion closed and bounded by the necessity for agreement 
on the subject matter. The methods are so successful, in- 
deed, that attempts are constantly made to apply .them in 
other fields — to the study of things as they should be 
rather than things as they are. The results are seldom 
convincing. The calculus of values, if it is ever formu- 
lated, will probably have little in common with the calcu- 
lus of science. Nevertheless the atmosphere of scientific 
research — the disinterested curiosity, controlled imagina- 
tion, and passion for impersonal tests — is by no means 
unique. It may, and often does, produce a definite influ- 
ence in those fields from which scientific technique is 
barred. That influence, the man of science likes to believe, 
is generally beneficial. The special methods of science will 
be discussed hereafter, but they are characterized by the 
remark that research attempts to discover laws and to 
explain the laws by theories, the ultimate goal being the 
understanding of the physical structure and operation of 
the world in which we live.* 

Actually, investigations are carried out in various 
ways, two of which may be mentioned as typical ex- 
amples. One emphasizes the observational approach, the 
other, the theoretical point of view. The observer com- 
monly starts by accumulating an isolated group of data, 

8 George Sarton, Introduction to the SUtor^ of Science (1927), I, 3. 

4 The reader is referred to Campbell What Is Science? for further dis- 
cussion and in particular for the significance of the word ‘ ‘ explain ’ ' as used 
above. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


8 


together with their estimated uncertainties. The material 
is studied, usually by graphical methods, and relations 
are found between various features. 

The data, for instance, may consist of apparent lumi- 
nosities of nebulae and red-shifts in their spectra. These 
terms will be explained later; for the moment, they may 
be considered merely as two measurable features, A and 
B. When one feature is plotted against the other, it ap- 
pears that, on the average, red-shifts increase as the lumi- 
nosities diminish — the fainter the_nebula. t he larger the 
red-shift. The conclusion is important even in this qualT- 
tafive form, but the significance would be enormously 
enhanced if the precise form of the relation could be es- 
tablished in numerical terms. 

The points that have been plotted make a scatter-dia- 
gram through which many different correlation curves 
might be drawn, all of which would represent the particu- 
lar data in a fairly satisfactory way. The observer selects 
from the possible relations, the simplest one that is con- 
sistent with the body of general knowledge. In the par- 
ticular case under discussion, the adopted relation, as will 
appear later, corresponds to a linear relation between 
red-shifts and distances as indicated by the faintness of 
the nebulae. 

The relation is plausible but not unique. The true rela- 
tion might be a curve which was nearly linear within the 
range covered by the observations, but which departed 
widely from a straight line in the regions beyond the 
faintest nebulae in the group. This possifclity was investi- 
gated by extrapolating the adopted relation — extending 
it far out into the hitherto unobserved regions — and test- 
ing it by new observations. Such a procedure often leads 
to minor, or even to major, revisions in the relation first 
selected : it has been said that research proceeds by suc- 
cessive approximations. However, in the investigation of 
red-shifts, no revision was definitely indicated. The linear 
relation has survived repeated tests of this nature and is 
known to hold, at least approximately, as far out into 



4 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 

space as the observations can be carried with existing 
instruments. 

The investigation thus leads to a new law — out to a cer- 
tain limiting distance, red-shifts are an approximately 
linear function of distances. Beyond the limit of the ob- 
servations, the form of the function, or relation, is specu- 
lative. For this reason, the law is empirical and it must 
remain empirical until it is explained by an accepted 
theory.' Some students believe that suitable theories have 
already been formulated, and they may be right in their 
opinion. The question will be decided by further investi- 
gations. 

The particular case of the red-shifts, or rather a simpli- 
fied version of that investigation, has been discussed at 
some length because it offers a fair example of the ob- 
servational approach. An isolated group of data is 
studied and the results are interpreted against the back- 
ground of general knowledge. Then follows the process of 
extrapolation, and tests, and appropriate revision. The 
observations and the laws which express their relations 
are permanent contributions to the body of knowledge; 
the interpretations and the theories change with the 
spreading background. The research sweeps outward and 
develops an observable region around a given center — a 
realm of positive knowledge. Beyond the horizon, is the 
realm of speculation. The observer, if he ventures therein, 
can only throw his empirical relation into the blue, and 
search for inconsistencies with extrapolations from other 
centers. 

The theoretical investigator, employing another method 
of approach, studies the isolated, empirical laws estab- 
lished by observers. He searches among them for some 
common element, some generalization by which he may 

5 Bed-shifts are directly measured out to distances of the order of 250 
million light-years. The linear relation is consistent with the body of gen- 
eral (observational) knowledge out to about 400 million light-years. Beyond 
this limit, where observational data are not available, the extrapolation 
must be tested by its consistency with accepted theories, and these are not 
yet established in the detailed form required for the tests. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


5 


collect various observed relations into a single statement. 
In short, be strives to invent a theory to explain the laws. 
The approach to the theory may be by logic or by intui- 
tion — it is immaterial which method is used. The impor- 
tant feature is the ability to explain the relations already 
observed, and to predict new relations. 

A fundamental theory and the various relations that 
can be readily deduced from it, form a consistent pattern 
which may apply to certain aspects of the universe, or 
even to the universe as a whole. The author projects his 
pattern on the world around him in order to see how 
closely the two coincide. The known empirical laws natu- 
rally fall into place, if the author is competent, and new 
laws may be predicted. The success of the venture de- 
pends largely on the verification of predicted relations. If 
no such test is possible, the value of the pattern must be 
measured by the order and kinship which it introduces 
among known, but hitherto unrelated, phenomena. Unless 
the systemization is of a high order, the theory will be 
regarded as speculation. 

Many theories are formulated but relatively few endure 
the tests. The survivors, in general, must be occasionally 
revised to conform with the growing body of knowledge. 
The ability to theorize is highly personal ; it involves art, 
imagination, logic, and something more. An outstanding 
genius may invent a successful new type of theory ; first- 
rate men may follow the lead and develop other theories 
on the same pattern; less competent minds are embar- 
rassed by the custom of testing predictions. 

The theoretical investigator frequently works from the 
circumference toward the center, while the observer 
works from the center toward the circumference. The 
latter extrapolates outward, while the former, in a sense, 
extrapolates inward. When the two agree, they inspire 
some confidence in the significance of the general pattern. 

The distinction is seldom so clear as the foregoing dis- 
cussion would imply. Almost every investigation com- 
bines both methods of approach, although they may be 



6 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


present in varying proportions. Eesearch men attempt to 
satisfy their curiosity, and are accustomed to use any 
reasonable means that may assist them toward the reced- 
ing goal. One of the few universal characteristics is a 
healthy skepticism toward unverified speculations. These 
are regarded as topics for conversation until tests can 
be devised. Only then do they attain the dignity of sub- 
jects for investigation. 

The present writer is primarily an observer. The chap- 
ters which follow describe the development of a new 
phase of astronomical research — the exploration of the 
realm of the nebulae. Emphasis is placed upon observa- 
tional data — upon the positive knowledge that has been 
assembled — rather than upon interpretations, whether 
theoretical or speculative. The latter aspect has been ex- 
ploited in popular literature, and a number of books have 
been written, some of which stir the imagination. The ob- 
servational data, for the most part, rest quietly in the 
technical journals. The references in this book are largely 
restricted to original sources rather than to rediscussions 
of the data. 

Much of the source material may be of interest to the 
general reader. It presents a case history of scientific re- 
search in a rather simple form. Some insight may be 
gained concerning that little known activity, without the 
preliminary acquisition of an extensive technical vocabu- 
lary. The subject was new, the data were rough, and the 
dangers of overdiscussion in a formative period were 
fully realized; therefore, the treatment was generally 
direct and free from the intricate devices used in the case 
of refined, quantitative investigations. Analysis of the 
data, for instance, was almost always graphical rather 
than mathematical. Naturally, certain special terms are 
constantly met in the source material. Several of them are 
so convenient that they will be used throughout the pres- 
ent book. Their explanation forms a necessary introduc- 
tion to the chapters which follow. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


7 


The Langwge of Astronomy. 

Astronomy, as other disciplines, has its own technical 
vocabulary of words and phrases with precise definitions. 
The terms always carry the same significance and substi- 
tutes are not employed. Variety is sacrificed for precision. 
Some of the terms have long histories. The words them- 
selves are familiar, but the technical definitions are far 
removed from common usage. Other terms are recent 
additions, deliberately coined in efforts to avoid the con- 
fusion of associated ideas. The result is a vocabulary so 
strange to the general reader that scientific reports, many 
of which are relatively simple, appear to be wrapt in a 
mantle of obscurity. Translation into the language of 
general discourse is a difficult art and frequently blurs 
the meaning for the dubious advantages of specious 
familiarity. It is for this reason that a few of the more 
common terms will be used in their technical purity. They 
are restricted to units of distance and of luminosity, and 
to certain types of variable stars which can be recognized 
by their behavior, wherever they are found. The glossary 
follows, and concludes with a brief discussion of the word 
nebula. 


Units of Distance. 

Miles and kilometers (1 mile = 1.6 km.) are occasionally 
used, but great distances are expressed in light-years 
(l.y.) or in parsecs (par.). The light-year is simply the 
distance which light travels in a year. Since the speed of 
light is about 186,000 miles per second, the number of 
miles in a light-year is roughly six followed by twelve 
ciphers (5.88 X 10’* miles = 9.46 X 10’* km.). 

Light reaches the earth from the moon in about 1% 
seconds ; from the sun, in about 8% minutes ; from Pluto, 
the outermost planet, in roughly 6 hours. The nearest star 
(Alpha Centauri) is at a distance of 4.3 light-years; the 
nearest nebula (Large Magellanic Cloud), about 85 thou- 



8 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


sand light-years; the faintest nebulae that have been 
photographed (limit of the 100-inch reflector) are at an 
average distance of the order of 500 million light-years. 

Beyond the nearer stars, distances cannot be determined 
with precision. Errors of 10 per cent are considered to be 
very small and uncertainties of 25 per cent represent rea- 
sonable accuracy. Under these conditions, distances are 
generally expressed in round numbers, using only one or 
two significant figures. 

The term parsec was coined for the distance corre- 
sponding to a parallax of one second of arc. The unit is 
very convenient in many calculations and for this reason 
it is generally employed in technical papers. It is used only 
rarely in the following chapters and in these cases the dis- 
tances are also expressed in light-years (1 par. = 3.258 

1-y-)- 

For those who may be interested, the derivation is as 
follows. The astronomical unit (not used in this book) is 
the mean distance from the earth to the sun, 9.29 X 10’ 
miles = 1.49 X 10® km. The parallax of an object is the 
angle subtended by the astronomical unit as seen from the 
distance of the object. Now an angle of one second of arc 
is subtended by an object whose distance is about 206,000 
times its diameter. Therefore, the parsec is about 1.92 X 
10’® miles, or, as mentioned above, about 3.258 light-years. 

Parallaxes of the nearer stars are measured by direct 
triangulation from opposite points on the earth’s orbit 
around the sun. The largest known stellar parallax, that 
of Alpha Centauri, is about three quarters of a second of 
arc® (distance = 1% par. = 4% l.y.), and parallaxes of one 
hundredth of a second (distance = 100 par. = 326 l.y.) 
can be measured with reasonable accuracy. These directly 
determined distances are used to calibrate the many in- 
direct methods of estimating greater distances. 

6 This angle is about that subtended by a dime at a distance of three 
miles. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


9 


Apparent Magnitudes. 

IIuMiNosiTiEs are expressed as magnitudes. The usage is 
traditional, although the precise calibration of the scale is 
modem. The ancient astronomers recorded apparent lu- 
minosities of stars primarily as aids in their identifica- 
tions. The earliest classification was presumably into the 
natural groups: bright, intermediate, and faint. Later, 
each group was probably subdivided into two sections. At 
any rate the oldest surviving catalogue of stars — that 
given in Ptolemy’s Almagest, composed in the first half 
of the second century a.d. — employed a 6-group classifica- 
tion. The scheme persisted into modern times and fur- 
nished the basis of the present system. 

The groups came to be known as magnitudes. About 
fifteen of the brightest stars were included in the first 
magnitude, and the faintest stars that could be seen with 
the naked eye formed the sixth magnitude. The five inter- 
vening steps represented roughly equal ratios in the lumi- 
nosities. Each magnitude was brighter or fainter than the 
next magnitude by an approximately constant but unde- 
termined factor, which is now known to have been of the 
order of 2.5. Thus the first magnitude was about 2.5 times 
brighter than the second, (2.5)* = 6.25 times brighter 
than the third, (2.5)“ = 16 times brighter than the fourth, 
(2.5)* = 40 times brighter than the fifth, and (2.5)' = 100 
times brighter than the sixth. The scheme was reached 
instinctively since, according to the relation now known 
as Fechner’s law of stimuli, the eye distinguishes equal 
ratios rather than equal increments of luminosity. 

Ptolemy’s magnitudes were accepted almost uncriti- 
cally for many centuries. Even in modern times, when 
independent estimates of apparent luminosities began to 
accumulate, and whole magnitudes were split into halves, 
thirds, and tenths, the same system was generally em- 
ployed. Telescopic stars were assigned to magnitudes 
numerically larger than six. Eventually, when the im- 



10 THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 

portance of a precise, uniform scale was realized, the 
value of the constant factor, or ratio of luminosities, was 
carefully investigated. The results varied considerably, 
but in most eases they were of the order of 2.5. Finally, 
in 1856, Pogson (1829-91) at the Radcliffe Observatory 
in Oxford, made a suggestion that met with general ap- 
proval. He said in eifect, let us adopt, as an arbitrary but 
very convenient value of the ratio, the number 2.512 ‘, 
whose common logarithm' is exactly 0.4.® The assumption 
is made that the first magnitude is precisely 100 times 
brighter than the sixth, and the range is divided info five 
steps whose ratios are equal. The logarithm of 100 — 
namely 2.0 — divided by 5, is 0.4, which is the logarithm of 
the luminosity-ratio between successive magnitudes. 

This scale, which is not very different from those em- 
ployed in the older catalogues, is in current use today. 
The zero-point has been adopted by international agree- 
ment to conform with certain published magnitudes for a 
standard sequence of stars in the vicinity of the north 
pole of the heavens. Magnitudes of other stars are de- 
termined by comparisons, direct or indirect, with the 
standard sequence. 

Magnitudes are proportional, not to luminosities, but 
to logarithms of luminosities. If Lo is the luminosity of a 
standard star whose magnitude (defined by agreement) 

7 No mathematics is included in this book except simple linear equations 
(statements of equality) and the use of common logarithms instead of ex- 
ponentials. The common logarithm of a number is merely the power of ten 
which represents the number. Thus, for any (positive) number, a, the loga- 
rithm is defined as follows: 

a = lOiosa 

In other words, if a = 10^, then h — log a, and a is sometimes called the anti- 
log of h» The quantity mentioned above, 0.4, is the logarithm of 2.512* ••, since 
100.4 = 2.512***. 

Because magnitudes are logarithmic functions of luminosities, and lumi- 
nosities vary as a power of the distance, it will often be convenient to use 
logarithms of distances, red-shifts, or other characteristics in order to express 
relations by simple linear equations rather than by more complicated expres- 
sions. 

8 Monthly Notices of the Boyal Astronomical Society, 17, 12, 1856. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


11 


is Wo, then the magnitude, m, of any other star whose lu- 
minosity is L, is given by the relation 

0.4 (w — Wo) = log La/L 
m = wip -f- 2.5 log Lo/L. 

The scheme is convenient because the ratio of the lumi- 
nosities, Lo/L, can be measured easily and accurately, al- 
though the absolute values of the individual luminosi- 
ties, Lo and L, are very difficult to determine. 

Two points should be noticed. First, the magnitudes in- 
crease slowly while the corresponding luminosity-ratios 
increase rapidly. Thus a difference of 0.1 mag., repre- 
sents a luminosity-ratio of 1.1 to 1.0, while a difference of 
10 mag., represents a ratio of 10,000 to 1. A short table of 
corresponding values emphasizes the relation. 

TABLE I. 


Magnitude-Bifferences and Luminosity Mat ios. 


m — 

LJL 

m — 

WL 

0.1 

1.1 

. 5. 

100. 

0.5 

1.6 

7.5 

1,000. 

1.0 

2.5 

10. 

10,000. 

2.0 

6.3 

15. 

1,000,000. 

2.5 

10.0 

20. 

100,000,000. 


The second point is that the numerical values of the 
magnitudes increase as the luminosities diminish. Magni- 
tudes measure faintness. A large magnitude, say +20, 
refers to an exceedingly faint star, while a small magni- 
tude, say +0.1, indicates a bright star (Vega). Still 
brighter luminosities are expressed by negative magni- 
tudes. The photographic magnitude of the brightest ob- 
ject in the sky, namely the sun, is about —26; the full 
moon, about —11 ; Venus, about —3. Two stars have nega- 
tive magnitudes — Sirius is —1.6, and Canopus is about 
—0.5. Otherwise, the magnitudes of stars are all positive 
(except those of occasional novae near their maxima). The 
faintest stars that have been photographed with the larg- 



12 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


est telescope are of the twenty-second magnitude, or about 
3,000 million times fainter than Sirius. 

There are many systems of magnitudes, but all are on 
the same scale — ^namely, 

m = Too -f- 2.5 log 

where Wo is arbitrarily defined. The systems are distin- 
guished by appropriate subscripts to the general symbol 
m. Thus Wpg represents photographic magnitudes. How- 
ever, since this one system will be used almost exclusively 
in the following chapters, the subscript will be dropped 
and the symbol, m, will henceforth be used for photo- 
graphic magnitudes alone. 

These quantities represent blue-violet luminosities. 
Visual, or the nearly equivalent photo-visual, magnitudes 
indicate yellow luminosities. A red star is brighter visu- 
ally than photographically, and for a blue star the rela- 
tion is reversed. Thus the difference between the visual 
and the photographic magnitude, called the color-index 
(C.I.), measures the color of an object. The two systems 
of magnitudes are adjusted so that the color-index is zero 
for a white star (spectral type AO). Therefore, the color- 
index is negative for a blue star and positive for a yellow 
or a red star. The range among normal stars is from 
about —0.4 to +2.0 magnitudes, although exceptional 
cases (for instance, the very red N-type stars) may be 
found beyond these limits. The sun, a yellow star, has a 
color index of about +0.6 magnitudes. 

The magnitudes hitherto discussed are called apparent 
magnitudes and are expressed by the symbol m. They in- 
dicate the luminosities of objects as they appear in the 
sky, and represent a combination of distance and intrinsic 
luminosity (or candle power). For instance, a star of the 
eleventh apparent magnitude (w = 11), might be a dwarf 
star at a small distance, or a giant star at a great dis- 
tance, or any intermediate combination. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


18 


Absolute Magnitudes. 

ISttbinsic luminosities are measured by absolute magni- 
tudes, expressed by the symbol M. They are on the same 
scale as apparent magnitudes and, as before, the zero- 
point is arbitrarily defined. Actually, the absolute magni- 
tude, M, is merely the apparent magnitude, m, which an 
object would exhibit if that object were at a certain stand- 
ard distance from the observer. The standard distance, 
by definition, is 10 parsecs or 32.6 light-years. At this dis- 
tance, the fainter dwarf stars could not be seen with the 
naked eye, the sun would be just comfortably visible, the 
brightest giants would surpass the planet Venus and 
would be seen in the daytime. The average nebula would 
appear several times brighter than the full moon. 

At the standard distance of 32.6 light-years, m=M. Ki 
any other distance, the ditference, m — M, is a known 
function of the distance (in fact it is sometimes called the 
modulus of the distance). The relation is 


or 


log d (in parsecs) = 0.2 (m — M) -}- 1 
log d (in light-years) = 0.2 (m — M) -f- 1.513. 


Now m can always be observed. Therefore, if either of the 
two quantities, d, or ilf, is known, the other can be readily 
calculated. The methods of estimating great distances are 
based almost entirely upon this simple relation. The abso- 
lute magnitudes of various types of stars have been de- 
termined from objects whose distances were already 
known. Thus, wherever the types can be recognized, the 
apparent magnitudes can be measured and the distances 
can be derived from the differences, m — M. 


Period-Luminosity Relation for Cepheids. 

One application of the method is of special interest in the 
study of nebulae. The stars concerned are called Cepheid 
variables, after the type example. Delta Cephei. They are 



14 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


pulsating stars which brighten rapidly and fade slowly, 
repeating the cycle continuously and faithfully. The 
period (length of the cycle) is constant for an individual 
star, but varies from one star to another, ranging from 
about one day to a hundred days. The range in luminosity 
is also constant for a given star, but varies within the 
group from about 0.8 to 2.0 magnitudes. Prom these fea- 
tures the Cepheids are easily recognized wherever they 
may be found. 

Several dozen are known among the stars in the galac- 
tic system, but they are scattered at wide intervals and 
even the nearest is very remote from the earth. For this 
reason the determination of distances, and hence absolute 
magnitudes, has been a difficult problem. Before it was 
completely solved, a new feature, of extraordinary sig- 
nificance, was discovered among Cepheids in the small 
Magellanic Cloud. 

The Cloud is an independent stellar system and a close 
neighbor — actually a satellite — of the galactic system. It 
offers a unique opportunity to study a sample collection 
of stars which are all at about the same distance from the 
observer. It is so remote that only the brighter stars 
(giants and supergiants) can be observed, but this draw- 
back is more than compensated for by the fact that rela- 
tive apparent luminosities, within the Cloud, are also 
relative absolute luminosities.® 

Investigations of the Cloud, made at the Harvard Col- 
lege Observatory, led to the discovery of several hundred 
variable stars. Some were carefully followed and most of 
these were identified as Cepheids. As early as 1908, Miss 
Leavitt, who made the investigations, remarked that the 
brightest Cepheids had longer periods (pulsated more 

» Since the diameter of the Cloud is small compared to its distance, m — 
M = constant, for all objects in the Cloud. Thus M — m — constant, and dif- 
ferences in m represent differences in M (AM = Am). Later, when the value 
of the constant was determined for a few stars (Cepheids), the distance of 
the Cloud and the absolute magnitudes of its many members were imme- 
diately known. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


16 


slowly) than the fainter Cepheids. In 1912,^® she an- 
nqunced a definite period-luminosity relation. The loga- 
rithms of the periods increased directly with the median 
magnitudes (the mid-points between maxima and min- 
ima). Thus, if the period of any Cepheid in the Cloud was 
known, the apparent magnitude was determined. The re- 
lation evidently reflected certain inherent characteristics 
of Cepheids which would presumably be found in all such 
stars wherever they might be located — in the Cloud, in 
the galactic system, or elsewhere. If the relation could be 
numerically calibrated — ^if the absolute magnitude for 
any one period could be established — the Cepheids, since 
they are so readily identified, would furnish a powerful 
method of estimating great distances. 

Hertzsprung," who immediately recognized the full 
significance of the period-luminosity relation, made the 
first calibration in 1913. He determined the mean distance 
of thirteen galactic Cepheids from their parallactic mo- 
tions (reflections of the motion of the sun among the 
stars). The individual distances were very uncertain, but 
the mean for the group was fairly reliable and furnished 
a mean absolute magnitude corresponding to a particular 
mean period. These data permitted him to calibrate the 
period-luminosity relation, make a provisional estimate 
of the distance of the Cloud, and examine the distribution 
of Cepheids in the galactic system. 

Five years later (1918), Shapley^* repeated the calcula- 

10 Harvard College Observatory Circular, No. 173 (1912), where refer- 
ences to earlier statements will be found. 

11 Astronomische N acJirichten, 196, 201, 1913. Russell had previously de- 
rived the mean absolute magnitude of presumably the same thirteen Ceph- 
eids, but no details were given and the period-luminosity relation was not dis- 
cussed {Science, 37, 651, 1913). 

12 << Contribution of the Mt. Wilson Observatory,’^ No. 151; Astrophysi- 
cal Journal, 48, 89, 1918. Shapley rejected two of the thirteen galactic Ceph- 
eids as abnormal, but derived a mean M for a given period only 0.2 mag. 
brighter than Hertzsprung had found. The material revision in the calibra- 
tion arose largely from new information concerning colors of Cepheids. The 
magnitudes of the bright galactic Cepheids were visual, while those of the 



16 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


tions and materially revised the calibration. Later altera- 
tions, introduced by Shapley, led to the current form pf 
the period-luminosity relation. Further revision is ex- 
pected to be of minor importance. Thus, wherever a 
Cepheid may be found, the period will indicate the abso- 
lute luminosity, and the apparent faintness then measures 
the distance. It was by this method that the first reliable 
distances of nebulae were determined. 

Nebulae and External Galaxies. 

The astronomical term nebulae has come down through 
the centuries as the name for permanent, cloudy patches 
in the sky that are beyond the limits of the solar system. 
The interpretation of these objects has frequently 
changed, but the name has persisted. It was once believed 
that all nebulas were clusters or systems of stars; later, 
it was found that some were composed of gas or dust. As 
new theories were developed, various new names were in- 
troduced, but in general the names did not survive. Only 
one revision has been permanent. Certain star-clusters, 
easily resolved with telescopes of moderate power, and 
obviously subordinate members of the galactic system, 
have been withdrawn from the list of nebulae to form a 
separate and distinct class of objects. 

Today, the term nebula is used for two quite different 
kinds of astronomical bodies. On the one hand are the 
clouds of dust and gas, numbering a few score in all, 
which are scattered among the stars of the galactic sys- 
tem. These have been called galactic nebulae. On the other 
hand are the remaining objects, numbering many mil- 
lions, which are now recognized as independent stellar 
systems scattered through space beyond the limits of the 
galactic system. These have been called extragalactic^^ 

faint variables in the Cloud were photographic. Shapley had found a relation 
between period and color and was able to reduce one system of magnitudes to 
the other with confidence. 

18 The adjective anagalactic, proposed by Landmark, is frequently used 
by Swedish writers, although it is seldom employed in this country. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


17 


nebulcB. The nomenclature is followed in this book with 
the exception that, since extragalactic nebulae are men- 
tioned so frequently, the adjective will be dropped. There- 
fore the term nebulce will refer to extragalactic nebulae 
alone, unless otherwise specified. 

Some astronomers consider that since nebulae are now 
known to be stellar systems they should be designated by 
some other name, which does not carry the connotation 
of clouds or mist. Such a revision might be useful, but, as 
yet, no entirely suitable alternative name has been sug- 
gested. The proposal most frequently discussed is a re- 
vival of the term external galaxies}* 

The authoritative definition of galaxy is the Milky 
Way, and the word, especially in the adjective form, ga- 
lactic, is commonly used in this sense. But a transferred 
and figurative use has also crept into the literature. The 
galactic system has sometimes been identified with its 
most conspicuous feature, and the term galaxy employed 
for the stellar system as a whole. Those who follow the 
practice commonly refer to other stellar systems as ex- 
ternal galaxies. 

The term is open to certain objections. A purist would 
say that our own stellar system is the galactic system, but 
is not the galaxy; that an independent stellar system is 
neither the one nor the other. Moreover, while the appli- 
cation of a new meaning to an old term is sometimes 
convenient, the continued use of both meanings is not ad- 
visable. Usage, however, is not always determined by 
logic. The established definition may be dropped and the 
variant, revived, may flourish. No prediction is ventured. 

14 The term occurs sporadically in the literature of the nineteenth century 
and had a certain vogue in the more popular astronomies. One example of 
the latter is The Architecture of the Heavens, by J. P. Nichol, which went 
through many editions after its first appearance in 1838, The ninth edition, 
1851, is one of the most interesting. It is dedicated to the Countess of Kosse 
and presents the early observations with Lord Possess six-foot reflector, in 
glowing terms. A letter is included in which Lord Posse expresses his convic- 
tion that the Orion nebula had been resolved. Nichol states that nebulee are 
external galaxies and presents certain globular clusters as conspicuous 
examples. 



18 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


The term nebulce offers the values of tradition ; the term 
galaxies, the glamour'® of romance. 

Designation of Individual Nebula. 

Individual nebulae are generally designated by their num- 
bers in certain catalogues which were made by Messier 
(1730-1817) and by Dreyer (1852-1926). During the latter 
half of the eighteenth century, Messier'® made a list of 
103 bright clusters and nebulae (both galactic and extra- 
galactic), and these conspicuous objects are still known 
by their Messier numbers. Some thirty-two extragalactic 
nebulae are included. The great spiral in Triangulum, for 
instance, is Messier No. 33, or M33. 

Dreyer ’s New General Catalogue — ^usually referred to 
as the NGC — is a compilation of all clusters and nebulae 
(galactic as well as extragalactic) which were known at 
the end of 1887. Two supplements — the Index Catalogues 
(IC) — bring the lists up to the end of 1907.”^ Since the 
numbering in the second supplement is a continuation of 
that in the first, there is no necessity for distinguishing 
between the two Index Catalogues. The great majority of 
the 7840 NGC objects and the 5386 IC objects, are extra- 
galactic nebulae. The NGC nebulae, in general, are brighter 
than the IC nebulae, and, of course, include the Messier 
objects. Thus M33 is also known as NGC 598. 

Since 1907, the numbers of nebulae recorded on photo- 
graphs have increased so rapidly that the compilation of 
general catalogues is neither practical nor important. 

15 The Oxford English Dictionary gives the established definition of galaxy 

‘ a luminous band or track, encircling the heavens . . . ; the Milky Way ^ 
and states that the transferred and figurative use is ‘ ‘ now chiefly applied to 
a brilliant assemblage or crowd of beautiful women or distinguished per- 
sons. ^ ^ 

15 Messier 's final catalogue was published in the Connaissance des temps 
for 1784. A finding list of the objects, together with appropriate references, 
is given by Shapley and Davis, Fuhlications of the Astronomical Society of 
the Pacific, 29, 178, 1917. 

17 The NOG is found in the Memoirs of the Boyal Astronomical Society, 
49, 1, 1890. The TO are found in the same publication, 51, 185, 1895, and 
59, 105, 1910. 



SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


19 


Many lists have been made for special purposes, but only 
oRe that covers the entire sky in a homogeneous manner. 
This latter is the Harvard survey of nebulae brighter than 
the thirteenth magnitude,^® which contains 1,249 objects 
(1,188 NGC nebulae, 48 IC nebulae, and 13 others). Indi- 
vidual, uncatalogued nebulae are designated by their posi- 
tions in the sky, or with reference to some object whose 
coordinates are generally known. 

18 A Survey of the External Galaxies Brighter than the Thirteenth Magni- 
tude, Harvard College Observatory, Annals j 88, No. 2, 1932. 



CHAPTER I 


THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE" 

T he exploration of space has penetrated only re- 
cently into the realm of the nebulae. The advance 
into regions hitherto unknown has been made during 
the last dozen years with the aid of great telescopes. The 
observable region of the universe is now defined and a pre- 
liminary reconnaissance has been completed. The chapters 
which follow are reports on various phases of the recon- 
naissance. 

The earth we inhabit is a member of the solar system — 
a minor satellite of the sun. The sun is a star among the 
many millions which form the stellar system. The stellar 
system is a swarm of stars isolated in space. It drifts 
through the universe as a swarm of bees drifts through 
the summer air. Prom our position somewhere within the 
system, we look out through the swarm of stars, past the 
borders, into the universe beyond. 

The universe is empty, for the most part, but here and 
there, separated by immense intervals, we find other stel- 
lar systems, comparable with our own. They are so re- 
mote that, except in the nearest systems, we do not see 
the individual stars of which they are composed. These 
huge stellar systems appear as dim patches of light. 
Long ago they were named “nebulae” or “clouds” — ^mys- 
terious bodies whose nature was a favorite subject for 
speculation. 

But now, thanks to great telescopes, we know some- 
thing of their nature, something of their real size and 
brightness, and their mere appearance indicates the gen- 

1 This summary of nebular research may be compared with a ‘ ‘ progress 
report ’ ^ of results obtained up to the end of 1928, published under the same 
title in Harper Magazine for May, 1929. Some of the material in the earlier 
report is included in the present summary, with the permission of Harper & 
Brothers. 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


21 


eral order of tlieir distances. They are scattered through 
space as far as telescopes can penetrate. We see a few 
that appear large and bright. These are the nearer nebu- 
lae. Then we find them smaller and fainter, in constantly 
increasing numbers, and we know that we are reaching 
out into space, farther and ever farther, until, with the 
faintest nebulae that can be detected with the greatest 
telescope, we arrive at the frontiers of the known universe. 

This last horizon defines the observable region of space. 
It is a vast sphere, perhaps a thousand million light-years 
in diameter. Throughout the sphere are scattered a hun- 
dred million nebulae — stellar systems — in various stages 
of their evolutionary history. The nebulae are distributed 
singly, in groups, and occasionally in great clusters, but 
when large volumes of space are compared, the tendency 
to cluster averages out. To the very limits of the tele- 
scope, the large-scale distribution of nebulae is approxi- 
mately uniform. 

One other general characteristic of the observable re- 
gion has been found. Light which reaches us from the 
nebulae is reddened in proportion to the distance it has 
traveled. This phenomenon is known as the velocity-dis- 
tance relation, for it is often interpreted, in theory, as 
evidence that the nebulae are all rushing away from our 
stellar system, with velocities that increase directly with 
distances. 

Receding Horizons. 

This sketch roughly indicates the current conception of 
the realm of the nebulae. It is the culmination of a line of 
research that began long ago. The history of astronomy 
is a history of receding horizons. Knowledge has spread 
in successive waves, each wave representing the exploita- 
tion of some new clew to the interpretation of observa- 
tional data. 

The exploration of space presents three such phases. 
At first the explorations were confined to the realm of the 
planets, then they spread through the realm of the stars, 
and finally they penetrated into the realm of the nebulse. 



22 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


The successive phases were separated by long intervals 
of time. Although the distance of the moon was well 
known to the Greeks, the order of the distance of the sun 
and the scale of planetary distances was not established 
until the latter part of the seventeenth century. Distances 
of stars were first determined almost exactly a century 
ago, and distances of nebulae, in our own generation. The 
distances were the essential data. Until they were found, 
no progress was possible. 

The early explorations halted at the edge of the solar 
system, facing a great void that stretched away to the 
nearer stars. The stars were unknown quantities. They 
might be little bodies, relatively near, or they might be 
gigantic bodies, vastly remote. Only when the gap was 
bridged, only when the distances of a small, sample col- 
lection of stars had been actually measured, was the na- 
ture determined of the inhabitants of the realm beyond 
the solar system. Then the explorations, operating from 
an established base among the now familiar stars, swept 
rapidly through the whole of the stellar system. 

Again there was a halt, in the face of an even greater 
void, but again, when instruments and technique had suffi- 
ciently developed, the gap was bridged by the determina- 
tion of the distances of a few of the nearer nebulae. Once 
more, with the nature of the inhabitants known, the ex- 
plorations swept even more rapidly through the realm of 
the nebulae and halted only at the limits of the greatest 
telescope. 


The Theory of Island Universes. 

This is the story of the explorations. They were made 
with measuring rods, and they enlarged the body of fac- 
tual knowledge. They were always preceded by specula- 
tions. Speculations once ranged through the entire field, 
but they have been pushed steadily back by the explora- 
tions until now they lay undisputed claim only to the 
territory beyond the telescopes, to the dark unexplored 
regions of the universe at large. 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


28 


The speculations took many forms and most of them 
have long since been forgotten. The few that survived the 
test of the measuring rod were based on the principle of 
the uniformity of nature — ^the assumption that any large 
sample of the universe is much like any other. The prin- 
ciple was applied to stars long before distances were de- 
termined. Since the stars were too far away for the meas- 
uring instruments, they must necessarily be very bright. 
The brightest object known was the sun. Therefore, the 
stars were assumed to be like the sun, and distances could 
be estimated from their apparent faintness. In this way, 
the conception of a stellar system, isolated in space, was 
formulated as early as 1750. The author was Thomas 
Wright (1711-86) an English instrument maker and pri- 
vate tutor.^ 

But Wright’s speculations went beyond the Milky Way. 
A single stellar system, isolated in the universe, did not 
satisfy his philosophical mind. He imagined other, simi- 
lar systems and, as visible evidence of their existence, re- 
ferred to the mysterious clouds called “nebulae.” 

Five years later, Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) devel- 
oped Wright’s conception in a form that endured, essen- 
tially unchanged, for the following century and a half. 
Some of Kant’s remarks® concerning the theory furnish 
an excellent example of reasonable speculation based on 
the principle of uniformity. A rather free translation runs 
as follows : 

I come now to another part of my system, and because it sug- 
gests a lofty idea of the plan of creation, it appears to me as the 
most seductive. The sequence of ideas that led us to it is very 
simple and natural. They are as follows ; let us imagine a system 
of stars gathered together in a common plane, like those of the 
Milky Way, but situated so far away from us that even with the 
telescope we cannot distinguish the stars composing it ; let us as- 
sume that its distance, compared to that separating us from the 

2 An Original Theory or New Hypothesis of the Universe (London, 1750), 

8 Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Eimmels, published first 
in 1755. The passages are found in the First Part. 



24 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


stars of the Milky Way, is in the same proportion as the distance 
of the Milky Way is to the distance from the earth to the sun; 
such a stellar world will appear to the observer, who contemplates 
it at so enormous a distance, only as a little spot feebly illumined 
and subtending a very small angle ; its shape will be circular, if 
its plane is perpendicular to the line of sight, elliptical, if it is 
seen obliquely. The faintness of its light, its form, and its appre- 
ciable diameter will obviously distinguish such a phenomenon 
from the isolated stars around it. 

We do not need to seek far in the observations of astronomers to 
meet with such phenomena. They have been seen by various ob- 
servers, who have wondered at their strange appearance, have 
speculated about them, and have suggested sometimes the most 
amazing explanations, sometimes theories which were more ra- 
tional, but which had no more foundation than the former. We 
refer to the nebulae, or, more precisely, to a particular kind of 
celestial body which M. de Maupertius^ describes as follows : 

‘ ‘ These are small luminous patches, only slightly more brilliant 
than the dark background of the sky ; they have this in common, 
that their shapes are more or less open ellipses ; and their light 
is far more feeble than that of any other objects to be perceived 
in the heavens. ’ ’ 

Kant then mentions and rejects the views of Derham 
that' the patches are openings in the firmament, through 
which the fiery Empyrean is seen, and of Maupertius that 
the nebulae are enormous single bodies, flattened by rapid 
rotation. Kant then continues : 

It is much more natural and reasonable to assume that a nebula 
is not a unique and solitary sun, but a system of numerous suns, 
which appear crowded, because of their distance, into a space 
so limited that their light, which would be imperceptible were each 
of them isolated, suffices, owing to their enormous numbers, to 
give a pale and uniform luster. Their analogy with our own sys- 
tem of stars ; their form, which is precisely what it should be ac- 
cording to our theory ; the faintness of their light, which denotes 
an infinite distance; all are in admirable accord and lead us to 
consider these elliptical spots as systems of the same order as our 
own — in a word, to be Milky Ways similar to the one whose con- 

4 Discours sur les cliff event es figures des astres (Paris, 1742). 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


25 


stitution we have explained. And if these hypotheses, in which 
analogy and observation consistently lend mutual support, have 
the same merit as formal demonstrations, we must consider the 
existence of such systems as demonstrated. . . . 

We see that scattered through space out to infinite distances, 
there exist similar systems of stars [nebulous stars, nebulae], and 
that creation, in the whole extent of its infinite grandeur, is 
everywhere organized into systems whose members are in rela- 
tion with one another. ... A vast field lies open to discoveries, 
and observation alone will give the key. 

The theory, which came to be called the theory of island 
universes,' found a permanent place in the body of philo- 
sophical speculation. The astronomers themselves took 
little part in the discussions: they studied the nebulae. 
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, however, the 
accumulation of observational data brought into promi- 
nence the problem of the status of the nebulae and, with it, 
the theory of island universes as a possible solution. 

The Nature of the Nebulae. 

(a) THE FOEMXJLATION OF THE PROBLEM. 

A FEW nebulae had been known to the naked-eye observers 
and, with the development of telescopes, the numbers 
grew, slowly at first, then more and more rapidly. At the 
time Sir William Herschel (1738-1822), the first out- 
standing leader in nebular research, began his surveys, 
the most extensive published lists were those by Messier, 
the last of which (1784) contained 103 of the most con- 
spicuous nebulae and clusters. These objects are still 
known by the Messier numbers — for example, the great 
spiral in Andromeda is M31. Sir William Herschel cata- 

5 The realm of the stars was once known as the ^ ‘ universe of stars ^ ^ and 
the term persisted after the isolation of the stellar system was recognized. 
The multiplication of stellar systems led to the term Weltinseln’^ — Island 
Universes — used in von Humboldt’s Kosmos (Vol. Ill [1850]), presumably 
for the first time. In the familiar English translation by Otte (1855), the 
word is translated literally as world islands” (Vol. Ill, 149, 150). The 
transition to island universes” is an obvious step, but the writer has not 
ascertained the first use of the term. 



26 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


logued 2,500 objects, and his son. Sir John (1792-1871), 
transporting the telescopes to the southern hemisphere 
(near Capetown in South Africa) added many more.® 
Positions of about 20,000 nebulae are now available, and 
perhaps ten times that number have been identified on 
photographic plates. The mere size of catalogues has long 
since ceased to be important. Now the desirable data are 
the numbers of nebulas brighter than successive limits of 
apparent faintness, in sample areas widely distributed 
over the sky. 

Galileo, with his first telescopes, resolved a typical 
“cloud” — Praesepe — into a cluster of stars. With larger 
telescopes and continued study, many of the more con- 
spicuous nebulae met the same fate. Sir William Herschel 
concluded that all nebulae could be resolved into star- 
clusters, if only sufficient telescopic power were available. 
In his later days, however, he revised his position and ad- 
mitted the existence, in certain cases, of a luminous 
“fluid” which was inherently unresolvable. Ingenious 
attempts were made to explain away these exceptional 
eases until Sir William Huggins (1824-1910), equipped 
with a spectrograph, fully demonstrated in 1864 that 
some of the nebulae were masses of luminous gas. 

Huggins ’ results clearly indicated that nebulae were not 
all members of a single, homogeneous group and that 
some kind of classification would be necessary before 
they could be reduced to order. The nebulae actually re- 
solved into stars — the star-clusters — were weeded out of 
the lists to form a separate department of research. They 
were recognized as component parts of the galactic sys- 
tem, and thus had no bearing on the theory of island uni- 
verses. 

Among unresolved nebulae, two entirely different types 
were eventually differentiated. One type consisted of the 

6 Sir John Herschel ’s general catalogue, representing the first systematic 
survey of the entire sky to a fairly uniform limit of apparent faintness, was 
published in 1864, and contained about 4,630 nebulas and clusters observed 
by his father and himself, together with about 450 discovered by others. The 
catalogue was replaced by Hreyer^s New General Catalogue in 1890. 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


27 


relatively few nebulae definitely known to be unresolvable 
— -^louds of dust and gas mingled among, and intimately 
associated with, the stars in the galactic system. They were 
usually found within the belt of the Milky Way and were 
obviously, like the star-clusters, members of the galactic 
system. For this reason, they have since been called “ga- 
lactic” nebulae. They are further subdivided into two 
groups, “planetary” nebulae and “diffuse” nebulae, fre- 
quently shortened to “planetaries” and “nebulosities.” 

The other type consisted of the great numbers of small, 
symmetrical objects found everywhere in the sky except 
in the Milky Way. A spiral structure was found in most, 
although not in all, of the conspicuous objects. They had 
many features in common and appeared to form a single 
family. They were given various names but, to anticipate, 
they are now known as “extragalactic” nebulae^ and will 
be called simply “nebulae.” 

The status of the nebulae, as the group is now defined, 
was undetermined because the distances were wholly un- 
known. They were definitely beyond the limits of direct 
measurement, and the scanty, indirect evidence bearing 
on the problem could be interpreted in various ways. The 
nebulae might be relatively nearby objects and hence 
members of the stellar system, or they might be very re- 
mote and hence inhabitants of outer space. At this point, 
the development of nebular research came into immediate 
contact with the philosophical theory of island universes. 
The theory represented, in principle, one of the alterna- 
tive solutions of the problem of nebular distances. The 
question of distances was frequently put in the form : Are 
nebulae island universes? 

(b) THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. 

The situation developed during the years between 1885 
and 1914 ; from the appearance of the bright nova in the 
spiral M31, which stimulated a new interest in the ques- 

7 The term ^ * external galaxies, * ^ revived by Shapley, is also widely used, 
as is a third term ^ * anagalactic * ’ nebulee, introduced by Landmark. 



28 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


tion of distances, to the publication of Slipher’s first ex- 
tensive list of radial velocities of nebulae, which furnished 
data of a new kind and encouraged serious attempts to 
find a solution of the problem. 

The solution came ten years later, largely with the help 
of a great telescope, the lOO-inch reflector, that had been 
completed in the interim. Several of the most conspicuous 
nebulae were found to be far beyond the limits of the ga- 
lactic system — they were independent, stellar systems in 
extragalactic space. Further investigations demonstrated 
that the other, fainter nebulae were similar systems at 
greater distances, and the theory of island universes was 
confirmed. 

The lOO-inch reflector partially resolved a few of the 
nearest, neighboring nebulae into swarms of stars. Among 
these stars various types were recognized which were 
well known among the brighter stars in the galactic sys- 
tem. The intrinsic luminosities (candle powers) were 
known, accurately in some cases, approximately in others. 
Therefore, the apparent faintness of the stars in the 
nebulas indicated the distances of the nebulas. 

The most reliable results were furnished by Cepheid 
variables, but other types of stars furnished estimates 
of orders of distance, which were consistent with the 
Cepheids. Even the brightest stars, whose intrinsic lumi- 
nosities appear to be nearly constant in certain types of 
nebulae, have been used as statistical criteria to estimate 
mean distances for groups of systems. 

The Inhabitants of Space. 

The nebulae whose distances were known from the stars 
involved, furnished a sample collection from which new 
criteria, derived from the nebulae and not from their con- 
tents, were formulated. It is now known that the nebulae 
are all of the same order of intrinsic luminosity. Some 
are brighter than others, but at least half of them are 
within the narrow range from one half to twice the mean 
value, which is 85 million times the luminosity of the sun. 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


29 


Thus, for statistical purposes, the apparent faintness of 
the nebulae indicates their distances. 

With the nature of the nebulae known and the scale of 
nebular distances established, the investigations pro- 
ceeded along two lines. In the first place the general fea- 
tures of the individual nebulae were studied ; in the second, 
the characteristics of the observable region as a whole 
were investigated. 

The detailed classification of nebular forms has led to 
an ordered sequence ranging from globular nebulae, 
through flattening, ellipsoidal figures, to a series of un- 
winding spirals. The fundamental pattern of rotational 
symmetry changes smoothly through the sequence in a 
manner that suggests increasing speed of rotation. Many 
features are found which vary systematically along the 
sequence, and the early impression that the nebulae were 
members of a single family appears to be confirmed. The 
luminosities remain fairly constant through the sequence 
(mean value, 8.5 X W suns, as previously mentioned), 
but the diameters® steadily increase from about 1,800 
light-years for the globular nebulas to about 10,000 light- 
years for the most open spirals. The masses are uncer- 
tain, the estimates ranging from 2 X 10® to 2 X 10“ times 
the mass of the sun. 

The Realm of the Nebulce. 

(a) THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBUL.®. 

Investigations of the observable region as a whole have 
led to two results of major importance. One is the homo- 
geneity of the region — the uniformity of the large-scale 
distribution of nebulae. The other is the velocity-distance 
relation. 

The small-scale distribution of nebulae is very irregu- 
lar. Nebulae are found singly, in pairs, in groups of vari- 
ous sizes, and in clusters. The galactic system is the chief 
component of a triple nebula in wliich the Magellanic 

8 The numerical values refer to the main bodies, which, as will be ex- 
plained later, represent the more conspicuous portions of the nebulae. 



30 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


Clouds are the other members. The triple system, to- 
gether with a few additional nebulae, forms a typiQal, 
small group that is isolated in the general field of nebulae. 
The members of this local group furnished the first dis- 
tances, and the Cepheid criterion of distance is still con- 
fined to the group. 

When large regions of the sky, or large volumes of 
space, are compared, the irregularities average out and 
the large-scale distribution is sensibly uniform. The dis- 
tribution over the sky is derived by comparing the num- 
bers of nebulae brighter than a specified limit of apparent 
faintness, in sample areas scattered at regular intervals. 

The true distribution is confused by local obscuration. 
No nebulae are seen within the Milky Way, and very few 
along the borders. Moreover, the apparent distribution 
thins out, slightly but systematically, from the poles to 
the borders of the Milky Way. The explanation is found 
in the great clouds of dust and gas which are scattered 
throughout the stellar system, largely in the galactic 
plane. These clouds hide the more distant stars and nebu- 
lae. Moreover, the sun is embedded in a tenuous medium 
which behaves like a uniform layer extending more or 
less indefinitely along the galactic plane. Light from 
nebulae near the galactic poles is reduced about one fourth 
by the obscuring layer, but in the lower latitudes, where 
the light-paths through the medium are longer, the ab- 
sorption is correspondingly greater. It is only when these 
various effects of galactic obscuration are evaluated and 
removed, that the nebular distribution over the sky is re- 
vealed as uniform, or isotropic (the same in all direc- 
tions). 

The distribution in depth is found by comparing the 
numbers of nebulae brighter than successive limits of ap- 
parent faintness, that is to say, the numbers within suc- 
cessive limits of distance. The comparison is effectively 
between numbers of nebulae and the volumes of space 
which they occupy. Since the numbers increase directly 
with the volumes (certainly as far as the surveys have 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


81 


een carried, probably as far as telescopes will reach), 
be distribution of the nebulae must be uniform. In this 
iroblem, also, certain corrections must be applied to the 
pparent distribution in order to derive the true distribu- 
ton. These corrections are indicated by the velocity-dis- 
ance relation, and their observed values contribute to 
be interpretation of that strange phenomenon. 

Thus the observable region is not only isotropic but 
omogeneous as well — it is much the same everywhere 
nd in all directions. The nebulae are scattered at average 
atervals of the order of two million light-years or per- 
aps two hundred times the mean diameters. The pattern 
light be represented by tennis balls fifty feet apart. 

The order of the mean density of matter in space can 
Iso be roughly estimated if the (unknown) material 
etween the nebulae is ignored. If the nebular material 
Aere spread evenly through the observable region, the 
moothed-out density would be of the general order of 
0'^® or 10'®® grams per cubic centimeter — about one grain 
f sand per volume of space equal to the size of the earth. 

The size of the observable region is a matter of defini- 
ion. The dwarf nebulae can be detected only to moderate 
[istances, while giants can be recorded far out in space. 
There is no way of distinguishing the two classes, and 
bus the limits of the telescope are most conveniently de- 
ined by average nebulae. The faintest nebulae that have 
leen identified with the 100-inch reflector are at an aver- 
,ge distance of the order of 500 million light-years, and 
0 this limit about 100 million nebulae would be observable 
xcept for the effects of galactic obscuration. Near the 
;alactic pole, where the obscuration is least, the longest 
xposures record as many nebulae as stars. 

(h) THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE BELATION.® 

^HE foregoing sketch of the observable region has been 
ased almost entirely upon results derived from direct 

» A more extensive, nontechnical discussion of the velocity-distance rela- 
on by the writer will be found in Bed'Shifts in the Spectra of Nehulce, 



32 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


photographs. The region is homogeneous and the general 
order of the mean density is known. The next — and last — 
property to be discussed, the velocity-distance relation, 
emerged from the study of spectrograms. 

When a ray of light passes through a glass prism (or 
other suitable device) the various colors of which the light 
is composed are spread out in an ordered sequence called 
a spectrum. The rainbow is, of course, a familiar example. 
The sequence never varies. The spectrum may be long or 
short, depending on the apparatus employed, but the 
order of the colors remains unchanged. Position in the 
spectrum is measured roughly by colors, and more pre- 
cisely by wave-lengths, for each color represents light of 
a particular wave-length. From the short waves of the 
violet, they steadily lengthen to the long waves of the red. 

The spectrum of a light source shows the particular 
colors or wave-lengths which are radiated, together with 
their relative abundance (or intensity), and thus gives in- 
formation concerning the nature and the physical condition 
of the light source. An incandescent solid radiates all col- 
ors, and the spectrum is continuous from violet to red 
(and beyond in either direction). An incandescent gas 
radiates only a few isolated colors and the pattern, called 
an emission spectrum, is characteristic for any particular 
gas. 

A third type, called an absorption spectrum and of 
special interest for astronomical research, is produced 
when an incandescent solid (or equivalent source), giving 
a continuous spectrum, is surrounded by a cooler gas. The 
gas absorbs from the continuous spectrum just those col- 
ors which the gas would radiate if it were itself incan- 
descent. The result is a spectrum with a continuous back- 
ground interrupted by dark spaces called absorption 
lines. The pattern of dark absorption lines indicates the 

being the Halley Lecture delivered at Oxford University in 1934. Some of the 
material in the lecture is included in the present summary, with the permis- 
sion of the Clarendon Press. 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


33 


particular gas or gases that are responsible for the 
absorption. 

The sun and the stars give absorption spectra and 
many of the known elements have been identified in their 
atmospheres. Hydrogen, iron, and calcium produce very 
strong lines in the solar spectrum, the most conspicuous 
being a pair of calcium lines in the violet, known as H 
and K. 

The nebulae in general show absorption spectra similar 
to the solar spectrum, as would be expected for systems of 
stars among which the solar type predominated. The 
spectra are necessarily short — the light is too faint to be 
spread over long spectra — but the H and K lines of cal- 
cium are readily identified and, in addition, the G-band of 
iron and a few hydrogen lines can generally be distin- 
guished (Plates VII and VIII). 

Nebular spectra are peculiar in that the lines are not in 
the usual positions found in nearby light sources. They 
are displaced toward the red of their normal position, as 
indicated by suitable comparison spectra. The displace- 
ments, called red-shifts, increase, on the average, with the 
apparent faintness of the nebula that is observed. Since 
apparent faintness measures distance, it follows that 
red-shifts increase with distance. Detailed investigation 
shows that the relation is linear. 

Small microscopic shifts, either to the red or to the 
violet, have long been known in the spectra of astronomi- 
cal bodies other than nebulae. These displacements are 
confidently interpreted as the results of motion in the line 
of sight — radial velocities of recession (red-shifts) or of 
approach (violet-shifts). The same interpretation is fre- 
quently applied to the red-shifts in nebular spectra and 
has led to the term “velocity-distance” relation for the 
observed relation between red-shifts and apparent faint- 
ness. On this assumption, the nebulae are supposed to be 
rushing away from our region of space, with velocities 
that increase directly with distance. 



84 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJS 


Although no other plausible explanation of red-shifts 
has been found, the interpretation as velocity-shifts naay 
be considered as a theory still to be tested by actual ob- 
servations. Critical tests can probably be made with ex- 
isting instruments. Eapidly receding light sources should 
appear fainter than stationary sources at the same dis- 
tances, and near the limits of telescopes the “apparent” 
velocities are so great that the effects should be appre- 
ciable. 

The Observable Region as a Sample of the Universe. 

A COMPLETELY Satisfactory interpretation of red-shifts is 
a question of great importance, for the velocity-distance 
relation is a property of the observable region as a whole. 
The only other property that is known is the uniform dis- 
tribution of nebulae. Now the observable region is our 
sample of the universe. If the sample is fair, its observed 
characteristics will determine the physical nature of the 
universe as a whole. 

And the sample may be fair. As long as explorations 
were confined to the stellar system, the possibility did not 
exist. The system was known to be isolated. Beyond lay a 
region, unknown, but necessarily different from the star- 
strewn space within the system. We now observe that re- 
gion — a vast sphere, through which comparable stellar 
systems are uniformly distributed. There is no evidence 
of a thinning-out, no trace of a physical boundary. There 
is not the slightest suggestion of a supersystem of nebulae 
isolated in a larger world. Thus, for purposes of specula- 
tion, we may apply the principle of uniformity, and sup- 
pose that any other equal portion of the universe, selected 
at random, is much the same as the observable region. We 
may assume that the realm of the nebulae is the universe 
and that the observable region is a fair sample. 

The conclusion, in a sense, summarizes the results of 
empirical investigations and offers a promising point of 
departure for the realm of speculation. That realm, domi- 
nated by cosmological theory, will not be entered in the 



THE EXPLORATION OF SPACE 


85 


present summary. The discussions will be largely re- 
stricted to the empirical data — to reports of the actual 
explorations — and their immediate interpretations. 

Yet observation and theory are woven together, and it 
is futile to attempt their complete separation. Observa- 
tions always involve theory. Pure theory may be found in 
mathematics but seldom in science. Mathematics, it has 
been said, deals with possible worlds — logically con- 
sistent systems. Science attempts to discover the actual 
world we inhabit. So in cosmology, theory presents an in- 
finite array of possible universes, and observation is 
eliminating them, class by class, until now the different 
types among which our particular universe must be in- 
cluded have become increasingly comprehensible. 

The reconnaissance of the observable region has con- 
tributed very materially to this process of elimination. It 
has described a large sample of the universe, and the 
sample may be fair. To this extent the study of the struc- 
ture of the universe may be said to have entered the field 
of empirical investigation. 



CHAPTER II 


FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 

The Classification of Nebula. 

T he first chapter presented a brief sketch of the 
current conception of the realm of the nebulae. The 
sample available for inspection is a vast region of 
space through which comparable stellar systems are more 
or less uniformly distributed. The subject will now be de- 
veloped systematically and in greater detail. 

The first step is obviously a study of the apparent fea- 
tures of the systems under investigation. The nebulae 
might be members of a single family or they might repre- 
sent a mixture of utterly different kinds of objects. The 
question is very important for all investigations of a gen- 
eral nature. The nebulae are so numerous that they cannot 
all be studied individually. Therefore, it is necessary to 
know whether a fair sample can be assembled from the 
more conspicuous objects and, if so, the size of the sample 
required. The answer to this question, and to many others, 
is sought in the classification of nebulae. 

The problem is essentially a photographic one, for the 
nebulae are faint and structural details are extremely dif- 
ficult to see. Visual observations, even with the largest 
telescopes, are less satisfactory than photographs made 
with moderate-size cameras. Photographs with large tele- 
scopes, of course, are correspondingly more informative. 

The simplest procedure is to sort out the nebulae, by in- 
spection of photographs, into groups of objects showing 
similar features. The more conspicuous members of each 
group can then be studied in detail and the results used 
for the comparison of the groups themselves. The degree 
of success attained by the method depends largely upon 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULiE 


87 


the significance of the features selected as the basis of 
classi&ation. 

*To a certain degree, the choice of these criteria repre- 
sents a compromise. The features must be significant — 
they must indicate physical properties of the nebulae 
themselves and not chance effects of orientation — and 
also they must be conspicuous enough to be seen in large 
numbers of nebulae. Millions of nebulae are within reach 
of existing telescopes, but relatively few are sufficiently 
large and bright for detailed investigation. Inconspicuous 
features, although they might be highly significant, would 
restrict the classification to a small number of nebulae 
which might not be a fair sample. 

Numbers of nebulae increase rapidly with decreasing 
brightness, and the great majority are recorded on the 
photographic plates as mere formless specks, barely dis- 
tinguishable from images of faint stars. These objects in 
general are beyond the limits of any useful classification. 
There are large numbers of nebulae, somewhat brighter 
but still so small and faint that no details are discernible 
except elongation and concentration (luminosity-gradient 
or rate at which the luminosity fades from the center 
toward the edge of an image). Classifications have been 
based on these features, but depend largely on chance 
orientation. When the criteria are applied to conspicu- 
ous, well-known nebulae, their significance appears to be 
slight. 


The Common Pattern. 

The current classifications were derived from several 
hundred of the bright nebulae, on the assumption that the 
collection was sufficiently large to constitute a fair sample 
of nebulae in general. These objects were sorted into 
groups, each representing an assemblage of characteristic 
features. The groups fell naturally into an ordered se- 
quence with the criteria varying systematically from one 
end to the other. Many characteristic features could be 



38 


THE REALM OF THE NEBUL-E 


described in the brightest nebulsB, but as fainter and still 
fainter nebulas were examined, the features were gradu- 
ally lost until finally the most conspicuous alone could be 
recognized. These last surviving criteria constitute the 
basis of the formal classification. Two such systems have 
been developed, but as they are rather similar, only one 
will be presented here in detail.^ This classification re- 
veals a common, fundamental pattern, whose continuous 
variation produces the observed sequence of nebular 
forms. 

As a first step the nebulae are divided into two very un- 
equal groups. The great majority are called “regular 
nebulae,” since they exhibit, as a common pattern, con- 
spicuous evidence of rotational symmetry about dominat- 
ing, central nuclei. The remaining objects, about 2 or 3 
per cent of the total number, are called “irregular,” 
because they lack both rotational symmetry and, in gen- 
eral, dominating nuclei. 

Regular nebulae are either “elliptical nebulae” or “spi- 
rals.” Objects in each group fall naturally into ordered 
sequences of structural forms ; and one end of the ellipti- 
cal sequence is rather similar to one end of the spiral 
sequence. Accordingly, the two sequences are oriented, 
for purposes of description, as though they were two sec- 
tions of a single, larger sequence containing all structural 
forms encountered among the regular nebulae. The zero- 
point is arbitrarily selected at the free end of the ellipti- 
cal section. The progression throughout the complete se- 
quence thus runs from the most compact of the elliptical 
nebulae to the most open of the spirals — a progression in 
dispersion or expansion. The terms “early” and “late” 
are used to denote relative position in the empirical se- 
quence without regard to their temporal implications. 
These explanations emphasize the purely empirical na- 

1 Hubble, Extra-Galactic Nehul(B, ‘^Mt. Wilson Contr., No. 324; Astro- 
physical Journaly 64, 321, 1926. See also, Lundmark, A Preliminary Classifi- 
cation of Nehulce, ^^Upsala Meddelanden (Arkiv for Mat., Astr. och 
Fysik),'' 19b, No. 8, 1926. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULJE 


39 


ture of the sequence of classification. The consideration 
is. important because the sequence closely resembles the 
line of development indicated by the current theory of 
nebular evolution as developed by Sir James Jeans.* 

Elliptical Nebulae.’^ 

Elliptical nebulae are designated by the symbol E. They 
range from globular objects through ellipsoidal figures to 
a limiting, lenticular form with a ratio of axes about 3 to 
1. It is probable that all regular nebulae with main bodies 
flatter than this limiting form are spirals. Elliptical nebu- 
lae are highly concentrated and. show no indications of 
resolution into stars. The luminosity falls rapidly away 
from bright, semistellar nuclei to undefined boundaries. 
As far as exposures have been pushed, diameters, and 
hence total luminosities, increase steadily with increasing 
exposure-time. Small patches of obscuring material are 
occasionally silhouetted against the luminous background, 
but otherwise these nebulae present no structural details. 

The only general features by which the elliptical nebu- 
lae can be further classified are (o) the shapes of the 
images, or, more precisely, the shapes of the isophotal 
contours (contours of equal luminosity); and (&) the 
luminosity-gradients. The gradients are difficult to esti- 
mate on a numerical scale and their measurement re- 
quires an elaborate technique. For these reasons they are 
not suitable as criteria for rapid classification. 

The shapes of contours are readily estimated by simple 
inspection, but they refer, of course, to the projected 
images as seen on the photographic plates and not to the 
actual 3-dimensional nebulae. Circular contours might 

2 The most recent statement of the theory is in Jeans, Astronomy and 
Cosmogony (1928), XIII. 

8 See Hubble, Distribution of Luminosity in Elliptical Nehulw, ^*Mt. Wil- 
son Contr.,’^ No. 398; Astrophysical Journal, 71, 231, 1930; a rediscussion 
of these data by ten Bruggencate, Zeitschrift fiir Astrophysik, 1, 275, 1930; 
Smith, Some Notes on the Structure of Elliptical Nebulce, ‘*Mt. Wilson 
Contr.,^’ No. 524; Astrophysical Journal, 82, 192, 1935. 



PLATE I 

Types of Nehulce {Elliptical and Irregular) 

Elliptical Nehul(E, The sequence of regular nebulse is composed of two 
sections, one containing Elliptical nebulse and the other, Spirals, Ellip- 
tical nebulae range from globular bodies, EO, through flattening, ellip- 
sodial figures to the limiting, lenticular form, E7. Nebulae flatter than 
E7, are spirals. 

The luminosity, in elliptical nebulae, fades smoothly away from semi- 
stellar nuclei to undetermined boundaries, and the isophotal contours 
(contours of equal lumiposity) are, in general, similar ellipses. Therefore, 
the size of an image grows with increasing exposure but the shape re- 
mains approximately constant. 

E7 nebulse are lenticular bodies seen on edge. Less flattened images, 
En, might represent true figures of any form between En and E7, which 
are properly oriented in space. The real existence of all forms from 
globular to lenticular is inferred from the frequency distribution of the 
ellipticities of the projected images. 

Irregulars. Regular nebulae are characterized by rotational symmetry 
around dominating central nuclei. About one nebula in forty is irregular 
in the sense that one or both characteristics are absent. The Magellanic 
Clouds are conspicuous examples of irregulars, and are similar to the 
object NGC 4449, which appears on the Plate. 



FAMILY TBAITS OF NEBULiE 


41 

represent globular nebulae or any of the flatter forms 
whose polar axes happen to fall in the line of sight. Only 
when the flattest (lenticular) nebulae are seen on edge, do 
the projected images indicate the true figures. The un- 
certainty is serious, but unavoidable. Except for the one 
case, no method is known by which the individual true 
figures can be determined.* Nevertheless, it is possible, by 
statistical analysis of the shapes of many projected 
images (assuming random orientation), to investigate 
the existence and the relative frequencies of the various 
true forms, without knowing those of individual objects. 
The analysis indicates that the true forms do range from 
globular to lenticular and that the latter are more fre- 
quent than the former. 

Under these circumstances, a provisional classification 
has been based on the contours of projected images. The 
contours are ellipses' and in any single nebula, they are 
all similar. In other words, the shapes of images remain 
unchanged as the images grow with increasing exposure 
time. 

Ellipticity is defined as {a — h)/ a where a and b are 
respectively the major and the minor diameters. Position 
in the sequence is very simply indicated by estimates of 
the ellipticity to one decimal, the decimal point being 
omitted. Thus circular contours (apparently globular 
nebulae such as NGC 3379) are designated as EO ; M32, the 
brighter satellite of M31, with a ratio of axes about 5 to 4, 
is E2 ; lenticular nebulae such as NGO 3115, are E7. There 
the series stops — E8 or higher would doubtless refer to a 
spiral on edge mistaken for an unusually thin, lenticular 
object. The latter forms may possibly occur, but if so they 
must be very rare. 

^Luminosity-gradients along the major axes may be more or less inde- 
pendent of orientation, but the possibility is a subject for investigation and 
not a present basis for classification. 

5 Contours in lenticular nebulae deviate very slightly from ellipses — ^they 
are pointed at the extremities — but the deviations are so small that they can 
be disregarded in the discussion of elliptical nebulae as a group. 



PLATE II 

Types of Nehulce {Normal and Barred Spirals) 

The sequence of spirals is double, one branch containing normal spirals, 
the other containing barred spirals. Each branch is subdivided into three 
sections, designated by the subscripts, a, h, and c, to the symbols S and 
SB, and described as early, intermediate and late, normal or barred 
spirals. Positions in each branch are determined by the amount of mate- 
rial in the arms relative to that in the nuclear regions, by the openness of 
the arms and by the degree of resolution. The early spirals (Sa and 
SBa) appear to be closely related to the lenticular (E7) nebulae. The 
transition from E7 to SBa is smooth and continuous but that from E7 to 
Sa may be cataclysmic — all known examples of Sa have fully developed 
arms. 

The complete sequence of regular nebulae, EO to Sp, exhibits many 
features which vary systematically throughout the entire range. Total 
luminosities (absolute magnitudes) remain approximately constant but 
diameters increase and hence surface brightness diminishes ; colors, spec- 
tral types, and degree of resolution, which characterize the nebular con- 
tents, also change continuously. The galactic system is presumably a 
late type normal spiral. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULJE 


48 


Spirals. 

Spieal nebulae fall into two distinct but parallel se- 
quences, containing normal and barred spirals, desig- 
nated as S and SB, respectively. A thin scattering of 
mixed forms lies between the series. In the normal spiral, 
the two arms emerge smoothly from opposite segments 
of the periphery of a nuclear region resembling a lenticu- 
lar nebula, and thence wind outward along spiral paths. 
In the barred spiral, the two arms spring abruptly from 
either end of a bar of nebulosity stretching diametrically 
across the nuclear region, and thence follow spiral paths 
similar to those found in the normal spirals. Normal 
spirals are more frequent than barred forms in the ratio 
of 2 or 3 to 1. 


Normal Spirals. 

At the beginning of the sequence, the normal spiral ex- 
hibits a bright, semistellar nucleus and a relatively large 
nuclear region of unresolved nebulosity which closely re- 
sembles a lenticular (E7) nebula. The arms which emerge 
from the periphery are also unresolved and are closely 
coiled. As the sequence progresses, the arms increase in 
bulk at the expense of the nuclear region, unwinding as 
they grow, until in the end they are widely open and the 
nucleus is inconspicuous. About the middle of the se- 
quence, or slightly earlier, condensations begin to form. 
The resolution generally appears first in the outer arms 
and gradually spreads inward until, at the end of the se- 
quence, it reaches the nucleus. 

Barred Spirals.'' 

The barred spiral is first seen as a lenticular nebula in 
which the outer regions have condensed into a more or 
less conspicuous ring of nebulosity concentric with the 
nucleus, and a broad bar has condensed diametrically 

« Attention was first directed to the barred spirals by Curtis, Puhlicaiiona 
of the Lick Olservatory, 13, 12, 1918. 



44 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


across the nucleus from rim to rim. The appearance re- 
sembles that of the Greek letter theta, 0. As the sequence 
progresses, the ring appears to break away from the bar 
at two opposite points, just above the bar at one end and 
just below the bar at the other — thus © — and the spiral 
arms grow out of the free ends of the broken ring. There- 
after the development parallels that of the normal spiral ; 
the arms build up at the expense of the nuclear region, un- 
winding as they grow; resolution appears first in the 
outer arms and works inward toward the nucleus. The last 
stage is the familiar (S-shaped spiral with thin, well-re- 
solved arms (NGO 7479). 

Sequence of Spirals. 

Peogbession in the two series is fairly indicated by the 
relative luminosity of nuclear region and spiral arms, by 
openness of the arms and by the degree of resolution. The 
last of these criteria, of course, cannot be used in the case 
of faint, distant spirals, but the other two are generally 
applicable and, in principle, they are independent of 
orientation. Spirals seen on edge cannot always be placed 
with precision, but they can be assigned with some con- 
fidence to general regions of the sequence. 

Provisionally, each sequence of spirals has been sub- 
divided into three sections designated by the subscripts 
a, h, and c. Thus Sa, Sb, and So represent, early, inter- 
mediate, and late types of normal spirals and SBa, SBb, 
and SBc, represent the corresponding types of barred 
spirals. Sections are supposed to cover equal ranges in 
the sequences, but divisions have not been precisely speci- 
fied and the classification of border-line objects is rather 
arbitrary. Such objects are sometimes indicated by the 
combined subscripts ab and he, and nebulae intermediate 
between E7 and Sa are occasionally designated as SO. 

The general trend of the progression appears to be 
well established, but refinements may be expected as the 
subject develops. Reynolds,^ for instance, has introduced 

Classification of Spiral Nebulae,’’ Cbservatory, 50, 185, 1927. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 


45 


the tenns “massive” and “filamentary,” denoting spi- 
ralg with broad, bulky arms (M33), and with thin, stringy 
arms (MIDI). The distinction may depend upon total 
mass or some other inherent characteristic of the nebul® 
and if such an interpretation can be established, the terms 
will be highly significant as well as descriptive. 

Sequence of Regular Nehulce. 

Since early-type spirals, Sa and SBa, resemble lenticular 
nebulae (E7) in many respects, the complete sequence of 
regular nebulae may be represented by a diagram shaped 
like the letter Y, or, since the spiral series are roughly 
parallel, like a tuning fork (Fig. 1). Elliptical nebulae 


ELLIPTICAL NEBULAE 


EO E3 







Fig. 1. The Sequence of Nebular Types. 

The diagram is a schematic representation of the sequences of classification. 
A few nebulae of mixed types are found between the two sequences of spirals. 
The transition stage, SO, is more or less hypothetical. The transition between 
E7i and SB^ is smooth and continuous. Between E7 and S^, no nebulae are 
definitely recognized. 


form the stem, with globular objects (EO) at the base and 
lenticular forms (E7) just below the junction. Normal 
and barred spirals lie along the two arms, and between 
the arms a few spirals of mixed types are found. The 
latter usually exhibit barred characteristics in small re- 



46 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


gions immediately surrounding the nuclei, but otherwise 
resemble normal spirals — M83 and M61 are examples. 

The junction may be represented by the more or less 
hypothetical class SO — a very important stage in all 
theories of nebular evolution. Observations suggest a 
smooth transition between E7 and SBa, but indicate a dis- 
continuity between E7 and Sa in the sense that Sa spirals 
are always found with arms fully developed. Speculation 
concerning the discontinuity will be unprofitable until 
more detailed information has been assembled from 
large-scale photographs. At present, the suggestion of 
cataclysmic action at this critical point in the evolutional 
development of nebulae is rather pronounced. 

Additional Characteristics. 

Before leaving the description of regular nebulae, a few 
additional features may be mentioned. Nuclei in general 
are semistellar, and too small for thorough investigation 
by photographic methods. In very late-type spirals 
(M33), where the nuclei stand out more or less conspicu- 
ously against the relatively faint nebulosity in the imme- 
diate region, the nuclei resemble globular clusters. In rare 
cases the nuclei appear stellar in all direct tests that have 
been applied. Such nuclei in general are relatively bright 
and exhibit emission spectra similar to the spectra of 
planetary nebulae (N 2 brighter than H3). Thus, regardless 
of their appearance, they cannot be considered as single 
stars in the ordinary sense of the term. 

Spiral structures appear to be embedded in faint, un- 
resolved nebulosity which can often be traced well beyond 
the main bodies of the nebulae. Obscuration plays a con- 
spicuous role. Peripheral bands of obscuring material, 
presumably dust or gas, are frequently found in the 
earlier types of normal spirals, Sa and Sb, and are seen in 
silhouette when the nebulae are oriented nearly edge-on 
(NGC 4594). These bands have not been found among the 
early barred spirals. Obscuration in definite patches, 
ranging widely in dimensions, is especially conspicuous in 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 


47 


the later types, but more so in the normal than in the 
barred spirals. The patches are presumably similar to 
obscuring clouds in the galactic system, and comparisons 
of angular diameters were once used as rough indications 
of the order of distances of spirals.® 

Occasional nebulae show unusual features and their pre- 
cise positions in the sequence of classification are rather 
uncertain. Such objects are placed according to the judg- 
ment of the investigator, and the letter p (for peculiar) is 
added to the symbol of classification. The device is re- 
quired for perhaps 2 per cent of the regular nebulae, and 
is more frequently applied to elliptical nebulae than to 
spirals. The fainter companion of M31, and the compan- 
ion of M51, both of which are classed as Ep, may be men- 
tioned as examples. 

Irregular Nehulm. 

Other nebulae, between 2 and 3 per cent of the total num- 
ber, show no evidence of rotational symmetry and hence 
do not find a place in the sequence of classification. These 
objects are called irregular nebulae and are designated as 
Ir. About half of the irregulars form a homogeneous 
group, in which the Magellanic Clouds are typical ex- 
amples, and their importance probably merits a separate 
division.® Since their stellar contents resemble those of 
very late-type spirals, they are sometimes considered as 
representing the last stage in the sequence of regular 
nebulae. Their status, however, is speculative, and the ab- 
sence of conspicuous nuclei may be of more fundamental 
significance than the absence of rotational symmetry, 
which is a possible consequence. 

The remaining irregulars might be arbitrarily placed 
in the regular sequence as highly peculiar objects, rather 

8 The most extensive discussion of obscuring material in spirals is that by 
Curtis, Publications of the Lick Observatory , Vol. XIII (1918), to which the 
reader is referred for further information. 

» Landmark ^8 classification does include a division — ^Magellanic Nebulae — 
for these objects. 



48 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


than in a separate class. Some, such as NGC 5363 and 1275, 
could be described as elliptical nebulae which have disinte- 
grated without developing spiral structures. Others, such 
as M82, are merely nondescript. Almost all of them re- 
quire individual consideration but, in view of their very 
limited numbers, they can be neglected in preliminary 
surveys of nebular forms. 

The Standard Nebula^° 

Nebul.® at any given stage in the regular sequence are 
constructed on a fairly uniform pattern. They present not 
only similar structures but also a constant, mean surface- 
brightness. Some are large and bright, others are small 
and faint ; in appearance they resemble a single, standard 
nebula placed at various appropriate distances. This con- 
clusion is derived from the observed fact that total lumi- 
nosity, on the average, varies directly with the square of 
the major diameter. Now the square of the diameter meas- 
ures the area of a nebular image if the nebula is oriented 
face-on (polar axis in the line of sight). For such nebula), 
the relation 

Luminosity = Constant X ( diameter )“ 

indicates constant, mean surface-brightness. Moreover, 
since the nebulae are moderately transparent, total lumi- 
nosities are, in the same degree, independent of orienta- 
tion. Hence, if major diameters of projected images are 
used consistently, the above relation holds approximately 
for all nebulae, regardless of foreshortening. 

The relation is expressed in astronomical units as 

m -f 5 log d = 0 

where m is total apparent magnitude, d is apparent angu- 
lar diameter, say in minutes of arc, and C, the sum, is 
constant for nebulae at a particular stage in the sequence. 
By means of this relation all nebulae at a given stage can 
be reduced to a standard apparent magnitude and the 

10 Hubble, Eiutra-Galactic Nehulos, 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULJE 


49 


dispersion in diameters can then be examined, or vice 
versa. 

When standard nebulae, all reduced to a given apparent 
magnitude, are established at various stages along the 
sequence, it is found that the diameters increase steadily 
from globular nebulae to open spirals (Fig. 2). This state- 



PiG. 2. Neiular Diameters along the Sequence of Types {m — 10). 

For nebulsB of the same apparent luminosity, the diameters increase steadily 
from the globular nebulae to the open spirals. The diagram shows the mean 
diameters (of the main bodies) in minutes of arc, for nebulae of the tenth 
apparent magnitude. The horizontal scale is arbitrary. 


ment is another way of saying that C increases system- 
atically throughout the sequence. Once the law of varia- 
tion is established, it is possible to reduce all the regular 
nebulae (and, in a statistical sense, the irregular nebulae 
as well) to a given stage in the sequence — for instance, to 
the junction point, SO — and to discuss them as a single, 
homogeneous group. This procedure emphasizes the con- 
venience, as well as the significance, of the classification 


60 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


and permits the application of quantitative methods so 
desirable in all investigations. 

In actual practice, certain difficulties are encountered. 
Diameters and luminosities are very arbitrary quantities, 
depending upon exposures and methods of measurement. 
It is for this reason that the term “main body” has been 
employed, referring to the portion of a nebula which is 
readily visible on simple inspection of well-exposed 
photographs. The main body must be distinguished from 
the much larger area over which the nebula can be traced 
with laborious photometric methods. 

The diameter-luminosity relation and the variation of 
C throughout the sequence, may be expected to emerge 
from any homogeneous set of data. The numerical results, 
however, depend upon the particular set of data employed. 
The first investigation, for instance, which included about 
400 nebulae, was based upon Holetschek’s visual magni- 
tudes, and diameters of main bodies estimated by simple 
inspection of hour-exposures on fast plates with large re- 
flectors. Improved results, derived by combining these 
diameters with estimated photographic magnitudes listed 
in the Harvard Survey” of bright nebulae, are given in 
Table II. The data represent the general pattern of the 
variation, but the numerical values refer to a particular 
set of conditions and require appropriate revisions when 
other conditions are specified. 

Features which Vary Systematically through 
the Sequence. 

(a) SPECTBAL TYPES.” 

Otheb characteristics which vary systematically through 
the sequence are spectral types, colors, and among the 

11 * ^ A Survey of the External Galaxies Brighter than the Thirteenth Mag- 
nitude/^ Harvard College Observatory, Annals, 88, No. 2, 1932, 

12 The classification of nebular spectra is largely the work of Humason. 
Most of the data are found in ‘^Mt. Wilson Contrs.,’^ No. 426 and No. 531; 
Astrophysical Journal, 74, 35, 1931, and 83, 10, 1936. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 61 

spirals, the upper limits of stellar luminosity (intrinsic 
luminosities of brightest stars). Spectral types are known 
for the nuclear regions of about 150 nebulae. The solar 
type, early G, predominates, although an occasional K or 
P is found. Dwarf characteristics are conspicuous in the 
few spectra which have been recorded on considerable 
scales, and hence they are provisionally assumed to be 

TABLE II. 


Diameter-Luminosity Belation, 


Type 

C* 

Type 

c 

EO 

11.4 

s. 

13.9 

1 

11.6 

s. 

14.4 

2 

11.9 

Sc 

14.9 

3 

12.2 

SBa 

13.7 

4 

12.5 

SBb 

14.0 

5 

12.8 

SBc 

14.7 

6 

13.1 

Irr 

14.0 

7 

13.4 




* C = m + 5 log d, where m is the total apparent magnitude of a nebula 
and d is the angular diameter in minutes of arc. 


normal features of nebular spectra. In the best-known 
spectra, those of the nuclear regions of M31 and M32, the 
relative intensities of the absorption lines correspond to 
those found in spectra of stars (dG3) whose absolute 
magnitudes are about +4.3. Such stars are closely com- 
parable with the sun. 

The relatively rare “stellar” nuclei with emission spec- 
tra resembling spectra of planetary nebulae, have already 
been mentioned. The significance of these spectra is un- 
known, but in view of their rarity they may be neglected 
in a preliminary survey of the field. Another type of emis- 
sion spectrum is fairly common in irregular nebulae and 
in the outer regions of open spirals. These spectra are 
localized in isolated patches within the nebulae and re- 
semble the spectra produced by certain diffuse nebulosi- 
ties (clouds of gas in the neighborhood of very hot stars. 



62 


THE BEALM OF THE NEBULJE 


for example, the Orion nebulosity) in the galactic system. 
The phenomena represent one of the many analogies be- 
tween nebulas and our own stellar system. 

When emission spectra are disregarded, the mean type 
of the nuclear spectra varies systematically through the 
sequence of classification, ranging from about G4 for the 
early, elliptical nebulae to about F9, or slightly earlier, for 
the open spirals. The range is small but is quite definitely 
established, since the dispersion in the correlation is also 
small. The mean type of all available absorption spectra 
is about dG3. 


( 6 ) COLOES. 

Spectbal types are derived from absorption lines without 
regard to the distribution of the continuous spectra. 
Colors, on the other hand, represent the distribution of 
the continuous spectra without regard to absorption lines. 
Among stars, there is a definite relation between colors 
and spectral types, and when one is known the other can 
be inferred with some confidence. Departures from the 
normal relation are termed color-deficiencies and color- 
excesses. The latter are by far the more common, especially 
in the rqgion of the Milky Way, and are generally inter- 
preted as due to selective absorption by diffuse, inter- 
stellar material. 

Among the nebulae, however, the normal relation be- 
tween color and spectral type appears only in the open 
spirals. Globular nebulae exhibit a conspicuous color ex- 
cess of the order of 0.3 mag., and the excess diminishes 
along the sequence until it vanishes at Sc. 

The cause of the phenomena is unknown, although the 
variation is well established. The colors (for about 80 
nebulae) represent very precise measures through blue 
and yellow filters made with photoelectric cells by Steb- 
bins and his associates directly at the foci of the large re- 
flectors on Mount Wilson.^® Other methods give com- 

18 These data are not yet published, but provisional values were available 
by the courtesy of Professor Stebbins. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULiE 


63 


parable, although less precise, results for a wide range 
of additional nebulas. 

The color-excesses exhibit no appreciable dependence 
upon galactic latitude nor upon apparent magnitude. The 
entire range is observed in the Virgo cluster alone (at 
latitude +75°). The source of the color-excess must, 
therefore, be assigned to the nebulae themselves and not 
to intervening diffuse material either within or without 
the galactic system. Diffuse material within the nebulae 
might be responsible, but this suggestion raises certain 
difficulties which have not yet been satisfactorily ex- 
plained. 

The observational data are summarized in Table III, 
where mean spectral types by Humason, and mean color 
classes (on the scale of giant stars) by Stebbins, are given 
for various stages in the sequence of classification. 

TABLE III. 

Spectral Types and Colors of Nehulce. 


Nebular Type Spectral Type Color Class 

E0-E9 G4 g6 

Sa, SBa G3 g5 

Sb, SBb G2 g4 

Se, SBe F9 f7 


(c) BESOLUTION. 

Photographs of many of the conspicuous spirals and ir- 
regular nebulae show numerous knots and condensations 
which are now known to represent individual stars and 
groups of stars. The identification of stars in nebulae, 
which was of fundamental importance since it led directly 
to the determination of distances, will be described at 
some length in Chapter IV. The subject is mentioned at 
this point because it is simpler and more significant to 
discuss “resolution into stars” rather than “resolution 
into condensations.” 

Resolution first appears among the earlier, intermedi- 



54 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


ate spirals, probably about Sab. Thereafter the stars be- 
come increasingly conspicuous. Lack of resolution among 
earlier types does not necessarily mean that stars are 
absent ; it merely indicates that, if stars are present, the 
brightest of them are fainter than the brightest stars in 
the later spirals. Thus it is not impossible that all nebulae 
are composed of stars, but that the upper limit of stellar 
luminosity increases systematically through the sequence 
of classification, passing above the observable threshold 
in the vicinity of the stage Sab. 

The hypothesis is admittedly speculative, but it finds 
some support in the observed luminosities of nebulae and 
stars in the neighboring Virgo cluster. This cluster is a 
compact group of several hundred nebulae among which 
all types are represented (except the irregulars). The 
mean luminosities of the different types are of the same 
general order, but the stars are systematically brighter in 
the Sc than in the Sb spirals, and no stars at all are found 
in the Sa spirals. These data further suggest that in- 
creasing stellar luminosities may compensate for the 
fading of unresolved nebulosity, leaving the total lumi- 
nosities of the nebulae relatively constant. 

The fact that the combined photographic luminosity of 
stars and unresolved nebulosity is fairly constant, is in- 
timately associated with diminishing color-excess through 
the sequence. The brightest stars in open spirals are blue, 
and are presumably 0-type supergiants such as those ob- 
served in the galactic system and in the Magellanic 
Clouds. Scares,^* in 1922, found that the outer arms of 
open spirals, the regions where resolution is most con- 
spicuous, are bluer (have smaller color-indices) than the 
nuclear regions. No interpretation of the phenomenon 
was offered at the time, but later, when the condensations 
were identified as stars, it seemed probable that the color- 

14 < ^ Preliminary Ee&ults on the Color of Nebulae/' Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 2, 553, 1916. See also another discussion by 
Seares in Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 28, 123, 
1916. 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 


85 


effect was due to blue (early-type) stars. Finally, when 
the colors of individual stars were measured and found to 
be blue, the interpretation seemed established. Since no 
differential distribution of color is found in elliptical 
nebulae, the systematic decrease in color along the se- 
quence appears to be definitely associated with the pro- 
gressive development of blue giants. 

(d) RELATIVE FREQUENCY OP TYPES. 

Finally, there appears to be a systematic increase in the 
relative frequency, or numbers of nebulae, along the se- 
quence of classification. The great clusters, which are 
dominated by the early types, do not conform to the rule. 
In the general field of isolated nebulae, however, the in- 
creasing frequency is found in all large collections of 
nebulae which are reasonably complete or representative, 
to a definite limit of apparent magnitude. The only essen- 
tial requirement is that the classification must be made 
from photographs on a scale sufficient to avoid effects of 
selection. Such effects generally operate in favor of early 
types at the expense of later types. 

The first tabulation according to the present classifica- 
tion was made from Holetschek’s list of about 400 nebulae 
observed from a northern latitude. A more comprehensive 
summary may be derived from the Harvard Survey of 
bright nebulae covering the entire sky. The relative fre- 
quencies for 600 nebulae with types estimated from large- 
refiector plates, is given in Table IV. The increasing 

TABLE IV. 


Belative Frequencies of Ne'bular Types, 


Type 

Frequency 
(Per Cent) 

E0-B7 

17 

S., SB. 

19 

Sb, SBb 

25 

Sc, SB. 

36 

Irr 

2.5 



66 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


frequency along the sequence is conspicuous among the 
spirals, where effects of orientation are not serious. , 

Elliptical nebulae, except the lenticular forms, E7, can- 
not be treated individually since the actual forms cannot 
be differentiated from effects of orientation in the pro- 
jected images. An EO image, for instance, might represent 
any figure of revolution oriented with the axis in the line 
of sight. In general, an E« image might represent any 
nebula whose actual ellipticity is equal to, or greater than, 
n, and which is appropriately oriented. The frequency- 
distribution of actual ellipticities is a statistical problem 
and it can be readily solved once the distribution of pro- 
jected ellipticities is known from the observations. The 
solution involves the law of orientation of nebular axes, 
and in practice the reasonable assumption of random 
orientation is chosen. 

The problem has been discussed by various investiga- 
tors and the results are not entirely consistent. The data 
are rather scanty for isolated nebulae, among which the 
ellipticals are relatively rare. Larger lists can be as- 
sembled in the clusters, where ellipticals predominate, but 
their interpretation is confused by variations in average 
type from one cluster to another. It seems clear, however, 
that globular nebulae are relatively rare as compared with 
lenticular systems, and that numbers increase along the 
sequence with increasing ellipticity. 

Summary. 

The discussion of relative frequencies completes the pre- 
liminary examination of the objects under investigation. 
Order has emerged from the apparent confusion and the 
planning of further research is greatly simplified. The 
study of nebular forms, as they appear on direct photo- 
graphs, leads to the conclusion that nebulae are closely re- 
lated members of a single family. They are constructed 
on a fundamental pattern which varies systematically 
through a limited range. The nebulae fall naturally into an 
ordered sequence of structural forms and are readily re- 



FAMILY TRAITS OF NEBULA 


67 


duced to a standard position in the sequence. At such a 
standard stage, the relation between apparent size and 
brightness is just that to be expected if the same nebula 
could be examined from various distances. The disper- 
sion in the apparent characteristics of nebulae is remark- 
ably small. Therefore, any considerable collection of nebu- 
lae, chosen at random, should be a fair sample. Eesults of 
detailed studies of conspicuous objects can be applied to 
nebulae in general. And broad statistical investigations 
may be conducted with some assurance that the material 
is homogeneous. 



CHAPTER III 


THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 

Nebular Surveys. 

T he distribution of nebulae, as well as their classifi- 
cation, can be studied in a significant way with no 
knowledge of actual distances. The distribution is 
derived from extensive surveys. The important numerical 
data are the numbers of nebulae brighter than various 
limits of apparent faintness. As the limits progress — as 
the surveys penetrate into greater and still greater depths 
of space — the numbers of nebulae increase rapidly and the 
broad features of the distribution become steadily more 
pronounced. Surveys to a single limit give the distribution 
over the sky, while the distribution in depth is found by 
comparing surveys to successive limits. Thus two prob- 
lems are presented, and the really significant results are 
achieved at the very faint limits which furnish the largest 
numbers of nebulae. 

The interpretation of the data is a statistical problem 
whose intricacies will not be presented in detail. The prin- 
ciple of the method is simple, however, and may be men- 
tioned briefly before the results of the investigations are 
described. Suppose that real distances were unknown. 
Nevertheless, if the nebulae were all of the same intrinsic 
luminosity (same absolute magnitude or candle power), 
the relative distance of each individual object would be 
indicated by its apparent faintness. Positions in space 
could then be mapped, on some arbitrary scale, and the 
general features of the distribution would be clearly re- 
vealed. 

The actual problem was complicated by the probability 
(now known as a fact) that the nebulae were not equally 
luminous. There might be (and there are) giant nebulae 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


S9 


and dwarf nebulae and all intermediate grades. Thus ap- 
parent faintness alone would not determine relative dis- 
tances, and maps such as those mentioned above would be 
misleading. 

The difficulty was met in a very simple way. Instead 
of plotting individual nebulae, the averages of large 
groups were mapped. Absolute magnitudes of individual 
objects might be scattered over a considerable range, but 
the means of large groups, chosen at random, should be 
fairly constant. Upon this simple principle are based the 
powerful statistical methods of investigating the distri- 
bution, although they are developed to a degree which 
permits the simultaneous consideration of all possible 
groupings of the data. 

In studying the distribution, one important assumption 
was made. Consider all the nebulae in a given volume of 
space. The relative numbers of giants and dwarfs and 
normal objects — more precisely, the frequency-distribu- 
tion of absolute magnitudes (candle powers) among these 
nebulae — form the “luminosity-function.” It was as- 
sumed that the luminosity-function remains constant 
throughout the regions covered by the surveys — that the 
function is independent of distance or direction — that the 
giants do not tend to congregate in one region, and the 
dwarfs in another region. The assumption has not been 
fuUy established by direct observations, but it seems rea- 
sonable and it is consistent with all information available 
at the present time. It will be implied in the chapters 
which follow, even when it is not specifically mentioned. 

On the basis of this assumption, the mean absolute mag- 
nitude for a large group of neighboring nebulae should be 
much the same as the mean magnitude for a group of dis- 
tant nebulae. In a statistical sense, apparent faintness 
would measure relative distances, although absolute dis- 
tances were unknown. Nothing was postulated concerning 
total numbers of nebulae per unit volume of space. The 
possible variation throughout the explored region (the 
density-function) was a problem to be investigated, and 



60 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


the survey would lead to a solution provided the lumi- 
nosity-function was constant. 

The surveys furnished data that were selected on the 
basis of apparent luminosity. Now it is an interesting 
fact, which may be mentioned in passing, that the mean 
candle power of a group of nebulae selected in this manner 
— for instance, nebulae of the fifteenth apparent magni- 
tude — is not the same as the mean candle power of nebu- 
lae in a given volume of space. The two quantities are 
related, it is true, but the relation involves the precise 
form of the luminosity-function. The subject will be 
discussed later, when the effects of selection must be 
evaluated. It is mentioned here merely as a preface to the 
statement that apparent magnitudes measure relative 
distances (in a statistical sense) regardless of the precise 
form of the luminosity-function, provided the form is con- 
stant. Thus nebulae of the fifteenth magnitude average ten 
times nearer than nebulae of the twentieth magnitude, and 
ten times more distant than those of the tenth magnitude. 
In general 

log djd^ — 0.2 (m, — mj) 

where d and m are mean distances and mean apparent 
magnitudes of any two groups of nebulae, selected on the 
basis of m (as they are in the surveys). 

The data available for investigations of distribution 
are of various kinds. The brighter, conspicuous nebulae 
are known individually, although accurately measured 
magnitudes are rare. The most extensive list with usable 
magnitudes is the Harvard Survey^ which is believed to be 
complete over the entire sky, down to and including the 
limiting magnitude, m = 12.9. Nebulae to brighter limits 
can be extracted from this list. 

1 Shapley and Ames, ‘ ^ A Survey of the External Galaxies Brighter than 
the Thirteenth Magnitude,^’ Harvard College Observatory, Annals, 88, No. 2, 
1932. Extensive counts of faint nebulae also have been made at Harvard but, 
except in a few instances, the data have not yet been published in sufficient 
detail to permit an examination of the important features of completeness 
and homogeneity. 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


61 


More or less complete surveys are still in progress with 
caqaeras which record large areas of the sky on single 
plates, but penetrate only to moderate depths. As larger 
cameras are used, the area per plate diminishes while the 
depth of penetration increases. Thus one camera may 
record the constellation of Orion on a single plate and 
register nebulae down to m = 13, another may record the 
bowl of the Big Dipper and reach m = 16, and a third 
may record the bowl of the Little Dipper and reach m = 
18. 

Very faint limits are reached only with large telescopes, 
which record very small areas on single plates but pene- 
trate to great depths. The usable field of the 100-inch, for 
instance, is about equal to the area of the full moon. Com- 
pleteness over the sky is impractical and the surveys pro- 
ceed on the principle of sampling. Plates are centered 
mainly on selected areas, uniformly distributed, and the 
regions are assumed to be fair samples of the entire sky. 
The deepest survey for which extensive, detailed results 
are available, made with the large reflectors on Mount 
Wilson, will be discussed at some length, since it furnishes 
the most general picture of the background of faint 
nebulae.* 


Distribution over the Shy. 

The survey included 1,283 separate samples rather uni- 
formly scattered over 75 per cent of the sky. Two tele- 
scopes, the 60-inch and the 100-inch, were used indiscrimi- 
nately under varying conditions. Then, by corrections 
largely derived from the data themselves, the numbers of 
nebulas counted on the plates (about 44,000 in all) were 
changed to numbers (about 80,000) representing standard 
conditions. The limiting magnitude of the corrected 
counts was 20.0 ± 0.1 in the central region of the plates. 

Analysis of this homogeneous material indicated that 
the large-scale distribution of nebulae over the sky was 

2 Hubble, The Distribution of Extra-Galactic Nebulae, * * Mt. Wilson 
Contr./’ No. 485; Astrophysical Journal, 79, 8, 1934. 



62 


THE REALM OF THE NEBUL-® 


approximately uniform, except for the ejffects of obscura- 
tion arising within the galactic system (Fig. 3). 



Fig. 3. Apparent Distribution of Nebulae, Showing Effects 
of Galactic Obscuration. 

Positions of samples are plotted in galactic coordinates. The horizontal line, 
0° — 0°, represents the central plane of the Milky Way. The north galactic 
pole is at the top. Small dots indicate normal numbers of nebul® per sample; 
large disks and circles, excesses and deficiencies, respectively; dashes, sam- 
ples in which no nebulae were found. 

The zone of avoidance along the Milky Way (regions where dashes pre- 
dominate) is bordered by partial obscuration (fringes of open circles), be- 
yond which the distribution is approximately uniform. 

The blank spaces at the extreme right and left of the diagram represent 
the southern skies which cannot be observed from the station at which the 
survey was made. 


Galactic Obscuration. 

The evidence for galactic obscuration is as follows. 

(a) No nebulae are found along the central region of the 
Milky Way. The zone of more or less complete avoidance 
is irregular and unsymmetrieal, the width varying from 
10° to 40°. 

(b) Outside the zone of avoidance and the bordering 
fringe of partial obscuration, the numbers of nebulae per 
plate increase with galactic latitude in a manner which 
closely approximates the trend of a cosecant law (similar 


THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULiE 


to the manner in which stars brighten as they rise from 
the^horizon toward the zenith and are seen through dimin- 
ishing air-paths). 


Obscuring Clouds. 

Dabk, obscuring clouds, ranging from insignificant wisps 
to vast bodies a hundred light-years and more across, are 
scattered throughout the stellar system. Some are sen- 
sibly opaque, others are semitransparent, and still others 
are barely perceptible as thin veils. They concentrate 
markedly toward the galactic plane and are most numer- 
ous along the Milky Way, where they are seen as silhou- 
ettes against the background of more distant stars. They 
are most conspicuous in the direction of the center of the 
galactic system, where they hide the nucleus, but they are 
found in all directions and, piling up one behind another, 
effectively hide the rim of the system as well.® The dark 
pattern of this obscuration designs most of the apparent 
structure of the Milky Way, and isolates many of the so- 
called star-clouds. 

The dark clouds may consist of matter in all forms, but 
in the sensibly opaque or barely transparent clouds, the 
major part of the obscuration must be caused by dust. By 
no other form of material can the obscuration be ex- 
plained without attributing impossibly large masses to 
the clouds. Moreover, the stars, and in particular the 
globular clusters, when they are veiled by heavy, partial 
obscuration in the clouds, exhibit pronounced color-ex- 
cesses which indicate selective absorption such as dust 
would produce. The lighter clouds may have the same 
composition with smaller densities, or they may be pre- 
dominantly gaseous. 

The apparent distribution of these clouds has much the 

8 The galactic system is a highly flattened swarm of stars — presumably a 
late-type spiral nebula — in rapid rotation about a polar axis. The sun is near 
the fundamental plane (the galactic plane), but far out from the center. The 
system probably has a nucleus, but it cannot be observed because dark clouds 
lie between the sun and the galactic center. 



64 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


same pattern as the nebular zone of avoidance — a narrow 
belt concentric with the galactic plane, from which several 
great flares sweep out into higher latitudes. Thus the zone 
of avoidance with its fringe of partial obscuration is 
readily explained by the presence of obscuring clouds 
within the stellar system itself. The avoidance is not 
necessarily complete. Occasional, faint nebulae are found 
which are seen through semitransparent paths between 
sensibly opaque clouds. The object IC 10, at a latitude of 
—3°, is a conspicuous example in which only a portion of 
a presumably large spiral nebula is visible.* 

The Absorbing Layer. 

Diffuse material in the galactic system has frequently 
been discussed as though it consisted of a uniform layer 
of constant depth, centered on the galactic plane. Since 
the bulk of the obscuration is due to the isolated clouds, 
such treatment, even as a rough approximation, is likely 
to be misleading. Disregarding the clouds, however, there 
is considerable evidence of a tenuous medium, producing 
some slight absorption, which does approximate the be- 
havior of a uniform layer. This medium may permeate 
the entire main body of the galactic system, or it may 
represent a flattened, lenticular cloud so vast that the 
variations in depth, as observed from the earth, are 
scarcely perceptible. In either ease, the first-order effects 
would be much the same. 

The evidence for such an absorbing layer, derived from 
the nebular survey in regions free from obscuring clouds, 
is very clear. The average numbers of nebulse per plate 
are largest in the regions of the galactic poles (perpen- 
dicular to the plane of the Milky Way), where obscura- 
tion due to a uniform layer should be least. From the 
poles toward the galactic plane, the numbers per plate 
decrease with latitude in a manner which indicates ob- 
scuration proportional to the length of the light path 

♦ Mayall, ‘^An Extra-Galactic Object 3® from the Plane of the Galaxy/^ 
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 47, 317, 1935, 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


6 « 


through a uniform layer. In other words, the obscuration, 
expressed in magnitudes, is C X cosecant P, where C is 
the obscuration at the pole and 3 is the latitude. The rela- 
tion is indicated by the highly simplified diagram ii 
Fig. 4. 



Pig. 4. Schematic Representation of the Absorbing Layer. 

As observed from the vicinity of the sun, extragalactic objects are obscurec 
according to the lengths of the light-paths through the absorbing layer. Th< 
obscuration is least for objects seen in the direction of the galactic poles 
and increases as the latitudes diminish. 


Since the obscuration at 3 = 30° is just twice that a 
(3 = 90°, the difference indicates the actual obscuration a 
the pole itself. It is about 0.25 mag., and thus the tota 
“optical thickness” of the layer is about 0.5 mag. Num 
bers of nebulae per plate are corrected for the latitude 
effect, and reduced to a homogeneous system representing 
uniform obscuration equal to that at the galactic pole 
by the relation (Fig. 5) 

log N = log Np + 0.15 cosec 3- 

Except in the very low latitudes, the data from the sur 
veys give the picture of a uniform layer of tenuous ma 
terial, extending indefinitely. But near the galactic plane 
certain systematic departures are found which indicati 


66 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


that obscuration may be greater in the direction of the 
galactic center than in the direction of the anti-cent:er. 
The discrepancies are not very important, but they sug- 
gest the possibility that the source of the obscuration may 



Fig. 5. Obscuration by the Absorbing Layer as Shown by 
the Apparent Distribution of Nebulae. 

The average number of nebulae per unit area (brighter than a given limiting 
magnitude) increases with the galactic latitude of the area, in a manner 
which closely follows the cosecant law, 

log N = constant — 0.15 cosecant /3. 

Circles and disks represent data from the northern and the southern galactic 
hemispheres, respectively ; crosses are means of the two. The pair of triangles 
represent supplementary data in low latitudes. 


be more reasonably pictured as a highly flattened, lenticu- 
lar cloud rather than as an indefinitely extended, uniform 
layer of material. The sun, in this picture, would lie near 
the median plane of the cloud, but well away from the 





THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


67 


center. The obscuration would thus be greater in some 
directions than in others. A few such clouds are actually 
observed as dim, lens-shaped silhouettes extending for 
many degrees along the central plane of the Milky Way. 

The absorption in the tenuous layer (or cloud), differs 
from the absorption in the opaque or semitransparent 
clouds in being essentially nonselective. All colors are ab- 
sorbed in the same degree (within the uncertainties of the 
measures), and there is no appreciable variation of nebu- 
lar colors with galactic latitude. In marked contrast are 
the color-excesses of globular clusters and early type 
stars in low latitudes, measured by Stebbins and his asso- 
ciates.' These color-effects exhibit a decided correlation 
with latitude. The more conspicuous cases, however, are 
within the nebular zone of avoidance, and are rather in- 
timately associated with known, obscuring clouds. The 
fundamental correlations might well be with positions in 
the clouds rather than with the latitude. 

Investigations of galactic obscuration are still in the 
formative period. The material includes obscuring clouds, 
the diffuse medium, and the unknown source of stationary 
lines in stellar spectra. Preliminary discussions naturally 
tend to throw these all together and to smooth the various 
effects into statistical uniformity. Later developments 
will doubtless emphasize departures from homogeneity, 
and in this connection the distinction between selective 
and nonselective absorption has considerable significance. 

The General Field. 

The importance of local obscuration in the investigation 
of nebular distribution is obvious. We are in the midst of 
obscuring material, and its effects must be eliminated be- 
fore the true distribution is revealed. The sky may be 
roughly divided into the galactic belt (latitudes —40° to 
+40°) and the polar caps (latitudes 40° to 90°). The ga- 

5 Stebbins, ^ ^ Absorption and Space Eeddening in the Galaxy as Shown by 
the Colors of Globular Clusters , Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 19, 222, 1933. 



68 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


lactic belt, which contains the zone of avoidance and the 
flares and the bordering fringe of partial obscuration, 
gives information primarily concerning local obscuration. 
The polar caps, free from the major effects of local ob- 
scuration, give information primarily concerning the 
distribution of nebulae. 

As the areas of the polar caps are relatively small, the 
distribution within the caps might not represent the dis- 
tribution over the sky as a whole. But it is possible, when 
the effects of the absorbing layer have been removed 
(Fig. 6), to derive additional information by following the 



Fig. 6. Distribution of Nebulce When Observations Are 
Partially Corrected for Galactic Obscuration. 

The orientation of the diagram is similar to that in Fig. 3. The nebular 
counts have been corrected for the latitude effect (absorbing layer), but the 
effects of clouds, whether opaque or semitransparent, are still present. 

Crosses indicate samples with normal numbers of nebulae (log N differing 
from the average by not more than 0.15) ; small disks and circles, moderate 
excesses and deficiencies; large disks and circles, considerable excesses and 
deficiencies. Except for the influence of obscuring clouds, there is no evi- 
dence of conspicuous systematic variation in the distribution of nebulae over 
the sky. 


general field of nebulae down into the galactic belt, be- 
tween the great flares from the zone of avoidance with 
their bordering fringes of partial obscuration. In this way 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


69 


the distribution of nebulas may be traced, over a consider- 
able range in longitude, down to latitudes as low as 15°. 
The data are individually less precise than those for the 
polar caps alone, but the general results are thoroughly 
consistent over as much of the field as can be safely ex- 
plored. These results are as follows : 

(а) The two polar caps, northern and southern, are 
similar, and the distributions agree within the uncertain- 
ties of the data. 

(б) There are no appreciable, systematic variations in 
distribution within the general field. 

(c) Individual values of log N, where N is the number 
of nebulae per plate, are distributed at random about the 
mean value of them all (frequency-distribution of log N 
approximates a normal error-curve). 

Large-Scale Distribution over the Slcy. 

Fbom the agreement between the two polar caps or, more 
broadly, between the two galactic hemispheres, it follows 
that the sun is close to the median plane of the absorbing 
layer of diffuse material. This plane, moreover, is close to 
the galactic plane. The agreement between the polar caps, 
together with the absence of systematic variations either 
in longitude or in latitude, may be summed up in the state- 
ment that the large-scale distribution over the sky is ap- 
proximately uniform. In technical terms, the distribution 
is isotropic — the same in all directions. 

The conclusion is drawn from only a fraction of the 
sky. The zone of avoidance with its bordering fringes 
withdraws large areas from possible exploration and, in 
addition, about 25 per cent of the sky cannot be efficiently 
observed from the station at which the survey was made. 
However, the areas investigated include both galactic 
poles, the whole of the northern cap, 60 per cent of the 
southern cap, and the less obscured portions of perhaps 
two thirds of the galactic belt. The extent and the pattern 
of these regions would appear to constitute a fair sample 
of the sky as a whole, and the complete absence of appre- 



70 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


ciable, systematic variations strongly suggests that no 
significant, major departures from isotropy should be ex- 
pected in the unobserved regions. 

Large-Scale Distribution in Depth. 

Distribution in depth is indicated by the rate at which 
numbers of nebulae increase with apparent faintness — in 
other words, by the comparison of various groups of 
nebulae with the volumes of space through which the 
groups are distributed. If the luminosity -function is inde- 
pendent of distance, then, in a statistical sense, apparent 
magnitudes measure relative distances. Therefore, the 
number of nebulae brighter than a given magnitude, Nm, 
represents the number within a sphere of a particular 
radius. The comparison of numbers contained in spheres 
of successive radii — more generally, the form of the rela- 
tion between Nm and m — ogives the distribution in depth. 

TJnifoijn distribution, since the numbers of nebulae are 
then proportional to the volumes of space over which the 
counts extend, is expressed by the simple relation* 

log Nm = 0.6 m -p constant. 

The relation is closely approximated even by casual ob- 
servational data. For this reason, serious investigations 
of distribution in depth are largely confined to the search 
for minor departures from uniformity, and to the precise 
evaluation of the constant. When the luminosity-function is 
known, the constant determines the quantitative distribu- 
tion — the number of nebulae per unit volume of space. 

Preliminary results, establishing approximate uniform- 
ity in the immediate neighborhood of the galactic system, 
were first derived from counts of the brighter nebulae, for 

6 Let d represent the distance corresponding to apparent magnitude m; 
let V represent the volume of the sphere with radius d, and let C, with or 
without subscripts, represent various constants. Then 

log d = 0.2 w + (7i 
= C,V = 

log Nja == 3 log d + 

= 0.6 tn C 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULJE 71 

which roughly estimated magnitudes were available. 
Similar results, extending to very faint limits, were de- 
rived later by plotting numbers of nebulae per photo- 
graphic plate against exposure times of the plates. This 
relation could be transformed into a relation between Nm 
and m by means of the known rate at which the limiting 
magnitudes on the plates varied with exposure times. 

The data now available represent several surveys with 
large reflectors to well-determined, limiting magnitudes 
ranging from 18.5 to 21. The detailed results will be dis- 
cussed later in connection with small apparent depar- 
tures from uniformity, which are interpreted as effects of 
red-shifts on apparent luminosity. When appropriate cor- 
rections for such effects are made, the data indicate uni- 
form distribution (within the small uncertainties of the 
investigation) out to the practical limits to which surveys 
can be carried with existing telescopes. The results are 
summarized in the relation 

log Nm = 0.6 (m — Am) — 9.09 ± 0.01 

where Nm is the number of nebulae per square degree and 
Am is the effect of red-shifts at magnitude m. 

In contrasting the uniform distribution of the nebulae 
with the thinning out of stars in the stellar system, the 
power of the telescope approaches the spectacular. The 
stars form an isolated system, and the star-density dimin- 
ishes steadily from the nucleus to the border. Therefore, 
for an observer within the system, the number of stars 
brighter than a given limiting magnitude, increases with 
the magnitude, but the rate of increase steadily dimin- 
ishes. The phenomenon is especially pronounced in the 
directions of the galactic poles. In these directions, the 
distances to the boundaries of the stellar system are 
shortest and the total numbers of stars in the line of 
sight are least. 

At moderately bright, limiting magnitudes, the stars 
per square degree greatly outnumber the nebulae, and the 
rate of increase is nearly the same for both. As succes- 



72 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


sively fainter limits are observed, the nebulae maintain a 
constant rate of increase while the rate for stars steadily 
diminishes. Eventually, the total number of nebulae per 
square degree, approaches the total number of stars. In 
the regions of the galactic poles, equality may be expected 
at magnitude 21.5 or thereabouts, which is approximately 
the extreme limit at which nebulae can be identified under 
favorable conditions with the 100-inch reflector. The ex- 
pectations are realized, since the maximum effective ex- 
posures in very high latitudes record fully as many recog- 
nizable nebulae as stars. The fact is, as has been said, a 
rather spectacular tribute to the power of the telescope. 

The uniform distribution in depth clearly shows that 
the nebulae are not members of the galactic system. The 
only assumption involved is the reasonable one that the 
luminosity-function of nebulae does not vary with distance 
in a manner which precisely compensates the counts for 
effects of falling density. Such a variation would be 
highly artificial and improbable. Thus the realm of the 
nebulae, even without further information concerning the 
scale on which it is constructed, appears as a definite 
entity, quite distinct from the realm of the stars. 

Small-Scale Distribution. 

The small-scale distribution of nebulae, as derived from 
the variations among small samples, is conspicuously 
nonuniform. Nebulae are found both singly, and in groups 
of various sizes up to the occasional, great compact clus- 
ters of several hundred members each. Only when large 
samples are compared does the tendency to cluster aver- 
age out and the distribution approximate uniformity. 

The great clusters, which are relatively rare, were ex- 
cluded from the surveys and will be described later. The 
present discussion is restricted to the mixture of isolated 
nebulae and small groups. The characteristics of small- 
scale variation, as derived from a particular survey, de- 
pend on the average number of nebulae per sample — ^in 
other words, upon the average volume of space per sam- 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 78 

pie, regardless of whether the volume represents a large 
angular area extending to a moderate depth, or a small 
area extending to a great depth. 

In the survey to the twentieth magnitude, the average 
sample in the polar cap was of the order of forty-five 
nebute per plate actually identified before reduction to 
standard conditions. The reduction of the counts and 
their transformation to numbers per unit area, confuse 
the simple representation of the variations among sam- 
ples, but one result is clear and significant. 

If the nebulae were individually distributed at random, 
the numbers per sample, N, would be scattered almost 
symmetrically about the average, W- Actually, the ob- 
served scatter is unsymmetrical in the sense that there is 
a conspicuous excess of small samples. The frequency- 
distribution of N follows a distorted, or “skew,” curve, 

A small part of the distortion is introduced by the limi- 
tations of the data and by the unavoidable errors of ob- 
servation and reduction. The remainder is presumably 
associated with the tendency of nebulae to cluster. An 
aggregation of nebulae drawn from the general field would 
result in one extra-large sample and several extra-small 
samples. Such a process, operating on a sufiicient scale, 
would account qualitatively for the skew distribution of 
samples in the survey. Assuming a tendency to cluster, 
the unsymmetrical distribution of A (if A is moderately 
small) would follow as a matter of course. 

Now it is well known that, in a frequency-distribution of 
this sort (excess of small samples or positive skewness), 
the substitution of log A for A, tends to restore the sym- 
metry. The remarkable feature of the nebular survey is 
the fact that the substitution completely eliminates the 
skewness and precisely restores the symmetry. The re- 
sults are shown in Fig. 7, where frequency-curves are 
plotted for both A, and log A, per sample. The frequency- 
distribution of log A closely approximates a normal er- 
ror-curve, and is fully described by the mean value, lo^A, 



74 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


together with the spread or, more precisely, the disper- 
sion, 0. 

This feature appears to be a general characteristic of 
nebular distribution. It is found in all surveys where defi- 
nite, limiting magnitudes have been consistently main- 



PiG. 7. Frequency-Distribution of Samples of Various Sizes. 

The circles indicate numbers of samples in which the logarithms of the num- 
bers of nebulae have various values. The smooth curve drawn through the 
circles is a normal error-curve. The close fit of the error-curve indicates that 
the log N per sample are distributed at random around the mean log N for 
all the samples. 

When simple numbers of nebulae per sample are substituted for the loga- 
rithms, the frequency distribution follows the unsymmetrical curve indicated 
by the dashes. 


tained and galactic obscuration has been considered. In 
each case, the log Nm per sample (m is the limiting mag- 
nitude) follow a normal error-curve and the survey is 
described by the two quantities, log and o. As the limit- 
ing magnitude, m, increases (becomes fainter), log Am in- 
creases and o diminishes. Eventually, for surveys using 
very large samples, the dispersions represent little more 






THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULiE 


76 


than the incidental errors of investigation. These surveys 
tend to conform with the theory of random sampling of a 
homogeneous population, and hence the large-scale dis- 
tribution of nebulae is said to be statistically uniform. 

A technical point may be mentioned in passing, since it 
emphasizes the precision with which the scatter of log N 
per sample is represented by the normal error-curve. 
Each survey is characterized by log and o. However, 
for the comparison of different surveys, the significant 
data are not the means of log Nm, namely log but the 
means of Am, namely These latter data represent the 
average numbers of nebulae per unit area, and hence fur- 
nish the total numbers in the sky brighter than the par- 
ticular limiting magnitudes of the surveys. It is by corre- 
lating Nm, or, for convenience, log W^, with m, that the dis- 
tribution of nebulae in depth, is investigated. 

Now the two quantities, log N and log N (dropping the 
siibscripts, m), have a very simple geometrical relation if 
the frequency-distribution of the individual log A is a 
normal error-curve. Then,’’ 

log N = 1^ + 1.152 0 ^ 

and the two sides of the equation can be calculated inde- 
pendently from the data for any survey. Such calculations 
have been made for the five available surveys with large 
reflectors. A comparison of the two sides of the equation 
shows an average difference of 0.002 in the logarithms or 
about half of 1 per cent in the numbers. The result, as has 
been said, emphasizes the precision with which the condi- 
tion is fulfilled. 

The restoration of symmetry by the transformation to 
logarithms is so exact that it suggests a property of num- 
bers rather than a property of nebular distribution. How- 
ever, no satisfactory explanation has been found in the 
mathematical manipulations, so the latter alternative 

7 This useful relation was brought to the writer ’s attention by Professor 
E. C. Tolman of the California Institute of Technology. 



76 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


seems highly probable. The feature thus serves as a de- 
scription and a measure of the tendency to cluster. 

It is clear that the groups and clusters are not super- 
posed on a random (statistically uniform) distribution of 
isolated nebulae, but that the relation is organic. Conden- 
sations in the general field may have produced the clus- 
ters, or the evaporation of clusters may have populated 
the general field. Equations describing the observed dis- 
tribution can doubtless be formulated on either assump- 
tion, and, when solved, should contribute significantly to 
speculations on nebular evolution. 

The tendency to cluster appears to operate on a limited 
scale. No organizations on a scale larger than the great 
clusters, and no clusters with as many as a thousand mem- 
bers, are definitely known. Actually, the maximum popu- 
lation of clusters may be considerably smaller. Samples 
which, on the average, are large compared with a single 
cluster, should tend to conform with the theory of random 
sampling. The frequency-distributions of N per sample 
should approximate normal error-curves. Smaller sam- 
ples should give unsymmetrical frequency-distributions 
of N, with an excess of thinly populated fields. In this 
sense, the average samples in the available surveys are 
small and the positive skewness is observed. 

The largest average sample — that found in the survey 
to the faintest limit, m = 21 — is about 200 nebulae actually 
identified per plate. The corresponding dispersion in log 
N is small, o = 0.084, and the efects of observational er- 
rors are presumably of about the same order as the true 
dispersion in the nebular distribution. Under these condi- 
tions the skewness is not very conspicuous. With still 
larger average samples, it would probably be inappre- 
ciable. 


Groups of Nebula. 

Groups and clusters are important in the study of nebular 
characteristics as well as in the study of distribution, for 
each represents a sample collection of objects all of which 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


77 


are at the same distance. Although the distance of a group 
m§iy be unknown, the relative, apparent dimensions of the 
members faithfully represent the relative, absolute di- 
mensions. 

Double and triple nebulae are numerous. The whirlpool 
nebula, M51, is a double. The great spiral in Andromeda, 
M31, with its two companions, M32 and NGC 205, is a 
triple system, and the galactic system, with the Magel- 
lanic Clouds as companions, is a similar case. All types of 
nebulae are represented in such systems, and thus they 
furnish information concerning the relative dimensions 
at various stages of the sequence of classification. More- 
over, once their distances are known, these very compact 
systems offer opportunities for deriving the order of 
nebular masses from statistical investigations of radial 
velocities. The methods involved are similar to those used 
for determining masses of double stars from the orbital 
motions of the components. 

Larger groups of nebulae are also encountered, analo- 
gous to the sparser open clusters of stars. The galactic 
system is a member of such a group and its neighboring 
fellow members were the first nebulae whose distances 
were determined. The most reliable criterion of distance, 
namely, the study of Cepheid variables, is still confined 
almost entirely to this local group. Small groups appear 
to be more numerous than large groups, but the precise 
manner in which the frequency varies with population has 
not been determined. Pending definite information, it is 
supposed that the frequency diminishes as the population 
increases, over the whole range of groups and loose clus- 
ters to the great clusters themselves. 

Clusters of Nebula. 

The nomenclature of the clusters is still arbitrary, and in 
these discussions the term “cluster” will be restricted to 
the great clusters alone. The term “group” will be used 
for all the lesser organizations. The clusters are rela- 
tively rare. About twenty are actually known, although 



PLATE III 

Group of Nebulae {NGC 3185, 3187, 3190, 3193). 

The group (in the constellation Leo; galactic long., 180°; lat., +56°) 
exhibits a variety of nebular types — E2 (3193), Sa (3190), SBab (3185), 
and SBc (3187). The apparent magnitudes range from about 12 to 13.5, 
and the average is 12.65, or, when corrected for local obscuration (lati- 
tude effect), about 12.6. 

The mean intrinsic luminosity (candle power) of this small sample 
collection is presumably about the same as that of nebulae in general. The 
absolute magnitude of the latter nebulae (see chap, vii) is Mq = —14.2. 
Therefore, the distance of the group in Leo, as indicated by the modulus, 
m — ilf = 26.8, is about 7.5 million light-years. 

Humason has measured a red-shift corresponding to a radial velocity 
of 810 miles/sec. (1300 km/sec.), in one member of the group (3193). 
This velocity, corrected for the solar motion (see chap, v), indicates a 
distance of seven million light-years (see chap, vii), in fair agreement 
with that derited from the luminosities. 

The plate was made with the lOO-inch reflector, December 24, 1935; 
north is at the top of the page ; 1 mm. = 5".7. 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULiE 79 

fragmentary data suggest that in surveys to the twentieth 
magnitude, perhaps one cluster per fifty square degrees 
may be expected. 

In appearance the clusters are remarkably similar. 
Each consists of perhaps five hundred members on the 
average, scattered through a range of about five magni- 
tudes. The form of the frequency-distribution of magni- 
tudes (relative numbers of giants, dwarfs, and normal 
nebulae) is difficult to determine, but it appears to be 
symmetrical about the mean or most frequent magnitude, 
and roughly to approximate a normal error-curve. The 
brighter branches of the frequency-curves are the more 
reliable, since the bright, giant nebulae stand out conspicu- 
ously among the fainter nebulae in the general field. These 
branches are so similar in the different clusters that the 
magnitudes of perhaps the ten brightest members may 
serve as dependable measures of the apparent character- 
istics of the clusters themselves. 

The mean magnitudes of all members, which in prin- 
ciple offer the most reliable measures, have been directly 
determined in relatively few cases. Such determinations 
involve the differentiation of cluster-members from nebu- 
lae in the general field. The problem, although simple in 
the case of brighter members, is beset with uncertainties 
in the case of fainter members, since the field-nebulae of 
comparable magnitudes are relatively numerous. In gen- 
eral, the mean or most frequent magnitude of a cluster is 
merely estimated as 2.5 mag. fainter than the brightest 
member, or 2.1 mag. fainter than the fifth brightest mem- 
ber, or by some similar empirical rule. 

The clusters vary through only a moderate range of 
compactness, and concentration toward the center, while 
appreciable, is not very conspicuous. In the latter respect, 
the nebular clusters resemble open, rather than globular, 
clusters of stars. All types of nebulae are represented, but 
in contrast to the general field, the earlier types, and es- 
pecially the elliptical nebulae, predominate. In a certain 
sense each cluster may be characterized by a most fre- 



PLATE IV 

The Corona Borealis Cluster. 

The Corona Borealis cluster (R.A. = 15^ Dec. = M“27° 56', 1930; 
gal. long. = 10°, lat. = +55°) is a typical example of the great, com- 
pact clusters. About four hundred members, most of them elliptical 
nebulae, are concentrated in an area of the sky equal to that covered by 
the full moon. The apparent magnitude of the brightest member is w = 
16.5 ; of the fifth brightest, m = 16.8 ; of the mean of all members, m = 
19 (estimated) . The faintest members are presumably at the extreme limit 
of the 100-inch refiector (about m = 21.5). Corrections for local obscura- 
tions and effects of red-shifts reduce these magnitudes by about 0.25 mag. 

Since members of this cluster average about 6.1 mag., fainter than 
members of the Virgo cluster, they are about 16.5 times as distant. A 
red-shift corresponding to a radial velocity of 13,100 miles/sec. (21,000 
km/sec.) has been measured by Humason in one of the brighter nebulaB 
of the Corona Borealis cluster. This velocity is 17 times that for the Virgo 
cluster, in good agreement with the relative luminosities. The adopted 
distance of the Corona Borealis cluster is derived from the mean absolute 
magnitude of the fifth brightest nebulae for clusters in general. Since 
2^5 = — 16.4 (chap, vii), the modulus is w — ilf= 32.95, and the dis- 
tance is 125 million light-years. 

The plate was made with the 100-inch reflector, June 20, 1933 ; north 
is at the top of the page ; 1 mm. = 2".9. 



THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEBULA 


81 


quent type, although the dispersion around that type is 
considerable. There are some indications of a correlation 
between characteristic type and compactness, the density 
of the cluster diminishing as the most frequent type ad- 
vances along the sequence of classification. The data are 
fragmentary, but in connection with the dominance of late 
types among isolated nebulae in the general field, they 
suggest as a possibility that nebulae may originate in clus- 
ters and that the disintegration of clusters may populate 
the general field. Such speculation, however, is still a sub- 
ject for conversation rather than a thesis for dissertation, 
and many more data will be required before it can be seri- 
ously considered. 

Given the large sample collections of nebulae present 
in clusters, the mean, absolute dimensions of the various 
samples should be fairly comparable. The assumption is 
strengthened by the apparent characteristics of clusters 
which, in a general way, resemble those of a single typi- 
cal cluster as it would appear at selected distances. On 
this preliminary hypothesis of absolute comparability, 
which is consistent with all the data available at the pres- 
ent time, the relative distances of clusters were indicated 
by the mean, apparent luminosities of their members, or, 
for practical purposes, by the apparent magnitudes of the 
brighter members. Subsequently, when the absolute dis- 
tance of the nearest cluster was determined, the absolute 
distances of all observed clusters were immediately 
available. 

The faintest clusters, since they are the most remote 
objects to which individual distances can be assigned, are 
selected when observations at great distances are desired, 
and the observations are made on the brightest members 
as a matter of convenience. These brightest nebulae of 
clusters represent maximum distances for a specified ap- 
parent luminosity. 

The results of the surveys may be briefly summarized. 
The small-scale distribution is irregular, but on a large 
scale the distribution is approximately uniform. No gra- 



82 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULAE 


dients are found. Everywhere and in all directions, the 
observable region is much the same. 

The nebulae are not members of the stellar system, ^he 
stars form an isolated system, which is embedded in the 
realm of the nebulae. 

The inhabitants of the realm are scattered singly and 
in groups. The frequencies of the groups diminish as the 
sizes of the groups increase. The groups are aggregations 
drawn from the general field, and are not additional 
colonies superposed on the field. The largest groups — the 
great clusters — are curiously similar organizations, and 
their relative distances are indicated by their apparent 
dimensions. 



CHAPTER IV 


DISTANCES OF NEBULAE 

T he data hitherto discussed concerned the apparent 
features of nebulae and their distribution, but gave 
no indications of absolute distances or dimensions. 
The investigations were the normal development of a line 
of research that began long ago with the introduction of 
photography. Most of the results were within the reach 
of telescopes of moderate power. The program repre- 
sented a preliminary phase of the explorations from 
which there emerged a definite picture of the nebulae as 
closely related members of a single family, scattered 
more or less uniformly through the observable region of 
space. 

The current phase of the explorations is concerned with 
the interpretation of this pattern. The essential clew was 
the scale of distance. The mass of nebular data steadily 
accumulated, but it piled up against the barrier of the 
unknown quantity. Until distances were available no 
progress was possible. 

The solution of the problem was an achievement of 
great telescopes. As telescopes and technique improved, 
they eventually reached a certain critical point and, in 
due course, the barrier fell. When the breach was open, 
a wave of exploration swept forward. With distances 
known, fruitful new methods of research were developed 
from the knowledge already accumulated. One in particu- 
lar, derived from red-shifts in the spectra of nebulae, has 
led to results that rival in significance the initial solution 
of the problem of distances. 

Investigations of the nebulae on an absolute scale are 
based upon two propositions. The first is that distances 
are indicated by the apparent luminosities of stars in- 
volved. The second is that red-shifts are linear functions 



84 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


of distances. These propositions are fundamental, and 
their development, as well as their applications, will, be 
discussed at some length. The determination of distances 
came first. 

Development of Criteria of Distances. 

The present phase of nebular research is a very recent 
development. Three dates are outstanding and any one of 
them might be selected as an appropriate starting point. 
The first radial velocity of a nebula was measured in 
1912 ; photographic novae were discovered in 1917 ; Cephe- 
ids were found in 1924. The second date, 1917, is perhaps 
the most significant, for the discovery of novae on photo- 
graphic plates initiated the study of stars involved in 
nebulae. Stars were the clews which led to distances. With 
distances at last available for a representative collection, 
the nebulae were recognized as independent stellar sys- 
tems, their general characteristics were determined, and 
the realm of the nebulae was open to intensive exploration. 

The clews have been exploited with extraordinary ra- 
pidity. During the course of a single decade — since 1924 
— a reliable general technique for determining distances 
has been developed and reconnaissance work has swept 
out to the very limits of telescopes. The observable re- 
gion, our sample of the universe, may now be contem- 
plated as a whole. 

Precision and finality are beyond the scope of recon- 
naissance work. Revisions of scale, filling in of details, 
and especially the recognition of the significance of ne- 
glected factors would follow as a matter of course. Never- 
theless, the general outlines were sketched with broad 
strokes. New investigations might be planned and the 
results interpreted with some preliminary knowledge of 
their relation to the general scheme. 

The situation in 1917 was somewhat as follows. Extra- 
galactic nebulae (then called spirals, or of the spiral class) 
were distinguished from the planetaries and the diffuse 
nebulosities because both of these were recognized as 



DISTANCES OF NEBULA 


85 


galactic objects. The status of the spirals involved the 
0 I 4 controversy about island universes. The wave of 
speculation generated by the bright nova of 1885 in M31 
and, to a less extent, by that of 1895 in NGC 5253, had sub- 
sided. The data which were considered of greatest sig- 
nificance were the extraordinary radial velocities, meas- 
ured by Slipher, and the large angular rotation of MlOl, 
measured by van Maanen. The velocities presumably re- 
moved the nebula; from the gravitational control of the 
galactic system, while the appreciable rotation indicated 
a moderate distance, presumably leaving MlOl well 
within the system. Thus the evidence was contradictory. 

Novce in Spirals. 

In July, 1917, Eitchey, at the Mount Wilson Observatory, 
found a previously unrecorded star (m = 14.6) on a 
photograph of the spiral NGC 6946, which, from further 
data, including a small-scale spectrogram, was identified 
as a nova.^ Both Eitchey and Curtis, the latter at the Lick 
Observatory, immediately examined all duplicate plates 
of nebulae in the large collections at their disposal, and 
found several earlier cases where novae had appeared in 
spirals.^ Two especially interesting objects were identi- 
fied and followed on a series of plates of M31 which 
Eitchey had assembled in 1909. The light-curves were 
definitely of the nova-type, exhibiting the sudden outburst 
and the slow fading away familiar in the case of galactic 
novae, with no subsequent recurrence. 

Both objects in M31 had been caught on the rise, and 
hence their maxima were well determined at about w = 17 
or 25,000 times fainter than the faintest naked star. Sys- 
tematic observations during the next two years resulted 
in the detection of fourteen additional novae in M31, but 
none in any other spiral. These novae were all faint and 

1 Announced in Harvard College Observatory Bulletin, No. 641, July 28, 
1917. 

2 Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 29, 1917. 
Curtis, op, cit., p. 180; Eitchey, op, cit,, p. 210. 



September 30, 1925 


PLATE V 

Novce in Messier 31. 

Left-Hand Plate, September 20, 1925, Nova No. 54 is the brightest nova 
that has been observed in M31, with the exception of the great supernova 
of 1885. On the plate, eight days after maximum (w = 15.3), the nova 
is at w = 15.7. It was last seen about one month later. 

Bight-Hand Plate, October 4, 1932 (plate by Baade). Nova No. 108 is 
at w = 17.0, about nine days after maximum (m = 16.0). A spectrum 
of this nova, photographed by Humason, is closely similar to spectra of 
galactic novae. Nova No. 109 is at w = 16.7, about six days after the 
(unobserved) maximum. 

Both plates are with the 100-inch reflector; west is at the top (outer 
margin of the page) ; 1 mm. = 7".0. 


October 4, 1932 



DISTANCES OF NEBUUE 


87 


represented a homogeneous group, of which Eitchey’s 
tw 9 were typical examples. The nova of 1885 in M31 was 
of a different order. Its luminosity at maximum was a 
considerable fraction of the total luminosity of the spiral, 
and in this respect it resembled the photographic novae 
detected in other, fainter nebulae. Two groups of novae 
were obviously indicated, one of which was probably sev- 
eral thousand times brighter than the other. The signifi- 
cance of the new data depended upon the answer to the 
question : Which, if either, of the two groups, dwarfs and 
giants, was comparable with galactic novae? The division 
into groups was suggested by Curtis and others® and the 
problem was formulated in definite terms by Landmark 
in 1920. 

In 1917, before the distinction was clearly recognized, 
the available data were thrown together and used indis- 
criminately. Shapley, as well as Curtis, immediately 
pointed out that the apparent faintness of novae in spirals 
indicated large distances, averaging at least fifty (Shap- 
ley) to one hundred (Curtis) times greater than the mean 
distance of galactic novae.® 

Curtis accepted this conclusion as virtually a proof of 
the island universe hypothesis. Shapley found the evi- 
dence inconclnsive, and favored the hypothesis that spiral 
nebulae were members of the galactic system. Novae in 
spirals, he suggested, might be considered as the engulf- 
ing of a star by rapidly moving nebulosity. Later (19^20), 

3 The early discussions of the implications of novae in spirals were almost 
entirely the contributions of three men — Curtis and Shapley in this country, 
and Lundmark in Sweden. Later, other contributions were made, the most 
important of which were Luplan- Janssen and Haarh, ‘^Die Parallaxe des 
Andromeda-Nebels, ’ ’ Astronomische Nachrichterif 215, 285, 1922, and Oepik, 

Estimate of the Distance of the Andromeda Nebula, Astrophysical 
Journal, 55, 406, 1922. The former included a comparison of novae in M31 
and the galactic system, using two methods which led to distances of 0.17 
and 3.3 million l.y. The latter was a very ingenious use of the (spectro- 
graphic) rotation of M31, which, on the assumption of a similar mass- 
luminosity relation in the spiral and in the galactic system, led to a dis- 
tance of about 1.5 million l.y. for the spiral. 

4 Fullications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 29, 1917. 
Curtis, op. cit,, p. 206; Shapley, op, cit., p. 213. 



88 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


the two views were more fully developed by their authors 
for a quasi-debate on “The Scale of the Universe” before 
the National Academy of Sciences.' 

In the same year Landmark® published an exhaustive 
review of available data bearing on the relation of spiral 
nebulae to the stellar system, and on the estimation of 
their distances. His paper, together with the debate, sum- 
marized the state of the problem at the time. The novae 
clearly furnished a significant criterion of distance, but 
its application involved the question as to whether the 
giants or the dwarfs should be identified with the normal 
novae in the galactic system. Both Landmark and Curtis 
selected the numerous, faint novae in M31 as the more 
likely to be comparable with galactic novae,^ and estimated 
the distance of the spiral as of the order of half a million 
light-years. Curtis concluded that spirals are independent 
systems comparable with the galactic system, “and indi- 
cate to us a greater universe into which we may penetrate 
to distances of ten million to a hundred million light 
years.” Shapley rejected this conclusion and Landmark® 

6 The two statements, considerably revised, were later published in Bulle- 
tin of the National Research Council, No. 11, 1921. Preliminary statements 
are found: Shapley, ‘^On the Existence of External Galaxies, Publications 
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 31, 261, 1919; Curtis, Modern 
Theories of the Spiral Nebulae,^’ Journal of the Washington Academy of 
Science, 9, 217, 1919. 

6‘^The Kelations of the Globular Clusters and Spiral Nebulae to the Stel- 
lar System, Kungl, Svensica V etenslcapsdkademiens Handlingar, Band 60, 
No. 8, 1920. 

7 This identification was later confirmed, and the ^ ^ dwarfs ’ ^ and ‘ * giants ’ ^ 
are now known as normal novas’^ and supernovae, ^ ^ respectively. 

sLundmark italicized his conclusion (p. 62 of his 1920 paper): ^‘The 
present investigation has given as the main result that the spiral nebulae 
must be considered as situated at considerable distances from the solar 
system. Whether they are Jeans’ star-producing mechanisms or remote 
galaxies is, on the other hand, more difficult to decide. Possibly we might in 
the present facts see a suggestion that the latter is the case, but the spiral 
nebulas do not, however, seem to be of such dimensions as those that should 
be ascribed to the galactic system with regard to Shapley ’s investigations, 
and much also speaks against regarding the galaxy as having a structure, 
analogous to that of spiral nebulae.” Although his conclusion was cautiously 
worded, Lundmark, in his discussions, clearly favored the extragalactic na- 
ture of the spirals. 



DISTANCES OF NEBULA 


89 


was noncommittal. All three, however, agreed that the 
new criterion furnished by the novae placed the spirals at 
very considerable distances from the solar system. 

Resolution of Nehulce. 

The discovery of novae led inevitably to the consideration 
of the more general problem of stars involved in nebulae 
and this, in turn, to the definitive solution of the problem 
of nebular distances. In 1889, Ranyard, editor of Knowl- 
edge, had reproduced Roberts’ photographs of M31, the 
first to show the spiral structure of the great nebula, and 
had called attention to numerous stars in the outer re- 
gions. The phenomena seemed normal, since current 
speculation assumed that all the white nebulae were island 
universes and would be resolved if only sufficient tele- 
scopic power were available. 

Roberts himself gave no such clear-cut description of 
the granulations in the spiral arms. He used the terms 
“stars,” “starlike condensations,” “stars surrounded 
by nebulosity,” indiscriminately, both for the nuclei and 
for the granulations.® Suspicions were gradually aroused 
doubting the stellar character of the condensations, and 
the suspicions seemed justified when Ritchey, in 1910, 
described his photographs of large spirals, made with the 
new 60-inch reflector.^® These photographs were on a 
comparatively large scale and were easily the finest and 
sharpest available. Therefore, when Ritchey stated that 
“all these [spirals, including M33, 51, 101, etc.] contain 
great numbers of soft, star-like condensations which I 
shall call nebulous stars,” and referred to 2,400 “nebu- 
lous stars” in M33, 1,000 in MlOl, etc., it was naturally 
assumed that the condensations did not in general repre- 
sent individual normal stars.^^ This interpretation of the 

9 Isaac Roberts, Photographs of Stars, Star Clusters and Nehulce, Vol. II, 
1900. Attention may be called to pp. 23 and 66. Ranyard description of 
M31 is in the February (1889) number of Knowledge. 

10 ‘^Mt, Wilson Contr.,’^ No. 47; Astrophysical Journal, 32, 26, 1910. 

11 The impression was materially strengthened when Shapley, nine years 
later, described Mount Wilson photographs in the following terms: ‘^With 



90 THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 

photographic images very appreciably delayed investiga- 
tions of stars involved in nebulae. 

Lundmark, in 1920, stated that an inspection of Ritch- 
ey’s photograph of M33 revealed “several thousand of 
the stars that form a part of the vast stellar system.” 
Lundmark, however, had seen only a copy,’* and, in view 
of Ritchey’s conclusions from the original plates, the new 
interpretation could scarcely be accepted without further 
investigation. The new evidence which Landmark’* even- 
tually offered as proof was derived from slitless spectra 
made with a 36-inch reflector and had no direct bearing on 
the question at issue. The nature of the condensations 
still remained a matter of speculation. 

The solution of the problem emerged several years 
later from a combination of results from two separate 
investigations made with a larger telescope, the 100-inch, 
which was then in operation.’* One was a study of the 
photographic images of nebular condensations, using a 
greater resolving power than had been previously em- 
ployed; the other was an investigation which led to the 
recognition of Cepheid variables in nebulae. A reexamina- 
tion of Ritchey’s plates of the large nebulae confirmed the 
previous conclusion that the images of condensations, 
although very small, appeared softer than equally faint 
images on photographs of star-fields. The condensations 

one or two possible exceptions, the secondary nuclei in spiral nebulae are so 
distinctly nebulous that they cannot be considered individual stars. Even in 
Messier 33, probably the most conspicuously nucleated of the brighter spi- 
rals, it is easy on large-scale plates, to distinguish between the superposed 
stellar images and the ^ softer^ nebular condensations. ’ ' ''On the Existence 
of External Galaxies,^’ Tuhlications of the Astronomical Society of the 
Facific, 31, 265, 1919. In this paper, Shapley states the arguments which led 
him to reject ‘^the island universe hypothesis of the spiral nebulae.’’ 

12 Lundmark states that the plate of M33 was placed at his disposal by 
Professor von Zeipel. This plate was presumably a copy, since the original 
never left the Mount Wilson Observatory. 

18 Monthly Notices, Foyal Astronomical Society, 85, 890/891, 1925 ; see 
also, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 33, 324, 1921. 

14 The resolution of a spiral, M33, is discussed in * ' Mt. Wilson Contr,, ’ ’ 
No. 310; Astrophysical Journal, 63, 236, 1926. References to earlier papers 
are given. 



DISTANCES OF NEBULiE 


91 


in the nuclear regions, however, were superimposed on 
relatively dense, unresolved backgrounds; those in the 
outer regions, where the background was less conspicu- 
ous, were distorted by the various aberrations of the tele- 
scope. Thus the nonstellar appearance of the images 
might arise either from the nature of the condensations or 
from photographic etfects under particular conditions. 

The latter possibility was investigated in two ways; 
first, by short exposures centered on the nuclear regions ; 
then by longer exposures centered both on the outer re- 
gions of the nebulae and on neighboring selected areas. In 
both cases the plates were made with the 100-inch re- 
flector under critical conditions. These plates registered 
star-images with the smallest angular diameters yet re- 
corded. They fully established the essentially stellar ap- 
pearance of the photographic images of the great ma- 
jority of the condensations when effects of photographic 
smearing were avoided. In M33, for instance, many sur- 
face-images, assumed to represent groups of stars, clus- 
ters, and occasional patches of nebulosity, were obviously 
present, but otherwise the images in general were indis- 
tinguishable from equally faint star-images on plates 
centered well away from the nebula. 

These results cleared the ground for further investiga- 
tions. They did not prove that the condensations were 
stars: they merely proved that the appearance of their 
photographic images was indistinguishable from that of 
stellar images. The diameters of the condensations might 
be any amount less than half a second of arc. But half a 
second of arc, at great distances, represents large linear 
diameters. At a million light-years, for instance, an 
angle of half a second is subtended by about two and a 
half light-years. A sphere with this diameter might con- 
tain many stars, or large masses of nonstellar material. 

The definite interpretation of condensations as indi- 
vidual stars was not possible until some of the condensa- 
tions were identified as Cepheid variables and the range 
of the light fluctuations was found to be normal. If one 



92 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


star in a condensation representing a group or cluster 
varied through a certain range, the variation of the con- 
densation as a whole would be much less than that of its 
single member. The normal range in the Cepheid-like con- 
densations established these condensations as single stars 
— ^not even double stars, to say nothing of groups or 
clusters. 

Other types of stars were tentatively identified; the 
brighter condensations were found to be a predominately 
early-type (white or blue), implying high luminosities; 
the faint novae in M31 were recognized as comparable 
with galactic novae; and similar objects were found in 
M33. The remaining condensations exhibited a frequency- 
distribution of apparent luminosities resembling, in a 
general way, that expected among the brighter stars in 
stellar systems. Hence, when absolute luminosities were 
established by Cepheids, novae, and other stars, at certain 
points in the scale of apparent luminosities, the analogy 
was complete, and the condensations in general were 
recognized as individual stars. Further evidence of the 
consistency of the conclusion is found in the fact that the 
very brightest stars in the nebulae whose distances are well 
determined from Cepheids, are comparable, in their abso- 
lute luminosities, with the brightest stars in the galactic 
system. 


Cepheids. 

Vabiable stars in extragalactic nebulae were first recog- 
nized in 1922 when Duncan*' reported three within the 
area covered by M33. His data were not sufficient to 
determine the nature of the variation and he refrained 
from suggesting any relation between the variables and 
the nebula. The following year (1923), a dozen variables 
were found in NGC 6822, an irregular nebula similar 
to the Magellanic Clouds. Cepheid characteristics were 
indicated in several of these variables, but were not fully 

16 Fublicaiions of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 34, 290, 1922. 



DISTANCES OF NEBULAE 98 

established until the observations had been extended over 
another year. 

The first extragalactic Cepheid was definitely recog- 
nized toward the end of 1923 in In the autumn of 

that year a systematic program of observations had been 
initiated for the purpose of assembling statistical data 
on the novae which were known to appear frequently in 
the great spiral. The first good plate in the program, 
made with the 100-inch reflector, led to the discovery of 
two ordinary novae and a faint, eighteenth magnitude ob- 
ject which was at first presumed to be another nova. Ref- 
erence to the long series of plates previously assembled 
by observers at Mount Wilson in their search for novae, 
established the faint object as a variable star and readily 
indicated the nature of the variation. It was a typical 
Cepheid with a period of about a month, and hence its 
absolute luminosity at maximum, as indicated by similar 
stars in the Magellanic Clouds, was of the order of ilf = 
—4, or about 7,000 times as bright as the sun. To appear 
as faint as the observations indicated (w [max] = 18.2), 
the required distance was of the order of 900,000 light- 
years. 

This first definite identification led to an extensive 
study of the great spiral, using all available material, but 
based primarily on long exposures with the 100-inch re- 
flector. By the end of 1924, when the first results were 
published, 36 variables were known, 12 had been recog- 
nized as Cepheids, and the order of the distance fully 
established.^^ In 1929, when the data were published in 
detail, 40 Cepheids were known and 86 novae.^® The light- 
curves of four Cepheids are shown in Fig. 8. 

Meanwhile the investigations had naturally extended 

16 The first references to variables in NGG 6822 and in M31, are found in 
the Annual Eeports of the Mount Wilson Observatory for the years 1922- 
1923 and 1923-1924, respectively. 

17 The preliminary notice concerning Cepheids in M31 and M33 will be 
found in Publications of the American Astronomical Society (33d meeting), 
January, 1925. The notice is reprinted in Observatory, 48, 139, 1925. 

i8‘*Mt. Wilson Contr.,’' No. 376; Astrophysical Journal, 69, 103, 1929. 



August 24, 1925^ 


PLATE VI 

Cepheid Variables in Messier 31. 

Left-Hand Platej August 24, 1925 (plate by Duncan) ; Bight-Hand, No- 
vember 26, 1924. The region is centered on an open cluster about 48' 
south-preceding the nucleus and close to the major axis of the spiral (see 
frontispiece). Stars Nos. 43 and 44 are irregular variables; the others 
are Cepheids. Variation is conspicuous in Nos. 25, 26, and 30, and is 
appreciable in 37, 39, 43, and 48. 

Both plates are with the 100-inch reflector; east is at the top (outer 
margin of the page) ; 1 mm. = 5".0. 

The globular cluster marked on the frontispiece is well shown on the 
left-hand plate (var. No. 30 bright), 15.5 mm. below and 48.5 mm. to the 
right of upper, left-hand outer corner of the black margin. The large 
round image of the cluster differs from the comparable images of stars 
in showing no diffraction rays. 


November 26, 1924 



DISTANCES OF NEBUUE 


95 


to the lar|;e, neighboring spiral, M33. The two brightest 
of, the objects discovered hj Duncan were identified as 
irregular variables, and the faintest, as a Cepheid. By the 



Pig. 8. Light-Curves of Four Cepheids in Messier 31. 

The vertical scales represent apparent photographic magnitudes; the hori- 
zontal, days. The dots represent observations made during many different 
cycles. The various cycles were superposed and normal light-curves drawn 
through the totality of the data. It will be noticed that the brightest Ceph- 
eid, No. 7, has the longest period, and the faintest, No. 38, has the shortest 
period. 

end of 1924, 22 Cepheids were known. By 1926, 35 Cephe- 
ids, and 2 novae were available for discussion.*® The ir- 
regular nebula NGC 6822 had furnished 11 additional 
Cepheids, and variables of undetermined types had been 
observed in several other conspicuous nebulae.®® 

i9*^Mt. Wilson Contr.,'’ No. 310; Astroph^sical Journal^ 63, 236, 1926. 

Wilson Contr.,*' No. 304; Astrophyaical Journal, 62, 409, 1925. 
After the variables had been found, but before their Cepheid characteristics 
had been fully established, Shapley published a provisional estimate of the 
distance of NGC 6822 (order of a million light-years) based on analogies 
with the Magellanic Clouds. Harvard College Ohaervatory Bulletin, No. 796, 
December, 1923. 







96 THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 

The Cepheids appeared to be unequivocal criteria of 
distances. Light-curves were typical, and periods .ex- 
hibited the familiar relations with luminosities that had 
been first established among Cepheids in the Magellanic 
Clouds. Spectral types were undetermined, of course, but 
colors, representing integrated spectra, were normal. 
Distances of spirals could now be derived by precisely the 
same methods used for investigating the remoter region 
of the galactic system, namely, the application of criteria 
of absolute stellar magnitudes. The greatest uncertainty 
lay in the zero-point of the period-luminosity curve for 
the Cepheids, a constant necessary for the reduction of 
apparent magnitudes to absolute magnitudes and hence 
to distances. The value of the constant was generally ac- 
cepted as of the correct order, but moderate revisions 
were expected as new and improved data might be com- 
piled. Meanwhile, the distances of spirals could be rather 
accurately expressed in terms of the distance of one or 
both of the Magellanic Clouds as a unit, leaving to future 
investigations the precise determination of the absolute 
value of the unit. 

The NebulcB as Comparable Galaxies. 

Cepheids were by no means the brightest stars observed 
in the nebulae. They were surpassed by novae, certain ir- 
regular variables, and blue giants, and the relative lumi- 
nosities were all in their normal order as observed in the 
galactic system. Patches of diffuse nebulosity, giving 
emission spectra and with blue stars involved (similar to 
galactic nebulosities) were occasionally found, and, later, 
objects similar to globular clusters were identified in pro- 
fusion. The stellar contents presented a consistent anal- 
ogy with those that would be expected from the Magel- 
lanic Clouds or the galactic system if these systems could 
be studied from very great distances. The evidence of the 
stars, together with that of radial velocities, was over- 
whelming, and the theory of island universes seemed to 
be established beyond reasonable doubt. 



DISTANCES OF NEBULJE 


97 


The theory had taken two forms. “Island universes” 
implied merely that the nebulfe were independent stellar 
systems, scattered through extragalactic space. “Com- 
parable galaxies” carried the additional implication that 
the dimensions of nebulae were more or less comparable 
with those of the galactic system itself. In flat contradic- 
tion to both formulations of the theory, there still existed 
the direct and powerful evidence of large angular rota- 
tions.^^ As early as 1916 van Maanen had reported an 
annual rotation for MlOl of the order of 0".02.“ Between 
1921 and 1923, he published rotations of the same order 
for six additional spirals and later reported measure- 
ments tending to confirm the earlier results. 

These large angular rotations implied relatively small 
distances, a few thousand light-years at most, and hence 
directly contradicted the evidence of the stars. For in- 
stance, in M33, where the linear velocity of rotation was 
known from spectrograms, the angular rotation indicated 
a distance of the order of 2,100 light-years as compared 
with that of 720,000 light-years derived from Cepheids. 
Landmark, in 1923, remeasured the pair of plates for 
M33 and found a rotation in the same direction but nu- 
merically so small that it could be considered within the 
uncertainties of the determination.^* Otherwise the data 
on rotations, although completely isolated, were inter- 
nally consistent but were wholly inconsistent with a 
theory of island universes. 

21 The rotations were derived from the comparison of photographs made 
several years apart. The relative positions of field-stars and nebular conden- 
sations were measured, and systematic differences were found when the meas- 
ures were compared. These displacements were interpreted as motions in the 
nebulae which had occurred during the time-intervals separating the plates — 
either rotations of the nebulae or motions of the condensations along the 
spiral arms. 

22<‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,’^ No. 118; Astrophysical Journal, 44, 210, 1916. 

28 A general discussion of the apparent motions in all seven of the spirals 
is given by van Maanen in the last paper of the series: Internal Motion of 
the Spiral Nehula Messier 33, NGC 598, ‘^Mt. Wilson Contr.,'^ No. 260; 
Astrophysical Journal, 57, 264, 1923, 

24 ^‘Mt. Wilson Contr., No. 308; Astrophysical Journal, 63, 67, 1926. 



98 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


Since the evidence of the stars and of the radial veloci- 
ties could not be reconciled with that of the angular rgta- 
tions, it was necessary to reject one of the two sets of 
data. Because the probability in favor of the first set of 
data was strong, the rotations were ignored and the field 
of nebular research was developed in spite of a flat con- 
tradiction at its very foundation. The contradiction was 
removed only in 1935 when investigations of several of 
the nebulae by various measurers, using much longer in- 
tervals, gave negative results and indicated that the large 
rotations previously found arose from obscure systematic 
errors and did not indicate motion, either real or apparent, 
in the nebulae themselves.®® 

Another argument, against the theory of “comparable 
galaxies” rather than that of “island universes,” was 
the very large diameter of the galactic system, 300,000 
light-years, which Shapley had derived from his investi- 
gations of globular star-clusters.®® If dimensions of nebu- 
lae were comparable, the distances indicated by apparent 
diameters would be so great that the novae would be im- 
possibly bright. The dilemma seemed serious at the time ; 
either the dimensions of nebulae or the luminosities of the 
novae were of a different order from that believed to hold 
in the galactic system. But novae offered the more familiar 
criterion, and the order of distances they suggested was 
eventually established by the Cepheids, regardless of di- 
mensions. The argument was then restated in the form 
that, if nebulae were island universes, the galactic system 
was a continent. 

The discussion eventually settled down to a comparison 
of the galactic system with M31, which was recognized as 
an exceptionally large spiral. The large, galactic dimen- 
sions had been derived not from the distribution of lu- 
minous material in general, which would determine the 

26 Hubble, Wilson Contr.,’^ No. 514; Astrophysical Journal, 81, 

334, 1935. The short paper is followed by a statement by van Maanen. 

26 This value is mentioned by Shapley in the quasi-debate on ‘ ‘ The Scale 
of the Universe, * ' to which a reference has already been made. 



DISTANCES OF NEBULiE 


99 


surface brightness as seen from a great distance, but 
from the distribution of several dozen globular clusters. 
Moreover, the effects of obscuration had been ignored. 
Many clusters in or near the Milky Way appear faint, not 
because they are at enormous distances, but because they 
are obscured by clouds of dust and gas which pervade the 
low latitudes. When later investigations evaluated these 
effects, the probable diameter of the system, as outlined 
by the clusters, was reduced to a half or possibly a third 
of the original estimate of 300,000 light-years. 

The diameter of M31, on the other hand, had been de- 
rived from the luminous material in general. Later, when 
globular clusters were found in M31, the clusters outlined 
a much larger system, the order of which is comparable 
with that of the galactic system, although the latter prob- 
ably represents the less-concentrated type of nebula.*^ 
Moreover, the original estimates were made from simple 
inspection of the images on small-scale photographs, and 
such images can be readily traced with photometers well 
beyond the limits to which they can be followed by simple 
inspection. The measured diameters of M31 are now 
known to be more than double the original estimates, and 
agree fairly well with the diameters indicated by clusters.*® 

Thus the discrepancy between the dimensions of the 
spiral and the galactic system has largely vanished. With 
a better perspective, the continent has shrunk and the 
island has grown until they can no longer be assigned to 
different orders. The galactic system may be considered 
as one of the larger nebulae. Globular clusters are dis- 
tributed throughout a great volume of space, but in the 
outer regions, where an occasional cluster may still be 
conspicuous, the star-density is probably very low. It is 
not impossible that the galactic system as viewed from 

27<<Mt. Wilson Contr./’ No. 452; Astrophysical Journal, 76, 44, 1932. 

28 Stebbins and Whitf ord, ‘ ‘ The Diameter of the Andromeda Nebula, ^ ^ 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 20, 93, 1934. See also, 
later measures by Shapley, Harvard College Observatory Bulletin, No. 895, 
1934. 



100 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


M31 covers an area in the sky comparable with that of the 
spiral as seen from the galactic system. 

Additional Criteria of Nebular Distances. 

The theory of island universes, even that of comparable 
galaxies, is now fully established with no outstanding dis- 
crepancies. At the time the Cepheids were found, the posi- 
tion was more tentative. Extensive analyses of stars were 
made in the two conspicuous spirals M31 and M33 and in 
the irregular nebula NGC 6822. They were clearly inde- 
pendent stellar systems at distances of less than a million 
light-years. The Magellanic Clouds were then recognized 
as extragalactic systems at even shorter distances. A 
small sample collection of nebulae was thus available as a 
point of departure for further exploration. The results of 
the investigation of this group will be presented later, but 
the general nature of the methods employed may be indi- 
cated at this point. 

The collection of nebulae was so small that it could 
scarcely be considered as a fair sample. But the possi- 
bilities offered by the stellar contents were by no means 
exhausted. Cepheids are not the brightest stars in nebu- 
lae. They are surpassed, as previously mentioned, by nor- 
mal novae, by certain irregular variables, and by blue 
giants such as the 0 and B stars. Each stellar type fur- 
nishes indications of distances, the Cepheids rather accu- 
rately, the others only roughly. All are important, since 
stars alone are the fundamental criteria; other methods 
of determining nebular distances must, in the end, be cali- 
brated by stars. 

With increasing distance we should expect the Cepheids 
to fade out first, then the irregular variables, then the 
novae, then the blue giants, until only the very brightest of 
all the stars would be seen. Finally, there would remain 
the millions of nebulae in which no stars at all, except an 
occasional supernova, could be detected. The expectations 
are fulfilled rather precisely by the observations. More- 
over, the data, although meager, strongly suggest that 



DISTANCES OF NEBULiE 


101 


the very brightest stars in late spirals are of about the 
same order of absolute luminosity. There appears to be 
an upper limit of stellar luminosity and this limit, about 
50,000 times the luminosity of the sun, is closely approxi- 
mated in most of the great stellar systems. Thus, when 
any stars at all can be detected in nebulae, some rough 
estimate of distance is possible. 

For statistical purposes the method is fairly reliable, 
and it furnishes a collection of certain types of nebulae at 
known distances, large enough to be regarded as a fair 
sample. The most serious defect in the method is the fact 
that, in general, stars can be detected only in the later, 
more open, spirals and in the irregular nebulae. Fortu- 
nately, stars can be detected in some of the spirals which 
are members of the great Virgo cluster of nebulae. The 
other types of nebulae are well represented among the 
several hundred members of the cluster, and hence their 
distances, as well as those of the spirals, are derived from 
stars. Analysis of the large sample-collection thus avail- 
able has furnished average characteristics of the nebulae 
themselves, which can be used as statistical criteria of 
distances out as far as the nebulae can be recorded. Even- 
tually, another criterion was found in the red-shifts, the 
percentage-accuracy of which increases with the distance. 

The exploration of the realm of the nebulae was carried 
out with the aid of these criteria. The early work was jus- 
tified largely by the internal consistency of the results. 
The foundations were firmly established, but the super- 
structure represented considerable extrapolations. These 
were tested in every way that could be devised, but the 
tests for the most part concerned internal consistency. 
The ultimate acceptance of the superstructure was due to 
the steady accumulation of consistent results rather than 
to critical and definitive experiments. 



CHAPTER V 


THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 

Early Spectrograms of Nehulce. 

S PECTRA of nebulae were first investigated visually 
I in 1864 by Sir William Huggins (1824-1910).^ 
' Those of white nebulae, as extragalactic systems 
were then called, were apparently continuous, but so faint 
that no details could be determined with certainty. Pro- 
longed study of the brightest, M31, led to the surmise that 
both absorption and emission lines or bands were present, 
and a very faint photograph, achieved in 1888, seemed to 
confirm the tentative conclusion. No report of the photo- 
graph had been published in 1899 when Scheiner settled 
the question with readable spectrograms of M31.® They 
showed a solar type spectrum with no emission. He con- 
cluded that the spiral was probably a stellar system and 
thus revived the waning interest in the controversy over 
island universes. Path and Wolf extended the investiga- 
tions to other nebulae with similar results, and eventually 
the prevalence of solar types among spectra of the 
brighter spirals, was generally recognized. 

The First Radial Velocity. 

The radial velocity of a nebula was measured for the first 
time in 1912 by V. M. Slipher at the Lowell Observatory.* 
Although the general character of the spectra had been 
established, the more difficult problem of determining the 
precise positions of the absorption lines had not been 
solved. The difficulties arose from the dim surface-bright- 

1 The Scientific Papers of Sir William Muggins (1909), pp. 101 f. 

2 ‘‘On the Spectrum of the Great Nebula in Andromeda, Astrophysical 
Journal f 9, 149, 1899. 

8 ‘ ‘ The Eadial Velocity of the Andromeda Nebula, ' ' Lowell Observatory 
Bulletin, No. 58, 1914. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 103 

ness of the nebular images. Unlike the stars, whose light 
is. concentrated into practically point-images by all tele- 
scopes, the nebulae form relatively large images and the 
areas increase with the focal length of the telescope em- 
ployed. Larger telescopes, if the focal ratios are constant, 
merely spread more light over larger images, leaving the 
surface-brightness unchanged. 

The difheulties are met in direct photography by short- 
ening the focus for a given aperture and thus concentrat- 
ing the light into smaller images. When the images are 
photographed through a prism, however, this modifica- 
tion of the telescope offers no advantage. The explanation 
is simple, but as it involves properties of optical instru- 
ments it need not be presented in detail. For large, uni- 
form surfaces, all telescopes are about equally efficient. 
No advantage can be gained except in the camera behind 
the prism, which actually photographs the spectra. The 
rule breaks down in the case of small surfaces, and for 
the concentrated, semistellar images of the fainter nebu- 
lae the larger telescopes are increasingly efficient. Never- 
theless, the most important single factor in the photog- 
raphy of spectra of faint light sources is the speed of the 
camera. 

Slipher exploited this principle and adapted a very 
fast, short-focus camera to a small-dispersion spectro- 
graph attached to the 24-inch refractor at the Lowell Ob- 
servatory. With this equipment he was able to record the 
spectrum of M31 with good definition and on a scale 
which, although small, was sufficient to show that the 
absorption lines were not quite in their customary posi- 
tions. The displacements were toward the violet end of 
the spectrum, indicating that the radial component of 
motion was toward the earth. Precise measures revealed 
that the velocity of approach was about 190 miles (300 
kilometers) per second. Four spectrograms secured in the 
autumn of 1912 gave consistent velocities, and the results 
could be published with complete confidence in their 
reliability. 



Spectra of Nebulce. 

A. Large-Scale Spectra of M32, Compared with the Solar 

Spectrum. 

The spectra of the nuclear regions of M31 and M32 are the only absorp- 
tion spectra of nebulae that have been obtained on a large scale (original 
plates, 1 mm. =73 A at 4360 A). They closely resemble the solar spec- 
trum, except that the lines in the nebular spectra are broader, possibly 
as a result of internal motions in the nebulae. Dwarf characteristics are 
conspicuous, and the absolute magnitudes, indicated by the relative in- 
tensities of lines, are about the same in all three spectra. 

The plate shows the spectrum of M32 below the spectrum of the sun. 
The comparison spectra are those of an iron arc. Red is to the right; 
violet, to the left. The last conspicuous absorption line to the right is the 
line of hydrogen. The conspicuous iron lines near the center of the 
nebular spectra are displaced toward the violet, with respect to the com- 
parison lines, indicating relative motion in the line of sight, toward the 
observer, amounting to about 120 miles/sec. This motion is largely the 
reflection of the sun^s motion in its orbit around the center of the galactic 
system. (Plate by Humason.) 

B. Spectrum of NGC 3115 Showing Evidence of Rotation. 

NGC 3115 is the type example of an E7 nebula and is exhibited in 
Plate I. The slit of the spectrograph has been oriented along the major 
axis of the spindle-shaped image and, therefore, the upper part of the 
spectrum represents light from one end of the nebula; the lower part, 
light from the opposite end; the central strip, light from the nuclear 
region. 

The pair of conspicuous absorption lines near the left (violet) end of 
the nebular spectrum are the H and K lines of calcium. They are in- 
clined, the top being displaced toward the red, and the bottom, toward 
the violet, with respect to the central nuclear region. The inclination is 
interpreted as evidence of rotation of the nebula about the minor axis. 
One end is receding and the other end is approaching, with respect to 
the nucleus. The speed of rotation and the manner in which it varies with 
distance from the nucleus is indicated by the angle of inclination. (Plate 
by Humason. ) 

C. Spectrum of a Nebula in the Bootes Cluster. 

The illustration is an unretouched enlargement of a spectrogram (by 
Humason) on which the scale is, 1 mm. = 875 A, at X4500. It shows the 
largest well-determined red-shift that has been recorded — an apparent 
velocity of 24,400 miles/sec. (39,000 km/sec.). Since the spectrogram 
represents an achievement near the extreme limit of instrumental pow- 
ers, the signiflcant features are not very conspicuous. However, the H and 
K lines, blended on the small scale, are readily seen opposite the strong- 
est line in the comparison spectrum (the >.4471 line of helium). The gap 
in the nebular spectrum, to the left of H and K, is due mainly to a lens- 
shaped insensitive spot in the coarse-grained emulsion necessarily em- 
ployed in photographing the very faint spectrum. The normal positions 
of H and K, in nearby light-sources, are near the second comparison line 
from the left Isee the snectrum of NGC 3116 on this nlate. in which H 







THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 


105 


Slipher’s List of Radial Velocities. 

The determination of the velocity of M31 has been dis- 
cussed at some length on the general principle that the 
first steps in a new field are the most difficult and the most 
significant. Once the harrier is forced, further develop- 
ment is comparatively simple. But the accumulation of 
nebular velocities was a slow process and became increas- 
ingly laborious after the brightest objects had been ob- 
served. Slipher carried on the work almost alone. In 1914 
he presented a list of thirteen velocities,* and by 1925 the 
number of his contributions had grown to forty-one.® A 
few of the velocities had been redetermined at other ob- 
servatories, sufficient to establish the validity of the data 
beyond any reasonable doubt, but only four new velocities 
had been added to Slipher’s list. In 1925, a total of forty- 
five nebular velocities was available for discussion.® 

Although the first velocity was negative, indicating mo- 
tion toward the observer, positive velocities, indicating 
motion away from the observer, were found in increasing 
numbers and soon they completely dominated the list. 
Moreover, after the most conspicuous nebulae had been 
observed, the numerical values of the new velocities were 
found to be surprisingly large. The complete list ranged 
from —190 miles/sec. to +1,125 and averaged about 
+375. The velocities were of an entirely different order 
from those of any other known type of astronomical 
body. They were so large that the nebulas were probably 
beyond the control of the gravitational field of the stellar 
system. The nebulae, it appeared, were independent bodies 
and this conclusion was consistent with the theory of 
island universes. 

4 Slipher, ‘ * Spectrographic Observations of Nebulas, ^ ^ Seventeenth Meet- 
ing of the American Astronomical Society, August, 1914; reprinted in 
Popular Astronomy, 23, 21, 1915. 

6 The list is published in a paper by Stromberg, Analysis of Badial Ve- 
locities of Globular Clusters and Non-Galactio Nebulce, ^‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,^^ 
No. 292; Astrophysical Journal, 61, 353, 1925. 



106 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


Interpretation of the Data. 

SOLAE MOTION WITH BESPECT TO THE NEBULJE. 

Actually no other theory was seriously considered in 
attempting to interpret the data. The stellar system, 
carrying the sun along with it, was supposed to be mov- 
ing rapidly through the realm of the nebulae, which them- 
selves were rushing about with comparable speeds in 
random directions. Each observed velocity was thus a 
combination of (a) the “peculiar motion” of the nebula, 
as the individual motion is called, and (6) the reflection 
of the solar motion.® If sufficient nebulae were observed, 
their random peculiar motions would tend to cancel out, 
leaving only the reflection of the solar motion to emerge 
from the totality of the data. 

The principle was a familiar one and had worked very 
well within the stellar system for the determination of 
the motion of the sun with respect to the stars. It was first 
applied to the nebulae by Truman in 1916, when only a 
dozen nebular velocities were known.^ Others also solved 
the equations, including Slipher,® when, in 1917, he had 
twenty-five velocities at his disposal. The numerical re- 
sults were all rather similar — a solar motion, interpreted 
as effectively the motion of the stellar system, of the gen- 
eral order of 420 miles/sec., in the general direction of the 
constellation Capricornus. 

It was expected that, when the solar motion was re- 
moved, the residual, peculiar motions of the nebulae would 
be much smaller than the observed velocities and, further- 
more, that they would be distributed at random — ^that 
velocities of approach would be as numerous as velocities 
of recession. Actually, the residual motions were still 
large and predominantly positive. The unsymmetrical 

6 The solar motion was a combination of the motion of the sun within the 
stellar system and the motion of the stellar system with respect to the nebulae. 

7 Truman, ^^The Motions of the Spiral Nebulae,^’ Popular Astronomy ^ 24, 
111, 1916. 

8 Slipher, * ^ Nebulae, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society ^ 
56, 403, 1917. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 107 

distribution indicated the presence of some systematic 
effect in addition to the motion of the sun. It was for this 
reason that Wirtz, in 1918, introduced a seemingly arbi- 
trary K-term — a constant velocity to be subtracted from 
all observed velocities before the search for the solar mo- 
tion was undertaken.® 

The conception of a K-term was not new. It had been 
used, for instance, in determining the solar motion with 
respect to' the B-stars. In that case it amounted to about 
four kilometers per second and was supposed to represent 
some effect of atmospheric pressure, gravitational field, or 
other condition peculiar to the blue giants. In the case of 
the nebulae, however, a term of fantastic dimensions — of 
the order of a hundred times four kilometers — would be 
required in order to effect seriously the distribution of 
residuals. The introduction was a logical step but it re- 
quires some boldness to make such a venture. 

Wirtz ’s formulation of the problem included the K- 
term together with the solar motion as unknowns to be 
determined from the observational data. He knew of only 
fifteen velocities at the time of his first solution, but three 
years later (1921),^® he repeated the investigation using 
twenty-nine velocities. The new values were of the same 
general order as the earlier results. The K-term amounted 
to about 500 miles/sec. The solar motion was again about 
440 miles/see., but was now in the general direction of the 
north pole of the heavens. More important, however, the 
scatter of the residuals or, in other words, of the peculiar 
velocities of the individual nebulae, was more or less ran- 
dom. The evidence of systematic effects had almost van- 
ished. The problem was not completely solved — the residu- 

s ‘ ^ t^ber die Bewegungen der Nebelflecke, ’ ^ Astronomische Nachrichten, 
206, 109, 1918. 

10 Lundmark, in the interim, had made a similar solution, with similar 
results, using twenty nebular velocities: ^*The Eolations of the Globular 
Clusters and Spiral Nebulro to the Stellar System, Kungl, SvensTca Veten- 
sTcapsahademiens Eandlingar, Band 60, No. 8, 1920. Wirtz ^s second paper 
is ^ ^ Einiges zur Statistik der Radialbewegungen von Spiralnebeln und Kugel- 
sternhauf en, ’ ’ Astronomische Nachrichten^ 215, 349, 1921. 



108 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


als were not wholly satisfactory — ^but the improvement 
was so marked that the K-term was accepted as a charac- 
teristic feature of nebular velocities. All subsequent dis- 
cussions of the problem included the K-term as a matter 
of course. 

The K-Term as a Function of Distance. 

When Wirtz first introduced the K-term, he merely stated 
that it was necessary because of the preponderance of 
positive signs and the large numerical values of the ve- 
locities. He was fully aware of the consequence that, if 
the displacements of the spectral lines were literally in- 
terpreted as actual velocity-shifts, the K-term must rep- 
resent a systematic recession of all nebulae from the vi- 
cinity of the galactic system. He did not fully commit him- 
self to this interpretation, but left the question open and 
used the term as though it were an arbitrary device for 
“saving the phenomena.” The explanation might be 
found later. 

It seemed possible, however, that current theory had 
already indicated the significance of the K-term. Einstein, 
in 1915, had formulated his cosmological equation which 
expressed the relation between the contents of space and 
the geometry of space, as derived from the theory of 
general relativity. On the assumption that the universe is 
static (does not vary systematically with time), he had 
found a solution to the equation and had, therefore, de- 
scribed a particular kind of universe, de Sitter, in 1916- 
17, using the same equation, had found another solution. 
It was later shown that no other solutions^ were possible 
on the particular assumptions. The two possible universes 
were carefully studied in order to see which of them more 
closely corresponded to the universe we actually inhabit. 

11 ^ ^ On Einstein Theory of Gravitation and Its Astronomical Conse- 
quences^’ — Three papers in Monthly Notices j Boyal Astronomical Society, 
76, 699, 1916 j 77, 155, 1916; 78, 1, 1917. A third solution, representing a 
particular case corresponding to special relativity, was possible but it was 
of no particular interest as an interpretation of the physical universe. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 109 

One outstanding difference between the two was the fact 
that de Sitter’s solution predicted positive displacements 
(red-shifts) in the spectra of distant light sources, which, 
on the average, should increase with distance from the 
observer, de Sitter knew of only three velocities^* at the 
time and could not make an extensive comparison between 
theory and observation. Nevertheless, it was clear, as he 
stated, that the large, positive velocities of the two fainter 
nebulae (NGC 1068 and 4594) as contrasted with the nega- 
tive velocity of M31, the brightest of all the spirals, were 
consistent with the prediction. 

The de Sitter universe is no longer considered as a 
representation of the actual universe, but at the time it 
seiwed the important purpose of directing attention to the 
possibility of a variable K-term. The numerical rate of 
increase of red-shifts with distance was not predicted by 
the theory ; the rate might be large or small, conspicuous 
or imperceptible, and the question could be determined 
only by observations. But among the necessary data were 
distances of nebulae, and distances were then unknown. 
This fact, together with perhaps a natural inertia in the 
face of revolutionary ideas couched in the unfamiliar lan- 
guage of general relativity, discouraged immediate in- 
vestigation. It was not until later, when Eddington and 
others had, as it were, “popularized” the new ideas, that 
the problem was seriously considered. 

If velocities increased with distance, the large constant 
K-term might represent the velocity corresponding to the 
mean distance of the particular group of nebulae that had 
been observed. This possibility was generally recognized, 
although no one seems to have made the statement spe- 
cifically. The problem was formulated as follows : Is the 
K-term constant for all nebulae or does it vary with the 
distance ? 

12 Slipher’s list of thirteen velocities, although published in 1914, had not 
reached de Sitter, probably as a result of the disruption of communications 
during the War. For the same reason, Wirtz, in 1918, was probably not 
aware of de Sitter ^s papers. 



110 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


Absolute distances of nebulae were very uncertain. The 
only available criteria of relative distances were apparent 
diameters and apparent luminosities. Neither were reli- 
able because the ranges in intrinsic size and brightness 
were wholly unknoAvn, and the ranges were believed to be 
considerable. In the triple system of M31 and its two com- 
panions, for instance, the diameters ranged from sixty 
to one, and the luminosities from a hundred to one. There 
was no evidence that even these ranges applied to nebulae 
at large. Nevertheless, in a general way, the smaller, 
fainter nebulae were doubtless at greater mean distances 
than the larger, brighter objects. The criteria might be 
useful provided the range in distance covered by the ve- 
locities was large compared to the scatter introduced by 
the criteria. 

Wirtz, the leader in the field, made the first attempt, in 
1924, to express the K-term as a function of distance 
using apparent diameters and velocities of forty-two 
nebulae.^® A plausible correlation appeared in the expected 
direction — velocities tended to increase as diameters 
diminished. The results, however, were suggestive rather 
than definitive. Not only were they subject to uncertain- 
ties arising from the unknown scatter in real diameters, 
but they included the effects of an apparent correlation 
between velocity and concentration. The highly concen- 
trated globular nebulae, as a class, exhibited the largest 
mean velocity, and the large, faint irregular nebulae and 
open spirals exhibited the smallest mean velocity. In be- 
tween these limits, the velocities increased with the con- 
centration. 

The correlation was generally known, and had inspired 
unsuccessful attempts to account for the K-term as Ein- 
stein-shifts produced by strong, gravitational fields — 
analogous to the red-shift in the solar spectrum which 
had served as one of the crucial tests of general rela- 
tivity. Eventually it was realized that the correlation was 

i8‘<De Sitter’s Kosmologie und die Bewegungen der Spiralnebel, ” 
Astronomische Nachrichten, 222, 21, 1924. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 


111 


a simple effect of selection. The concentrated objects, be- 
cause of their great surface-brightness, were given pref- 
erence in the laborious task of photographing nebular 
spectra. So, although these objects are relatively rare, 
there was a natural tendency to select them for the inves- 
tigations of faint nebulae. They represented, on the aver- 
age, the faintest and most distant of the nebulae observed 
and for this reason they exhibited the largest mean ve- 
locity. But the explanation came much later. At the time, 
it was believed that the progression in diameters might 
signify a progression either in concentration or in dis- 
tance or in both; therefore the correlation between di- 
ameters and velocities was ambiguous. 

Furthermore, Wirtz had not used the simple diameters, 
but their logarithms. The choice was a convenient one, but 
it led him to express his results as a linear relation be- 
tween velocities and log diameters or, as he considered, 
log distances. Such a relation differed in principle from 
the relation predicted by de Sitter. Hence, in view of the 
possibility of an alternative explanation as a concentra- 
tion effect, there was a tendency among astronomers to 
defer judgment until more information should become 
available. 

Wirtz'‘ presented some arguments suggesting that his 
correlation could not be entirely due to variations either 
in real diameters or surface-brightness, and Dose,” 
shortly afterwards, showed that a similar, although less- 
pronounced, correlation existed between velocities and 
simple diameters. Nevertheless, the later investigations 
of Lundmark” and of Strbmberg” failed to establish any 

14 Wirtz later published a stimulating popular presentation of the inves- 
tigation and the implications of the results {Scientia, 38, 303, 1925) in 
which he assumed that de Sitter ^s prediction had been verified. 

i5^^Zur Statistik der nichtgalaktischen Nebel . . . Astronomische 
Nachrichten, 229, 157, 1927. 

16 < < The Determination of the Curvature of Space-Time in de Sitter 
World, Monthly Notices, Boyal Astronomical Society, 84, 747, 1924. 

17 Analysis of Badial Velocities of Globular Clusters and Non~Galactic 
Nebulae, ‘^Mt. Wilson Contr.,^' No. 292; Astrophysical Journal, 61, 353, 
1925. 



112 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


definite relation between velocity and distance. Landmark 
in 1924, using the same nebulae as Wirtz and employing 
diameters and luminosities in combination as criteria of 
distances, concluded somewhat optimistically that “there 
may be a relation between the two quantities (velocity 
and distance), although not a very definite one.” Strom- 
berg, in 1925, using luminosities alone as criteria of dis- 
tances, made an especially clear-cut analysis of the data 
and found “no sufficient reason to believe that there exists 
any dependence of radial motion upon distance from the 
sun.” This statement, of course, referred to the situation 
as indicated by the information then at hand. It repre- 
sented the observer’s point of view — that whatever the 
ultimate truth of the matter might be, the data did not 
establish a relation. Further discussion would probably 
contribute little; the important desiderata were addi- 
tional data and more precise criteria of distances. Strom- 
berg did bring out rather clearly, however, that although 
the K-term did not seem to vary systematically with dis- 
tance, it probably varied from nebula to nebula, being 
small for M31 and the Magellanic Clouds, but large for 
NGC 584 (for which the largest velocity, -fl,125 miles/ 
sec., had been measured). 

Shortly afterwards. Landmark made a final attempt to 
uncover a variable K-term.*® He used the same data as 
before but replaced the constant K-term in the equations 
by a power series, 

K = -j- -p mr® 

where r was the distance in terms of the undetermined 
distance of M31 as a unit. The results were disappointing. 
The constant, Tc, in the series, was found to be 320 miles/ 
sec., somewhat smaller than, but still of the same general 
order as, the former values of K. The coefficient, I, was 
small and uncertain, about +6 miles/sec., indicating a 
slight distance-effect (about 8 per cent of the current 

is^^The Motions and the Distances of Spiral Nebulae/' Monthly Notices, 
Boyal Astronomical Society, 85, 865, 1925. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 


113 


value), but the coefficient m, very small and still more 
uncertain, was negative, —0.047. Landmark considered 
that m, although its precise value was uncertain, ex- 
pressed a real phenomenon which obviously set an upper 
limit to the velocities of recession that nebulae could ever 
attain (aside from their peculiar motions). He concluded 
that “one would scarcely expect to find any radial veloci- 
ties larger than -fSOOO km/sec. among the spirals.” 

The Velocity-Distance Relation, 

Hebe the matter rested until 1929. Slipher had turned to 
other problems and only two or three new velocities had 
been determined. But new criteria of distances had been 
developed which were much more reliable than those de- 
rived from apparent size and brightness. The new cri- 
teria, as described in the preceding chapter, were fur- 
nished by stars involved in nebulae and not by the nebulae 
themselves. Nebulae were now recognized as independent 
stellar systems scattered through extragalactic space. In 
a few of the very nearest neighbors, swarms of stars could 
be photographed and among them various types, well 
known in the galactic system, could be identified. The ap- 
parent faintness of these stars furnished reliable dis- 
tances of the nebulae in which they were involved. 

Less precise distances were indicated by the apparent 
faintness of the very brightest stars in the nebulae. This 
criterion could be applied as far as the nearest of the 
great clusters, the Virgo cluster, at a distance of the order 
of six or seven million light-years. The scatter in the new 
criterion was reasonably small compared to the range in 
distance covered by the velocities. The new development 
led inevitably to a reinvestigation of the K-term as a 
function of distance. 

Although velocities of forty-six objects were available 
in 1929, the new criteria gave distances for only eighteen 
of the isolated nebulae and for the Virgo cluster. Never- 
theless, the uncertainties in the distances were so small 
compared to the range over which they were distributed. 



114 


THE KEAEM UE THE iSEEUEJE 


that the velocity-distance relation (Fig. 9) emerged from 
the data in essentially its present form.^® 



Fig. 9. The Formulation of the Velocity-Distance Relation. 

The radial velocities (in km/see.), corrected for solar motion, are plotted 
against distances (in parsecs) estimated from involved stars and, in the case 
of the Virgo cluster (represented by the four most distant nebulae), from the 
mean luminosity of all nebulae in the cluster. The black disks and full line 
represei^t a solution for the solar motion using the nebulae individually; the 
circles and dashed line, a solution combining the nebulae into groups. 


The motion of the sun with respect to the nebulae was 
found to be about 175 miles/sec. in the general direction 
of the bright star Vega. This result is not very different 
from the solar motion due to galactic rotation — the or- 
bital motion of the sun around the galactic center. The 
agreement clearly indicates that the motion of the galac- 
tic system among the nebulae must be small. The data are 
not yet sufficient to determine this motion with any pre- 
cision. 

The K-term was closely represented as a linear func- 

19 Hubble, Eelation between Distance and Eadial Velocity among 
Extra-Galactic Nebulae, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
15 , 168 , 1929 . 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE KELATION 115 

tion of distance. Velocities, on the average, increased at 
the rate of roughly 100 miles/sec., per million light-years 
of distance, over the observed range of about 6.5 million 
light-years. When the distance effects as well as the solar 
motion were eliminated from the observed velocities, the 
residuals, which represented the peculiar motions of the 
nebulae, averaged about 100 miles/sec. Moreover, the ve- 
locities of approach were about as numerous as the veloci- 
ties of recession. The observed velocities were thus re- 
duced to order and the distribution of residuals was 
satisfactory. 

The velocity-distance relation, once established, could 
evidently be used as a criterion of distance for all nebulae 
whose velocities were known. The first application of the 
new criterion was made to the nebulae in Slipher’s list 
in which no stars could be detected. Observed velocities, 
divided by the K-term, indicated distances whose only 
uncertainties were those introduced by peculiar motions. 
Distances and apparent faintness, taken together, indi- 
cated intrinsic luminosities. Intrinsic luminosities derived 
in this manner were strictly comparable with those of the 
nebulae in which stars were observed; both the mean lu- 
minosities, and the ranges through which they were scat- 
tered, agreed within the uncertainties of the determina- 
tions. The nebulae whose velocities had been measured 
appeared to form a homogeneous group, and the nebulae 
in which stars could be observed, were a fair sample of 
the group. The consistency of these results was additional 
evidence of the validity of the velocity-distance relation. 

Humason’s List of Radial Velocities. 

The data were rediscussed by various authorities with 
occasional slight modifications, but it was recognized that, 
in a general way, the linear relation fairly accounted for 
the observed velocities then available. Yet the data were 
few and were distributed through a very small portion of 
the observable region of space. Further progress de- 
pended upon the extension of the observations out among 



116 THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 

fainter, more distant nebulae. This exacting task was 
undertaken by Milton Humason at the Mount Wilson Ob- 
servatory. 

Slipher, in his pioneer work, had observed a representa- 
tive collection of the brighter nebulae down to about the 
efficient limits of his 24-inch refractor. Humason, using 
the great reflectors on Mount Wilson, carried the work far 
out into unexplored regions. He initiated his program in 
1928 and by 1935 had added nearly 150 new velocities, 
ranging over distances out to thirty-five times the dis- 
tance of the Virgo cluster. 

The new phase in the study of nebular spectra repre- 
sented a steady advance in technique and instrumental 
equipment. Where the semistellar images of small, faint 
nebula} were concerned, the large reflectors, and especially 
the 100-inch, had a decided advantage over smaller tele- 
scopes. Spectrographs were designed to exploit this pe- 
culiar power and were frequently modified as experience 
suggested. 

Development of the most essential equipment, the 
camera behind the prism, led to the Eayton lens. This 
lens, designed by Dr. W. B. Eayton of the Bausch and 
Lomb Optical Company, was constructed on the principle 
of a reversed microscope objective.^® The focal ratio of 
the lens is F0.6 — the focal length is a little more than half 
the aperture — and this great speed enables it to record 
spectra of exceedingly faint nebulae. 

The success of the Eayton lens led to further experi- 
ments which culminated logically in the adaptation of the 
microscope objective for oil immersion. A focal ratio of 
F0.35 — focal length about one third the aperture — ^has 
been reached on this principle, although the lens has not 
yet been tested at the telescope itself.^ 

20 Eayton, ‘^Two High-Speed Camera Objectives for Astronomical Spec- 
trographs,’’ Astrophysical Journaly 72, 59, 1930. 

21 This lens was designed by Mr. B. J. Bracey of the British Scientific 
Instrument Eesearch Association. It is described by Hale, * * The Astrophysi- 
cal Observatory of the California Institute of Technology,” Astrophysical 
Journaly 82, 111, 1935. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 117 
Clusters. 

Humason began bis investigations with the spectra of a 
few bright nebulae whose velocities were already known. 
When he was sure that his equipment and technique were 
reliable he ventured out into the new regions. The first 
problem was to test the velocity-distance relation over a 
great range in distance. For this reason, the observations 
were concentrated on the brightest nebulae in clusters. 

The first velocity, +2,400 miles/sec., for a cluster in 
Pegasus,^^ was more than double the largest velocity pre- 
viously known. Thereafter, as fainter and fainter clusters 
were observed, the absorption lines marched steadily 
across the spectrum. A velocity of 4,700 miles/sec. was 
found for the Coma cluster, 9,400 for Ursa Major No. 1, 
15,000 for Gemini, and, ultimately, for clusters in Bootes 
and Ursa Major (No. 2), velocities of 24,500 and 26,000, 
respectively, which are about one seventh of the velocity 
of light itself. 

The nebulae in these latter clusters could not be seen at 
the long (Cassegrain) focus of the telescope. The slit of 
the spectrograph was set on neighboring stars and was 
then moved by measured amounts (determined from di- 
rect photographs) to the positions of the unseen nebulae. 
The observations thus extend nearly to the extreme limit 
of existing equipment. No very significant advances are 
expected until larger telescopes are constructed. 

The velocities over the entire range increase directly 
with distances, and the linear relation holds as closely as 
distances can be estimated.’'® Apparent luminosities of the 
five or ten brightest nebulae in clusters would offer fairly 
reliable criteria of distances except for effects of the 

22 Humason, Large Eadial Velocity of NGC 7619,’^ Proceedings 

of the National Academy of Sciences, 15, 167, 1929. Humason has since pub- 
lished two considerable lists of velocities, ‘‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,^^ Nos. 426 
and 531; Astrophysical Journal, 74, 35, 1931 and 83, 10, 1936. 

23 Hubble and Humason, The Velocity -Distance Relation among Extra- 
Galactic NehulcB, *^Mt. Wilson Contr.,^^ No. 427; Astrophysical Journal, 
74, 43, 1931. Subsequent investigations are discussed in chap, vii of this 
book. 



PLATE VIII 

The Velocity-Distance Relation. 

The five examples in the Plate illustrate the empirical law that red- 
shifts in the spectra of nebulaD increase with the apparent faintness of 
the nebulae. Since apparent faintness measures distance, the law can be 
stated in the form that red-shifts increase with distance. Detailed in- 
vestigation shows that the relation is linear (red-shifts = constant X dis- 
tance). 

Red-shifts resemble velocity-shifts, and no other satisfactory explana- 
tion is available at the present time : red-shifts are due either to actual 
motion of recession or to some hitherto unrecognized principle of physics. 
Therefore, the empirical law is generally described as the velocity- 
distance relation (velocity = constant X distance), and is often consid- 
ered as visible evidence of the expanding universe of general relativity. 

The spectra are by Humason. The velocity of NGC 221 is negative — 
toward the earth — and is a refiection of the sun^s motion in its orbit 
about the center of the galactic system. The other velocities are positive 
— awdy from the earth. The distance of NGC 221 (M32) should read 
700,000 light years. The revision takes into account the effects of local 
obscuration. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 


119 


enormous velocities. Spectra in the fainter clusters are 
shifted bodily toward the red so far that the distribution 
of light in the photographic region is sensibly altered. The 
nebulae thus appear fainter than normal, and the effect 
increases directly with the red-shifts. The precise evalua- 
tion of the effect is somewhat uncertain and will be dis- 
cussed later in connection with the interpretation of red- 
shifts. But the general order of the effect is known and 
approximate corrections are now applied as a matter of 
course. 

The two faintest clusters in which velocities have been 
measured are at distances estimated to be of the order of 
230 and 240 million light-years (70 and 73 million par- 
secs), respectively. The linear velocity-distance relation 
is thus established over an immense volume of space and 
may be considered as a general characteristic of the ob- 
servable region itself. 

Isolated Nehulce. 

Afteb the preliminary investigations of clusters, empha- 
sis was transferred to isolated nebulas. Here also, Huma- 
son has rapidly enlarged the body of data. The earlier list 
of eighteen nebulae in which stars could be detected has 
grown to thirty-two, and the total number of velocities of 
isolated nebulae has passed the hundred mark. Groups 
also were included in the program, and are now repre- 
sented by about fifteen velocities in five well-defined 
groups. 

The isolated nebulae are well represented down to mag- 
nitude 13.0, and a considerable number are scattered over 
the fainter magnitudes. The faintest isolated nebula yet 
observed is at magnitude 17.5, and has a velocity of 
-f 12,000 miles/sec. All the objects appear to conform to 
the velocity-distance relation determined by the clusters. 
The relation as derived from the isolated nebulae is defi- 
nitely linear. The numerical value of the K-term cannot 
be determined independently, but when the value for the 
clusters is introduced, and certain necessary corrections 



120 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


are made for effects of selection, the resulting distances 
and luminosities of the nebulae are thoroughly consistent 
with data derived from other sources. Actually, the ve- 
locity-distance relation is so firmly established that it is 
assumed to hold for all nebulae, and the observed residu- 
als are analyzed for the information they give concerning 
the scatter in the intrinsic luminosities or the luminosity- 
function of nebulae.^* 

Significance of the Velocity-Distance Relation. 

As a mere criterion of distance the relation is a valuable 
aid to nebular research. The only serious errors are those 
introduced by the peculiar motions. These average be- 
tween 100 and 150 miles/sec., and are presumably in- 
dependent of distance. As the K-term increases with 
distance, the peculiar motion, remaining constant, is an 
ever-smaller fraction of the K-term. Thus the percentage- 
accuracy of the determinations increases as the distances 
increase — a welcome contrast to methods which involve 
photometric measures. 

The velocity-distance relation is not merely a powerful 
aid to research, it is also a general characteristic of our 
sample of the universe — one of the very few that are 
known. Until lately, the explorations of space had been 
confined to relatively short distances and small volumes 
— in a cosmic sense, to comparatively microscopic phe- 
nomena. Now, in the realm of the nebulae, large-scale, 
macroscopic phenomena of matter and radiation could be 
examined. Expectations ran high. There was a feeling 
that almost anything might happen and, in fact, the ve- 
locity-distance relation did emerge as the mists receded. 
This was of the first importance for, if it could be fully 
interpreted, the relation would probably contribute an 
essential clew to the problem of the structure of the uni- 
verse. 

24 Hubble and Humason, ‘‘The Veloeity-Distance Eelation for Isolated 
Extra-Galactic Nebulse/^ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
20, 264, 1934. See also, chap, vii of this book. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 121 

Observations show that details in nebular spectra are 
displaced toward the red from their normal positions, and 
that the red-shifts increase with apparent faintness of the 
nebulae. Apparent faintness is confidently interpreted in 
terms of distance. Therefore, the observational result can 
be restated — red-shifts increase with distance. 

Interpretations of the red-shifts themselves do not in- 
spire such complete confidence. Eed-shifts may be ex- 
pressed as fractions, dX/\, where dX is the displacement of 
a spectral line whose normal wave-length is A. The dis- 
placements, d\, vary systematically through any particular 
spectrum, but the variation is such that the fraction, d\/\, 
remains constant. Thus dX/X specifies the shift for any 
nebula, and it is the fraction which increases linearly with 
distances of the nebulae.^' Prom this point, the term red- 
shift will be employed for the fraction dX/X. 

Moreover, the displacements, dX, are always positive 
(toward the red) and so the wave-length of a displaced 
line, A -f dX, is always greater than the normal wave- 
length, A. Wave-lengths are increased by the factor 
(A -f- dA)/A, or the equivalent 1 -+- dX/X. Now there is a 
fundamental relation in physics which states that the 
energy of any light quantum, multiplied by the wave- 
length of the quantum, is constant. Thus 

Energy X wave-length = constant. 

Obviously, since the product remains constant, red-shifts, 
by increasing wave-lengths, must reduce the energy in the 
quanta. Any plausible interpretation of red-shifts must 
account for the loss of energy. The loss must occur either 
in the nebulae themselves or in the immensely long paths 
over which the light travels on its journey to the observer. 

Thorough investigation of the problem has led to the 
following conclusions. Several ways are known in which 
red-shifts might be produced. Of them all, only one will 
produce large shifts without introducing other effects 

25 The apparent radial velocity of a nebula is, to a first approximation, 
the velocity of light (186,000 miles/sec.) multiplied by the fraction, d\/\. 



122 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


which should be conspicuous, but which are not observed. 
This explanation interprets red-shifts as Doppler effects, 
that is to say, as velocity-shifts, indicating actual motion 
of recession. It may be stated with some confidence that 
red-shifts are velocity-shifts or else they represent some 
hitherto unrecognized principle in physics. 

The interpretation as velocity-shifts is generally 
adopted by theoretical investigators, and the velocity- 
distance relation is considered as the observational basis 
for theories of an expanding universe. Such theories are 
widely current. They represent solutions of the cosmo- 
logical equation, which follow from the assumption of a 
nonstatic universe. They supersede the earlier solutions 
made upon the assumption of a static universe, which are 
now regarded as special cases in the general theory. 

Nebular red-shifts, however, are on a very large scale, 
quite new in our experience, and empirical confirmation 
of their provisional interpretation as familiar velocity- 
shifts, is highly desirable. Critical tests are possible, at 
least in principle, since rapidly receding nebulae should 
appear fainter than stationary nebulae at the same dis- 
tances. The effects of recession are inconspicuous until 
the velocities reach appreciable fractions of the velocity 
of light. This condition is fulfilled, and hence the effects 
should be measurable, near the limits of the 100-inch 
reflector. 

The problem will be discussed more fully in the con- 
cluding chapter. The necessary investigations are beset 
with difficulties and uncertainties, and conclusions from 
data now available are rather dubious. They are men- 
tioned here in order to emphasize the fact that the inter- 
pretation of red-shifts is at least partially within the 
range of empirical investigation. For this reason the atti- 
tude of the observer is somewhat different from that of 
the theoretical investigator. Because the telescopic re- 
sources are not yet exhausted, judgment may be sus- 
pended until it is known from observations whether or 
not red-shifts do actually represent motion. 



THE VELOCITY-DISTANCE RELATION 123 

Meanwhile, red-shifts may be expressed on a scale of 
velocities as a matter of convenience. They behave as ve- 
locity-shifts behave and they are very simply represented 
on the same familiar scale, regardless of the ultimate 
interpretation. The term “apparent velocity” may be 
used in carefully considered statements, and the adjective 
always implied where it is omitted in general usage. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE LOCAL GROUP 

T he previous chapters have described the apparent 
features of nebulas and of their distribution, and 
the development of methods for investigating their 
intrinsic characteristics. The remaining chapters will pre- 
sent some of the results derived from the application of 
these methods, first to a group of nebulae in our immediate 
neighborhood, then to the remoter nebulae scattered 
through the general field, and finally to the realm of the 
nebulae as a whole. 

Apparent dimensions will no longer be of primary in- 
terest except as they lead to absolute dimensions. Linear 
distances, in general, will be expressed in terms of light- 
years (l.y.), and luminosities, in terms of absolute magni- 
tudes {M). It may be repeated that absolute magnitudes 
are merely the apparent magnitudes which objects would 
exhibit, if they were at a certain standard distance — 10 
parsecs or 32.6 l.y. The sun, at this distance, would be just 
comfortably visible to the naked eye — the photographic 
luminosity would be M = -1-5.6. Supergiant stars would 
rival Venus, and the brightest of them would be readily 
visible in broad daylight. The faintest nebulae would be 
somewhat fainter than the full moon, and the brightest, 
perhaps a hundred times brighter than the moon. 

Members of the Local Group. 

Surveys of the sky show that nebulae are scattered singly 
and in groups of various sizes up to the occasional great 
clusters. The small-scale distribution resembles that of 
stars in the stellar system. Analogies among the nebulae 
are readily found with individual stars, doubles, triples, 
multiples, sparse clusters, and open clusters. Globular 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


125 


clusters alone seem to have no counterpart in the realm 
of the nebulsB. 

The galactic system is a member of a typical, small 
group of nebulae which is isolated in the general field. The 
known members of the “local group” are the galactic 
system with the Magellanic Clouds as its two companions ; 
M31 with M32 and NGC 205 as its companions; M33, 
NGC 6822 and IC 1613. The three nebute, NGC 6946, IC 
10 and 342, may be members, but they are so heavily ob- 
scured that their distances are indeterminate. 

The known members of the local group are fairly ac- 
cessible. Cepheids have been observed even in the most 
distant members, and stellar contents have been studied 
in some detail. These neighboring systems furnished a 
small sample collection of nebulae from which criteria 
were developed for exploring the remoter regions of 
space. 

The nearer nebulae in the general field are far beyond 
the limits of the group. Investigations of their stellar con- 
tents are so difficult that very little definite information 
has been gathered. No Cepheids^ have been identified as 
yet — distances are estimated from less precise criteria 
derived from the local group. The fact that the galactic 
system is a member of a group is a very fortunate acci- 
dent. The assembling of a sample collection of nebulae 
from the general field would probably have been delayed 
until telescopes were built much larger than those now in 
operation. 

The local group contains two triple nebulae. The galac- 
tic system and M31 are each accompanied by a pair of 
satellites, so close that their outermost regions probably 
mingle with those of the primary body. The extragalactic 
character of the Clouds was not fully recognized until 
comparatively late. Because of their proximity and their 

1 In MlOl, one of the nearest of the field-nebulas, Cepheid characteristics 
are presumed in the case of a few variables with short intervals between ob- 
served maxima, but the light curves and hence the identifications have not 
been established. 



126 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


unusual types — ^they are highly resolved irregular nebulae 
— there was a tendency to regard the Clouds as possibly 
local aggregations in the galactic system. Although they 
were really the most accessible of the nebulae, they were 
passed over, in a sense, and the first definite conquests 
in extragalaetic space were made among more distant 
systems. 

TABLE V. 


Members of the Local Group, 






Unit = 

= 1,000 








Light-Years 






Galactic 

Dis- 

Diam- 



Veloc- 

Nebula 

Type 

X 

P 

tance 

eter* 

M(neb) M (stars) t 

ity! 

LMC 

Ir 

247° 

—33° 

85 

12 

—15.9 

-7.1 

0 

SMC 

Ir 

269 

-45 

95 

6 

14.5 

5.8 

-f60 

M31 

Sb 




40 

17.5 

6.0 

-30 

M32 

E2 

89 

-21 

680 

0.8 

12.6 



NGC 205 

E5p 




1.6 

11.5 



M33 

Sc 

103 

-31 

720 

12 

14.9 

6.3 

-180 

NGC 6822 

Ir 

354 

-20 

530 

3.2 

11.0 

5.6 

-30 

IC 1613 

Ir 

99 

-60 

900 

4.4 

-11.2 

5.8 


Mean 






—13.6 

-6.1 





Possible Members, 




IC 10 

Sc? 

87 

-3 






IC 342 

Sc 

106 

+11 





-fl50 

NGC 6946 

Sc 

64 

+11 





-fllO 


* Diameters refer to the main bodies of the nebulae, 
t M (stars) refer to the mean of the three or four brightest nonvariable 
stars in each nebula. 

t The radial velocities are corrected for the rotation of the sun around 
the center of the galactic system. The velocities thus represent combinations 
of the individual (peculiar) motions of the nebulae with respect to the galac- 
tic system, and the distance-effects. 


The known and the possible members of the local group 
are listed in Table V, with certain of their apparent char- 
acteristics and their intrinsic dimensions. The known 
members are distributed through an ellipsoidal volume of 
space whose longest diameter is about a million light- 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


127 


years. Distances of the possible members are indeter- 
minate, but they could be placed in the same ellipsoid, or 
in one slightly larger, without unduly straining the ob- 
servational data. 

The galactic system is well out toward one end of the 
group. The long axis of the ellipsoid stretches away in the 
general direction of M31. Although the data are much too 



Pig. 10. Apparent Distribution of Members of the Local Group. 

Positions are plotted in g’alactic coordinates. The central, horizontal line, 
0° — 0°, represents the galactic plane, along which lies the irregular zone of 
avoidance (see Fig. 3.). Disks indicate known members of the local group; 
circles, possible members. The obscuration of the possible members is con- 
spicuous, especially in the case of IC 10. 


scanty for precise statements, the galactic coordinates of 
the axis may be tentatively adopted as X = 80° to 90° ; 
3 = —25°. The eccentric position of the galactic system is 
indicated by the fact that the known and possible mem- 
bers of the group are all within 40° of the axis, with the 
exception of the Magellanic Clouds and NGC 6822 (Fig. 
10). Since the former are satellites of the galactic system 
itself, and the latter is the nearest of the independent 
members, their directions are the least significant in the 
list. 

The nebulae as a group favor the low southern latitudes. 



128 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


IC 1613, at 6 = —60°, represents the limit in one direc- 
tion and the possible members, 10 342 and NGC 6946, 
both at 3 = +11°, represent the other limit. The distribu- 
tion is somewhat unfortunate for nebular research, since 
the prevailing low latitudes lead to conspicuous galactic 
obscuration. Uncertainties are thus introduced in the 
study of the very nebulae which must serve to calibrate 
methods for further exploration. The obscuration is 
especially heavy in the case of the three doubtful mem- 
bers ; it renders their distances, and hence their member- 
ship in the group, indeterminate. Other members may be 
completely hidden behind the great clouds in the Milky 
Way, especially in the general direction of the galactic 
center, where the zone of avoidance is many degrees 
wide. Moreover, the nebulae in low latitudes between 
longitudes 200° and 300° cannot be observed with the 
great reflectors in the northern hemisphere. Little is 
known of their stellar contents or their spectra. Several 
of them, for example NGC 4945 and 5128, must be care- 
fully investigated before they can be definitely excluded 
from the list of possible members. 

The group contains samples of several different types. 
Barred spirals and early-type normal spirals are missing, 
but ellipticals, intermediate, and late-type normal spi- 
rals, and irregular nebulae are included. The irregular 
nebulae, although relatively rare in the general field, are 
especially well represented by four members. The Large 
Magellanic Cloud is a giant nebula and the Small Cloud 
is about normal. The two remaining irregulars, NGC 
6822 and IC 1613, are intrinsically the faintest of all 
nebulas whose luminosities have been determined. In view 
of the wide range in dimensions thus represented, the col- 
lection offers an opportunity for the study of the general 
characteristics of the irregular nebulae as a class. 

The local group has been investigated for two pur- 
poses. In the first place, the members have been studied 
individually, as the nearest and most accessible examples 
of their particular types, in order to determine the in- 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


129 


ternal structures and stellar contents. The significant 
data are the forms and structural patterns, the luminosi- 
ties, dimensions, and masses, and in particular the types 
and luminosities of the stars involved. In the second 
place, the group may be examined as a sample collection 
of nebulae, from which criteria can be derived for further 
exploration. 


The Galactic System.^ 

The galactic system is a highly flattened swarm of stars, 
dust, and gas, in rapid rotation about an axis perpendicu- 
lar to the galactic plane. The sun is a star nearly in the 
galactic plane, but far out, possibly 30,000 l.y., from the 
center of rotation. Details of form and structure are diffi- 
cult to determine, partly because of the observer’s in- 
terior position, but more especially as a result of the ob- 
scuration produced by the dust. Nevertheless, it is pos- 
sible, by a combination of facts, analogies, and specula- 
tions, to construct a reasonable working hypothesis. 

The great, conspicuous dust-clouds® are sensibly opaque, 
obscuring the view over large areas along the Milky Way. 
The galactic center, presumably the nuclear region of the 
nebula, is completely hidden. The dust-clouds account for 
most of the apparent irregularities in the Milky Way by 
framing normal areas with bordering fields of obscura- 
tion. Yet, when full allowance has been made for effects 
of obscuration, there still remain regions of high local 
density which are called star-clouds. 

2 For a more extensive discussion, see J, S. Plaskett, * ^ The Dimensions 
and Structure of the Galaxy^' (the Halley Lecture at Oxford, 1935). The 
lecture is a simple, clear, and authoritative statement of the present concep- 
tion of the galactic system. 

8 The opaque or semiopaque clouds may consist of material in all forms, 
but the greater part of the obscuration must be attributed to dust (particles 
with diameters comparable with the wave-length of light). With material 
in other forms, impossibly large masses would be required to account for 
the observed obscuration. Tenuous clouds do exist, which veil rather than 
obscure, and these might consist of either dust, in smaller quantity, or gas 
(molecules, atoms, and electrons). Between these limits all degrees of ob- 
scuration are found. 



180 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


The star-clouds, together with other evidence of clus- 
tering, produce a certain patchiness in stellar distribution 
which suggests the observed texture of open spirals*^ or 
irregular nebulae such as the Magellanic Clouds, The 
analogy with spirals is preferable, since the rapid rotation 
of the galactic system implies a symmetry of form which 
is lacking in the irregular nebulae. Finally, the very dim 
surface-brightnesfe of tlie galactic system (as it would ap- 
pear from a great distance), the extent of the resolution, 
and the prevalence of blue giants and emission-nebulosity, 
all suggest that the spiral is of the late-type. Sc. It is 
possibly similar to the “massive” spiral, M33. 

The star-density presumably diminishes outward from 
the nucleus to undefined borders. Estimates of dimen- 
sions are arbitrary unless a particular density is speci- 
fied, to which the estimates extend. To an observer far out 
in space, the surface-brightness of the galactic system 
might be inconspicuous at forty thousand light-years 
from the nucleus, although individual giant stars and 
clusters could be detected to much greater distances. The 
main body may be pictured as a lenticular mass, possibly 
seventy to eighty thousand light-years across, and per- 
haps ten thousand light-years thick at the center. This 
body consists of a very tenuous medium, strewn with 
stars, within which the ill-defined spiral arms wind out- 
ward from the nuclear region. Star-clouds are found 
along the vague spiral arms, and obscuring clouds are 
scattered throughout the fundamental plane. 

The rotation of the system is determined from the mo- 
tion of the sun with respect to the other stars, some of 
which are nearer the nucleus and others are more remote. 
At the distance of the sun from the center, the period of 
rotation is of the order of 220 million years. This period 
suggests a total mass for the galactic system of the gen- 
eral order of 200,000 million times the mass of the sun. 

The brightest stars (photographically) are blue giants 
(0-type). Other types follow in much the same order as 
that observed in neighboring systems. Cepheids are con- 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


181 


spicuous among the four or five brightest magnitudes. 
Novae flare out at the rate of several per year. Patches of 
emission-nebulosity (Orion nebula, etc.), and globular 
clusters, are conspicuous features. 

The Magellanic Clouds. 

The Magellanic Clouds, because of their proximity, offer 
exceptional opportunities for detailed study of nebulae as 
stellar systems. They are southern objects (Dec. —69° 
and —73°) and for this reason they have not been ana- 
lyzed with great reflectors. Badial velocities of numerous 
patches of emission-nebulosity in the Clouds were deter- 
mined at the southern station of the Lick Observatory.* 
Otherwise, most of the recent data have been furnished 
by a 24-inch camera at the southern station of the Har- 
vard College Observatory.” With this camera, all objects 
in the Clouds brighter than about absolute magnitude 
zero, or perhaps one hundred times brighter than the sun, 
are readily observed. More detailed information has been 
obtained from the Clouds than from any other nebulae in 
the sky. 

Both systems, as previously mentioned, are typical ir- 
regular nebulae — highly resolved, with no nuclei and no 
conspicuous evidence of rotational symmetry. The stellar 
contents, down to the observable limits, are remarkably 
similar to those of the galactic system. The relative, ap- 
parent luminosities of corresponding objects furnish 
many independent estimates of distance. The Cepheids, of 
course, indicate the most precise distances, but the other 
criteria are valuable for confirming the order and estab- 
lishing the general consistency of the results. 

The Clouds are readily visible to the naked eye. Their 

4 Wilson, Publications of the LicJc Observatory ^ 13, 185, 1918. 

5Wattenburg, Astronomische Nachrichten, 237, 401, 1930, summarizes 
investigations previous to that data. Some data are found in Shapley, Star 
Clusters (1930). Subsequent investigations are scattered through the AnnalSy 
Bulletins, and Circulars of the Harvard College Observatory. In addition, 
total magnitudes of the Clouds were measured by Van Herk, Bulletin of the 
Astronomical Institutes of the Netherlands, No. 209 (1930). 



182 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


apparent, photographic magnitudes are about 1.2 and 2,8. 
The distances derived from Cepheids, according to Shap- 
ley, are about 85,000 and 95,000 l.y., the Large Cloud 
being the nearer. Since they are approximately 23° apart 
in the sky, their absolute separation is of the order 0.4 
times their mean distance from the earth, or perhaps 
35,000 l.y. 

The Large Cloud, at latitude —33°, is more seriously 
affected by galactic obscuration than is the Small Cloud 
(latitude —45°). The differential effect, of the order of 
0.1 mag., should reduce the relative distance of the Large 
Cloud by about 5 per cent. The actual distance of the 
Small Cloud might also be revised, but uncertainties in 
the photometric data are probably comparable with the 
effects of obscuration and the latter may be ignored for 
the present. 

Total absolute magnitudes corresponding to Shapley’s 
distances are —15.9 for the Large Cloud and —14.5 for 
the Small Cloud — approximately 400 million and 100 mil- 
lion times the luminosity of the sun, respectively. 

The main bodies of the clouds are roughly circular, with 
diameters of about 11,000 and 6,000 l.y. Each contains an 
elongated, central core whose dimensions are roughly 
by 1/4 larger diameter. Individual objects, such as 
variable stars and clusters, can be traced well beyond the 
main bodies. The latter term, as previously mentioned, is 
used loosely for the regions readily seen on well-exposed 
photographs. Diameters have no precise significance un- 
less the density limits are specified. 

Eadial velocities of 4-276 and 4168 km/sec., for the 
Large and the Small Cloud, respectively, were derived 
from patches of emission-nebulosity. The velocities are 
largely accounted for as reflections of the solar motion, 
and, therefore, the peculiar motions of the nebulae in the 
line of sight are very small. 

A single nova has been recorded in each Cloud. The 
estimated maxima were about M = — 5 and —6, so the 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


188 


objects were similar to the normal novae found in M31, 
M|3, and the galactic system. 

More than 3,000 variable stars have been found in the 
two Clouds and the list is reported to be incomplete. The 
majority of the variables are presumably Cepheids,® al- 
though detailed investigations have been published for 
only about 200 in the Small Cloud and 40 in the Large 
Cloud. The former list established the period-luminosity 
relation in its current form. The list, it may be mentioned, 
includes the relatively few Cepheids used by Miss Leavitt 
in her original formulation of the relation. 

Long-period variables, irregulars, and eclipsing bina- 
ries are occasionally represented, but the analysis of data 
is incomplete and the relative frequencies are still un- 
certain. The brightest variable of all is the irregular S 
Doradus, a P-Cygni type of star involved in the enormous 
diffuse nebulosity catalogued as NGC 2070. This mass of 
nebulosity, contained in the Large Cloud, spreads over an 
area about 200 light-years in diameter. The mean intrin- 
sic luminosity of S Doradus is listed as about M = —8.3, 
which is the brightest luminosity that has been assigned 
to any individual star. It is about 350,000 times the lumi- 
nosity of the sun. 

The Large Cloud is exceptionally rich in supergiants. 
Nonvariables range up to perhaps M = —7.2 as com- 
pared to about —6.0 in the Small Cloud. Otherwise the 
relative frequencies of stars of different luminosities are 
much the same as those found in the galactic system. 

Open clusters and patches of emission-nebulosity are 
numerous in both Clouds. More than thirty globular clus- 
ters are known in the Large Cloud, although only a few 
have been found in the Small Cloud. The estimated mag- 
nitudes of the clusters have been revised from time to 

6 Shapley reports that about 2.5 per cent of all stars in the Small Cloud, 
brighter than m = 16.8 (M = ~0.5), are variable stars, presumably almost 
wholly of the Cepheid class; Froceedinga of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 22, 10, 1936. 



134 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


time. The most recent estimates, although admittedly un- 
certain, suggest that these clusters are closely compar- 
able with similar objects in M31, but are systematically 
fainter than globular clusters in the galactic system. 

Messier 31.'' 

M31, the great spiral in Andromeda, is fairly conspicuous 
to the naked eye as an elongated cloud about half the size 
of the full moon, and about as bright as a star of the 
fourth or fifth magnitude. The spiral structure has never 
been seen with any telescope, although it is readily photo- 
graphed with small cameras. 

The nebula is a typical Sb spiral with a relatively large, 
unresolved nuclear region (the portion visible to the 
naked eye) and fainter arms. The outer parts are well 
resolved into stars. Novae, Cepheids, early-type giants, 
and globular clusters are found in considerable numbers, 
with relative luminosities much the same as those of simi- 
lar objects in the Magellanic Clouds. The Cepheids, of 
which forty have been studied in detail, furnish a fairly 
reliable distance and the order is confirmed by the other 
types of objects. 

The Cepheids in the spiral appear systematically 
fainter than Cepheids in the Small Magellanic Cloud (the 
standard system) by about 4.65 mag. Part of the differ- 
ence must be attributed to differences in galactic obscura- 
tion, for the spiral is only 21° from the galactic plane, 
while the Cloud is 45°. The appropriate correction re- 
duces the difference in magnitudes arising from relative 
distance, to about 4.3 mag. Therefore the spiral is 7.25 
times as far away as the Cloud, or about 680,000 l.y. 
(210,000 parsecs). 

The spiral has the usual lenticular form with a ratio of 
axes probably 6 or 7 to 1, but is oriented so that the ratio 

7 For a general discussion of M31, including references to earlier investi- 
gations, see Hubble, A Spiral Nebula as a Stellar System, Messier SI, ‘^Mt. 
Wilson Contr.,^^ No, 376; Astrophysical Journal, 69, 103, 1929. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


135 


in the projected image is about 3 or 4 to 1. The major 
diameter of the bright nuclear region is of the order of 
3,000 l.y. and the spiral arms are readily traced to a 
diameter of 40,000 l.y. Painter extensions can be detected 
by refined methods to perhaps double this diameter, and 
globular clusters are distributed over the larger area.* 
The dimensions thus appear to be of the same general 
order as those of the galactic system, although M31 is a 
more compact type of nebula. 

The absolute luminosity is rather uncertainly estimated 
as ilf = —17.5 (1,700 million times as bright as the sun). 
The mass, as derived from the rotation of the nuclear 
region (from inclination of lines in the spectrum), is pos- 
sibly 30,000 million times the mass of the sun. 

One supernova has been observed — S Andromeda 
(1885). It reached a maximum absolute luminosity of 
about M = —14.5 (100 million times the sun), which is 
brighter than most nebulae. Normal novae flare up at the 
rate of 25 or 30 per year (115 have been recorded). The 
light curves, luminosities, and spectra® are similar to 
those of galactic novae. The absolute magnitudes at maxi- 
mum are sjunmetrically distributed around the mean 
value, M = —5.5, with a dispersion of about 0.5 mag. The 
brightest observed maximum is M = —6.7, about 85,000 
times as bright as the sun. 

The same limit is reached by the brightest variable, an 
early -type star with an irregular light curve, but with 
some indications of a five-year period. A half dozen other 
irregulars are known, one of which is red and may be com- 
parable with the galactic star Betelgeuse. The Cepheids 
at maximum range from M = —4.1 to —2.7, depending on 
their periods. Nonvariable stars brighter than M = —5 

8 For the diameter from globular clusters, Hubble, ^^Mt. Wilson Contr.,^’ 
No. 452, Astrophysical JournaX, 76, 44, 1932; from photoelectric measures, 
Stebbins and Whitford, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
20, 93, 1934; from micro-photometer measures, Shapley, Harvard College 
Observatory Bulletin, No. 895, 1934. 

» Humason, ' ‘ The Spectra of Two Novae in the Andromeda Nebula, ^ ’ 
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 44, 381, 1932. 



136 THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 

are not numerous, and the upper limit appears to be near 
Af = -6. 

An object catalogued as a separate nebula, NGC 206, is 
really a typical star-cloud in the outer region of M31. The 
dimensions of the cloud are about 1,300 X 450 l.y. Some 
90 stars are brighter than M = —3.5, and the numbers in- 
crease steadily with increasing faintness until the indi- 
viduals are lost in the unresolved background. The 
brighter stars are early types, although their precise 
classification has not been established. No patches of 
emission-nebulosity have been identified in the cloud, nor 
elsewhere in the spiral. 

A few open clusters are known. A typical example is 
found about 48' south-preceding the nucleus, along the 
major axis. It is perceptibly elongated, with a major 
diameter of the order of about 50 l.y. The cluster is par- 
tially resolved and a few individual stars can be detected 
on the border. The spectrum is A-type, and the color- 
index is considerably less than those of the globular 
clusters. 

About 140 globular clusters are known, and the list is 
still incomplete for the extreme outer regions of the 
nebula.^® Their forms, structures, colors, and spectra are 
similar to those of globular clusters in the galactic sys- 
tem. The luminosities range from M = — 4 to —7, and the 
diameters range from about 12 to 50 l.y. The clusters in 
M31 are thus comparable with those in the Magellanic 
Clouds, and are systematically smaller and fainter than 
those in the galactic system. 

The distribution of the clusters follows that of the lu- 
minosity in the spiral, and is definitely not the spherical 
distribution found in the galactic system. The clusters, 
since they can be distinguished with some confidence from 
the numerous faint nebulae in the general region of M31, 
serve to define the maximum extensions of the spiral 

10 Hubble, Nebulous Objects in Messier SI Provisionally Identified as 
Globular Clusters, *‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,^^ No. 452; Astrophysical Journal, 70, 
44, 1932. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


187 


beyond the main body. The distribution of clusters sug- 
gests a maximum diameter of the order of 100,000 l.y. The 
search for clusters has also shown the feasibility of de- 
termining the opacity of M31 from the manner in which 
the very faint field-nebulae fade out as the nucleus is ap- 
proached. The data, however, are still incomplete and no 
definite result can be stated. 

Messier 32. 

M32, the closer and brighter of the two statellites of M31, 
is the type example of elliptical nebulae of the class E2 
(ratio of axes 8 to 10). As seen in projection, it is super- 
imposed on an arm of the great spiral, about 25' south of 
the nucleus. The least possible separation of the two 
nebulae (nucleus to nucleus) is thus 5,000 l.y. If M32 lies 
in the plane of the spiral, the separation is 12,000 l.y. The 
larger distance may be used for speculations, although 
M32 may lie anywhere along the line of sight within 
rather wide limits. 

The nebula is highly concentrated, and the luminosity 
falls rapidly away from the nucleus to undefined borders. 
Isophotal contours (contours of equal luminosities) are 
similar ellipses. Diameters, and hence total luminosities, 
increase with exposure times as far as exposures have 
been pushed. The largest recorded major diameter is 
about 8'.5, or 1,700 l.y., and catalogued values range down 
to about 2'. The great range emphasizes the difficulties of 
using diameters or luminosities without specifying the 
condition to which they refer. The absolute luminosity of 
M32, out to a major diameter of about 4', or 800 l.y., is of 
the order of M = —12.6 (20 million times the sun). The 
inclusion of exterior nebulosity does not materially alter 
this value. 

The nucleus, when defined as the least trace of an image 
that can be recorded on photographs, appears as a semi- 
stellar disc about 2" in diameter. The apparent magnitude 
is about m = 13.4, considerably brighter than the corre- 



PLATE IX 

Messier 31. 

The composite picture is made from three plates with the 100-inch re- 
flector, using the Ross zero-power correcting lens at the Newtonian focus. 
(Plates by Duncan, August 19, 20, 1933.) The nuclear region of the 
great spiral is unresolved — the stars are too faint to be recorded indi- 
vidually — although novae flare up in the region at frequent intervals. 
The outer arms are well resolved and bright giant stars can be studied in 
detail. The lower right-hand portion (south-preceding the nucleus) is 
shown on larger scales in the Frontispiece and in Plate V, and there the 
resolution is conspicuous. 

Messier 32, the brighter, closer satellite of the spiral, appears directly 
below (south of) the nucleus, on the edge of the spiral arms. The bright- 
est star on the plate is below and to the right of Messier 32. NGC 205, the 
fainter, more distant satellite, is found in the upper right-hand corner 
of the central plate (north-preceding the nucleus of the spiral). 

The picture shows most of the main body of the spiral but fainter ex- 
tensions can be traced with microphotometers to diameters at least double 
those of the main body. At the Newtonian focus of the 100-inch reflector, 
the image of the main body is about two feet long; at the Cassegrain 
focus, about six feet long. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


189 


sponding image in M31. Further analysis, below the limits 
of photographic methods, can be made visually. Sinclair 
Smith,^‘ who investigated the nucleus of M32 with an 
interferometer on the 100-inch reflector, found no fringes 
and concluded that no stellar center was involved. Under 
critical conditions, he was able to see a stable nuclear 
image with a diameter of about 0".8 or 2 l.y., from which 
the nebulosity falls away in all directions. 

The spectral-type of M32 is dG3, the dwarf characteris- 
tics being conspicuous. The color-class is g8 on the scale 
of giant stars. Neither characteristic varies with distance 
from the nucleus. No polarization has been detected. 

The texture of the image is smooth and featureless. 
There is not the slightest suggestion of resolution and 
hence stars brighter than, say, M = —2, are definitely ab- 
sent. The conception of M32 as a stellar system presents 
less serious inconsistencies than other current theories 
of its structure, but it does not account for the consider- 
able color-excess (difference between color-class and spec- 
tral-type). This phenomenon is a characteristic feature 
of elliptical nebulae in general. 

NGC 205. 

NGC 205, the fainter companion of M31, is an abnormal 
elliptical nebula classed as E5p. Its position, as seen in 
projection, is about 37' north-preceding the nucleus of 
M31, close to the minor axis of the spiral. The minimum 
separation is thus 7,500 l.y. The precise location in the 
line of sight is unknown, but for purposes of speculation 
it may be assumed to lie in the plane of the spiral. In this 
case the separation is about 30,000 l.y. 

The nucleus resembles that of M32, but is considerably 
fainter and is embedded in relatively fainter nebulosity. 

11 Smith, Lottie Notes on the Structure of Elliptical Nehulce, ‘*Mt. Wilson 
Contr.,’* No. 524; Astrophysical Journal, 82, 192, 1935. For investigations 
of the extranuclear regions, see Hubble, Distribution of Luminosity in El- 
liptical Nebulas, ^^Mt. Wilson Contr.,'* No. 398; Astrophysical Journal, 71, 
231, 1930. 



140 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


The luminosity fades away to undefined borders and the 
isophotal contours are similar ellipses with a ratio of 
axes of about 5 to 10. The more conspicuous portion of 
the nebula is about 8' X 4' (1,600 X 800 l.y.). A major 
diameter of 12' (2,400 l.y.) has been measured on a photo- 
graph with moderate exposure^* and no doubt still larger 
dimensions could be derived from longer exposures. The 
total luminosity is uncertainly estimated as M = —11.5 
(7 million times the sun), and thus the nebula is a very 
faint dwarf. 

The region immediately surrounding the nucleus ex- 
hibits some structure, which is apparently the effect of 
numerous small, rather sharply defined, patches of ob- 
scuration. Very faint stars are more numerous than 
would be expected for foreground stars alone, and some 
of them may be associated with the nebula. Several globu- 
lar clusters are also concentrated within the area, and 
they may be associated with NGC 205 rather than with 
the great spiral. These various features, together with an 
exceptionally low luminosity-gradient, are so unique that 
the nebula is classified as peculiar. The early spectral- 
type, F5, is also abnormal. 

The radial velocities for the components of the triple 
system (M31, M32, and NGC 205) are of the same ordeF® 
and are largely accounted for as reflections of the solar 
motion. The velocity of NGC 205 agrees with that of M31, 
but the velocity of M32 differs by about 35 km/sec. The 
latter difference is small, but since it is derived from large- 
scale spectra, it is probably real. It suggests the possi- 
bility of orbital motion of the satellite (M32) around the 

12 Eeynolds, ^^Photometric Measures of the Nebula NGO 205/^ Monthly 
Notices, Boyal Astronomical Society, 94, 519, 1934. 

18 Velocities of M31 and M32, derived from moderately large-scale spec- 
trograms obtained with the same equipment, are —220 and —185 km/sec. 
The velocity of NGC 205, necessarily derived from very small-scale spectra, 
is —300 km/sec. and agrees with the velocity of M31 as measured in spectra 
obtained with the same spectrograph. The difference in the velocities of 
M31 in the two cases, represents a relatively small systematic variation with 
scale, the effects of which are known and are applied to nebular velocities 
as a matter of routine. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


141 


primary (M31). NGC 205, if it revolved about M31 in the 
plane of the spiral, would show no radial component of 
motion. It lies near the minor axis of the projected image 
of the spiral, and the orbital motion would be wholly 
across the line of sight. 

The orbital motion of M32, if it were in the plane of the 
spiral and at a distance of 12,000 l.y. from the nucleus, 
would be about 105 km/sec. This velocity corresponds to 
a mass for M31 of the order of 10^® suns — a not unreason- 
able value. The satellite (M32), however, would be mov- 
ing in a direction opposite to that of material in the spiral 
arms, as indicated by the radial velocities in M31. The 
discrepancy seems serious and is probably fatal to the 
assumption that M32 rotates in the plane of the spiral, or 
is now located in that plane. Still, the dynamical problems 
of the triple system are in the stage of speculation and 
much additional information must be assembled before 
they can be discussed in a definitive manner. 

Messier 33}* 

M33 is an Sc spiral of the massive type, tilted so that the 
ratio of axes in the projected image is about 2 to 3. The 
main body has a major diameter of about 1° (12,000 l.y.) 
and fainter extensions have been followed over nearly 
twice this diameter. The nucleus resembles in appearance 
a giant globular cluster, although no evidence of resolu- 
tion is found. It is semistellar, M = —8, spectral type F5, 
color-excess appreciable, radial velocity, —320 km/sec., 
as derived from moderately large-scale spectra. 

The nuclear region exhibits a background of unresolved 
nebulosity with a vague, spiral structure and numerous 
patches of obscuration. Stars are thickly scattered over 
this background. With increasing distance from the nu- 
cleus, the unresolved nebulosity fades and the spiral arms 

14 For a general discussion of M33, including references to earlier in- 
vestigations, see Hubble, A Spiral Nebula as a Stellar System, Messier SS, 
‘‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,'^ No. 310; Astrophysical Journal, 63, 236, 1926. 



PLATE X 
Messier 33 . 

The plate shows the central region, as photographed with the 100-inch 
reflector. The nebula probably resembles the galactic system but is much 
smaller. 

M33 is a late-type spiral at about the same distance (approximately 
700,000 l.y.) as the intermediate type spiral, M31, with its elliptical 
companions (see Frontispiece and Plate X). A comparison of these 
nebulae furnish some detailed information on the systematic variation in 
stellar content along the sequence of classiflcation. For instance, the 
resolution in M33, unlike that in M31, extends inward to the nucleus. 
Moreover, an appreciable percentage of the total luminosity of M33 is 
contributed by blue, supergiant stars; the corresponding percentage in 
M31 is much smaller, and in the elliptical nebulae, no such stars are 
found. Data of this kind are accumulating slowly but eventually they may 
throw some light on the evolution of stars and of stellar systems. 

The photograph of M33 was made with the 100-inch reflector on No- 
vember 30, 1935; south is at the top of the page; 1 mm. =5". 5. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


143 


become more conspicuous. The anus are broad and highly 
resolved into stars, clusters, and clouds. 

The distance, as indicated by 35 Cepheids, is 720,000 
l.y. (220,000 parsecs). The Cepheids appear systemati- 
cally brighter than those in M31, by 0.1 mag. The differ- 
ence was at first attributed to relative distance alone and 
M33 was believed to be slightly nearer than M31. The 
order is now reversed, for the difference in apparent lu- 
minosity is more than balanced by the difference in galac- 
tic obscuration — about 0.2 mag., in the opposite direction. 
However, the obscuration (latitude-effect) is determined 
in a statistical manner and local variations are possible, 
especially near the edge of the Milky Way where M31 is 
situated. This possibility introduces some uncertainty 
in the relative distances. Perhaps no more precise con- 
clusion is warranted than the remark that both spirals 
are about equally remote (order of 700,000 l.y.). Equality 
of their distances is significant in view of their small, 
angular separation in the sky — about 15°. The linear 
separation is less than 200,000 l.y., which is a relatively 
short distance on the cosmic scale. 

M33 is somewhat brighter than the average nebula. The 
total luminosity is about M = —14.9 or 160 million times 
the luminosity of the sun. The mass, as suggested by 
spectrographic rotation, is probably of the order of 1,000 
million suns. 

Six apparently normal novae have been recorded. The 
brightest variable is irregular and, in 1925, reached a 
maximum at M = —6.35. The spectrum was then of an 
early type with faint emission lines, presumably the 
Balmer series of hydrogen. The color-index was negli- 
gibly small. 

The upper limit for nonvariable stars is about M = 
—6.4. The brighter stars are blue, and colored stars 
brighter than the Cepheids are very rare. The relative 
frequency of stars brighter than M = —3 is similar to 
that found in the galactic system. Some small clusters in 
M33 resemble, in appearance and color, the globular clus- 



144 THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 

ters in M31, but are systematically fainter by a magni- 
tude or more. Their real nature, therefore, is somewhat 
doubtful. 

Patches of emission-nebulosity with blue stars involved 
are numerous, and several are catalogued as separate 
nebulae. The most conspicuous, NGC 604, is slightly elon- 
gated, and roughly 230 l.y. in diameter. The spectrum 
closely resembles that of emission-nebulosity in the galac- 
tic system, for example, the Orion nebula. A small cluster 
of stars is involved in NGC 604, the fifteen or twenty 
brightest of which range from M = —5 to —6.2. From 
colors and faint traces of their spectra, the stars are un- 
certainly identified as 0, and BO types. The relation be- 
tween the luminosities of the stars and the extent of the 
nebulosity is consistent with the general relation estab- 
lished within the galactic system. 

NGC 6822}^ 

NGC 6822 is an irregular nebula similar to the Magellanic 
Clouds but much smaller and fainter. It is close to the 
Milky Way (lat. —20°) and in the general direction of the 
galactic center (long. 354°), where the great obscuring 
clouds are most conspicuous. For this reason, the cor- 
rection for galactic obscuration is rather uncertain. 

The apparent magnitudes of 12 Cepheids indicate a 
distance of 6.7 times the distance of the Small Magellanic 
Cloud and the normal latitude-correction reduces the ab- 
solute distance to about 530,000 l.y. (164,000 parsecs). The 
main body of the nebula is elongated, with diameters of 
3,200 and 1,600 l.y. (20'X10'). There is a central core 
about 1,250 X 470 l.y. (8' X 3'), similar to the cores in the 
Magellanic Clouds. The possibility of very faint exten- 
sions has not been investigated. The nebula is a very faint 
dwarf, one of the faintest known, with an absolute magni- 

18 For a general discussion, including references to earlier investigations, 
see Hubble, NGC a Bemote Stellar System, '^Mt. Wilson Contr.,^^ No. 
304; Astrophysical Journal, 62, 409, 1925. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


146 


tude of the order of M = —11 (5 million times the lumi- 
nosity of the sun). 

No novae have been observed. Several irregular vari- 
ables are found, none of which is brighter than the bright- 
est Cepheid. A few clusters, presumably globular, are in- 
volved, but they are relatively faint and resemble those 
in M33 rather than those in M31. There are five conspicu- 
ous patches of emission-nebulosity, the largest of which 
resembles a ring, about 130 l.y. in diameter, centered on a 
small group of bright stars. The upper limit of stellar 
luminosity is about M = —5.6, a low value that may re- 
flect the limited stellar contents of the nebula. A radial 
velocity of —150 km/sec., derived from a patch of emis- 
sion-nebulosity, agrees closely with the reflection of the 
solar motion. 


IC 1613. 

IC 1613, like NGC 6822, is a small, faint, irregular nebula. 
The high latitude, —60°, frees it from the grosser effects 
of local obscuration and thus simplifies the interpretation 
of the photometric data. Baade, who discovered the na- 
ture of the system, has made an exhaustive analysis of 
the stellar contents with the 100-inch reflector, and the 
final results will shortly be published.^® He has found 
many variable stars, the majority of which are Cepheids. 
The distance is about 900,000 l.y. The main body is 
roughly circular, about 4,400 l.y. in diameter, and perhaps 
five million times as bright as the sun. The stellar con- 
tent resembles that of NGC 6822, although patches of 
nebulosity are not so conspicuous. 

Possible Members of the Local Group. 

The nine systems previously described are known to be 
members of the local group. Three other nebulae, NGC 
6946, IC 342, and IC 10 may be considered as possible 

16 Some of the results are mentioned in the Annual Beport of the Mount 
Wilson Observatory for the year 1934-35, 



PLATE XI 

IG 1613. 

The nebula is irregular and resembles the Magellanic Clouds, although 
it is much smaller and fainter (about five million times the luminosity of 
the sun). In comparison with the Large Cloud, IC 1613 is about 75 times 
fainter and 10.6 times farther away (distance 900,000 l.y.) ; therefore, it 
appears about 8500 times fainter than the Large Cloud. 

IC 1613 is the most distant of the known members of the local group. 
Since the galactic latitude is high (3 = —60°), the foreground stars are 
not numerous. For this reason the differentiation of stars belonging to 
the nebula is a comparatively simple problem. The stellar contents is 
similar to those of the Magellanic Clouds. Minor differences are found 
but they are accounted for by the fact that the Clouds offer much larger 
sample collections of stars. 

Tiie photograph was made (by Baade) with the 100-inch reflector on 
November 14, 1933 ; east is at the top of the page; 1 mm. = 5".9. 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


147 


members. The first two” are large, faint Sc spirals found 
on the northern edge of the Milky Way, both at latitude 
of 4-11°. They lie in the zone of partial obscuration which 
borders the opaque clouds in the Milky Way, and may be 
heavily obscured in addition to the normal latitude effect. 
The total obscuration may be any amount from one to 
three magnitudes, and the photometric data are corre- 
spondingly indeterminate as criteria of distance. Stars, 
none of them variable, are found in both nebulae, but they 
merely set upper limits to possible distances. If the ob- 
scuration amounts to two or three magnitudes, the nebulae 
are members of the local group ; if it amounts to one mag- 
nitude, they are not members. 

Radial velocities furnish additional, independent in- 
formation, but are also indeterminate. The velocities, cor- 
rected for solar motion, are -f 110 and -f 150 km/sec., for 
NGC 6946 and IC 342, respectively. The values represent 
the sums of the peculiar motions and possible distance- 
effects. By suitable combinations of these quantities, both 
of which are unknown, the nebulae could be placed at will 
either within or without the local group. 

The third nebula, IC 10, is one of the most curious ob- 
jects in the sky. Mayall, at the Lick Observatory, was the 
first to call attention to its peculiarities.” It lies well 
within the borders of the Milky Way, at latitude —3°. The 
longitude, 87°, is about 122° from the galactic center. The 
texture is apparently that of an extragalactic nebula with 
some indications of resolution. The photographs are diffi- 
cult to interpret fully, but they suggest that a portion of 
a large, late-type spiral is dimly seen between obscuring 
clouds. The radial velocity is not known. The possibility 

17 IC 342 was recognized as a possible member of the local group in Hub- 
ble and Humason, ^^The Velocity-Distance Eolation for Isolated Extra- 
Galactic Nebulas/^ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 20, 
264, 1934, The spiral was later described in Harvard College Observatory 
Bulletin, No. 899, 1935. The similar rdle of NGC 6946 has not been com- 
mented upon. 

is^^An Extra-Galactic Object 3° from the Plane of the Galaxy, Pub- 
lications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 47, 317, 1935. 



NGC 6946-» 


PLATE XII 
NGC 6946 and IC 342. 

These large, faint late-type spirals are possible members of the local 
group. They are seen close to the Milky Way (3 = +11°), and for this 
reason the foreground stars are numerous (compare Plate XI at 3 = 
—60° and Plate XIII at 3 = +75°). They lie on the edge of the zone of 
avoidance (see Fig. 10) and are subject to heavy local obscuration. Since 
the precise amount of the obscuration is unknown, the distances, and 
hence membership in the local group, are indeterminate. 

Both nebulae are partially resolved but, with one exception, no stellar 
types have been definitely recognized. In 1917, a nova was found in NGC 
6946 (see page 85), and the discovery initiated the line of investigations 
which led to the determination of nebular distances. 

The photograph of NGC 6946 (by Humason) was made with the 100- 
inch reflector on June 19 and 20, 1921; south is at the top (outer margin 
of page) ; 1 mm. = 6".4. The photograph of IC 342 was made with the 
60-inch, on November 16, 1933; west is at the top; 1 mm. = 12".l. 


IC 342-> 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


149 


of membership in the local group rests entirely on the ex- 
cessive obscuration that would be expected at the very 
low latitude. No more definite statement can be made until 
further information becomes available. 

Summary, 

Absolute magnitudes of group members range from 
M = —11 to —17.5, with a mean of —13.6. These values 
may be compared with the corresponding values later 
found in the general field and in clusters, which range 
from about —11.6 to —16.8, with a mean about —14.2. The 
slight discrepancies are largely accounted for by the pres- 
ence of three very faint dwarfs in the local group — IC 
1613, and NGC 6822 and 205. The results suggest that 
there might be, in the general field, many similar dwarfs 
so faint that they would be overlooked in general surveys. 
A careful reexamination of the surveys demonstrates that 
such nebulae would be detected if they existed in con- 
siderable numbers, and, therefore, they must be regarded 
as relatively rare objects. Their presence in the local 
group appears to be a unique feature of the group, and 
they detract from its significance as a fair sample of 
nebulae in general. 

The galactic system was not considered in deriving the 
means of M(neb) and M( stars). The system is a promi- 
nent member of the group and its luminosity, although 
unknown, is presumably of the same order as that of M31. 
If this hypothetical value were included in the list, the 
mean M(neb) would be about —14.0 and the small sample 
collection would agree very closely with the larger sample 
furnished by field-nebulae and clusters. The mean M( stars) 
would probably not be changed by more than 0.1 mag. 

One supernova, that of 1885 in M31, has certainly been 
observed in the group. Any one of several galactic novae 
— in particular, the naked-eye nova of 1572 — ^might be 
placed in the class of supemovae if their distances were 
known. The nova of 1917, in the possible member NGC 



150 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


6946, was presumably a supernova, discovered at some 
unknown interval after maximum. 

Normal novae have been observed in four members, in 
addition to the galactic system — one in each of the Mag- 
ellanic Clouds, six in M33 and 115 in M31. The giant 
Sb spiral is clearly a favored system, and the Sc spiral is 
more favored than the irregular nebulae. The galactic sys- 
tem (probably Sc) lies between M31 and M33. The scanty 
data suggest that the frequency of normal novae may de- 
pend upon the nebular type (degree of concentration of 
material within the system), and, among nebulae of a 
given type, upon total luminosity (stellar contents). 

Stars are not found in the typical elliptical nebula, M32, 
and their presence in the peculiar system, NGC 205, is 
questionable. All the other members of the group are well 
resolved. The brightest stars in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud and in M31 are variables (irregular variables), but 
are nonvariable in the other resolved members. The 
Large Cloud appears to be abnormally rich in supergiant 
stars, even when variables are excluded. The upper limit 
of stellar luminosity, of the order of M = —7.2, appears 
to be an outstanding exception. The corresponding limits 
in the other members range from about —5.5 to —6.5 with 
a mean around —6.0. A review of these data, together with 
a few additional data from the nearer nebula} in the gen- 
eral field, has led to the adoption of M = —6.1, for the 
brightest stars in resolved nebulae. This quantity will be 
used, in the next chapter, as a criterion of distance. 

Patches of emission-nebulosity are found in the late- 
type spirals and irregular nebulae, but not in the earlier 
types. This distribution seems to hold generally. Blue 
giants and emission-nebulosity are characteristic features 
of high resolution. 

The radial velocities of group members are largely ac- 
counted for as simple reflections of the solar motion. The 
residuals represent combinations of peculiar motions and 
distance-effects, and the distance-effects are necessarily 
positive. Since the residuals are small — ^the mean is a 



THE LOCAL GROUP 


161 


small negative quantity — the distance-effects must be 
lachingj or the peculiar motions must be large and sys- 
tematically negative. The latter alternative, which implies 
that the group is contracting or that the galactic system is 
approaching the center, does not seem to be supported by 
the observed velocities of the nearer field-nebulae. The 
data are few and their interpretation is not entirely clear, 
but they suggest, although they do not establish, the 
hypothesis that the velocity-distance relation does not 
operate within the local group. 



CHAPTER VII 


THE GENERAL FIELD 

Criteria of Distances. 

T he local group is a sample collection of nebulae 
whose distances have been derived by the familiar 
methods used for investigations within the galactic 
system. The sample is small but it is a very welcome, and 
almost a necessary, connecting link with nebulae in the 
general field. The brightest class of objects in members of 
the local group can still be seen in the nearer field-nebulae 
that have been resolved. These brightest objects furnish 
a common denominator by means of which the two sets of 
nebulae can be compared. The comparison shows that re- 
solved field-nebulae are similar, in a general way, to re- 
solved nebulae in the local group. This conclusion is of 
fundamental importance. 

The common denominator is the “brightest star,” de- 
fined as the mean of the three or four brightest individual 
stars in a nebula. These “brightest stars,” although not 
precisely equal, are of the same order of intrinsic lumi- 
nosity in all of the resolved nebulae. The mean luminosity 
was determined largely from the members of the local 
group, where distances were known from Cepheids. Once 
the calibration was established, the brightest stars indi- 
cated the distances of all resolved nebulae in the general 
field. The distances, however, were statistical — subject to 
errors in individual cases, although reliable in the mean. 

The brightest stars might be used to explore the inner 
fringe of the general field, in much the same way that 
Cepheids were used to explore the local group. A few of 
the more conspicuous field-nebulae might be described in 
some detail, just as the neighboring systems were treated 
in the previous chapter. But, for purposes of general ex- 



THE GENEEAL FIELD 


153 


ploration, the criterion is used in another way. The re- 
solved field-nebulae are sufficiently numerous — about 125 
are known — to constitute a fair sample of later-type nebu- 
lae in general. This sample collection of resolved nebulae, 
as a group, serves to calibrate a new criterion of distance, 
namely, the intrinsic luminosity of the nebulae themselves, 
which applies to all nebulae, regardless of type or apparent 
faintness. 

The field of the new criterion is the realm of the nebulae 
— the whole of the observable region of space. The cri- 
terion is again statistical, but now the dispersion is large. 
It is essential that the calibration should include not only 
the mean luminosity of nebulae but also the scatter among 
the individual luminosities. The requisite data are con- 
tained in the luminosity-function, which, as previously 
mentioned, is the technical term for the frequency-distri- 
bution of absolute magnitudes among the nebulae in a 
given volume of space. The characteristics of the lumi- 
nosity-function are {a) the form of the frequency-curve, 
(fc) the mean or the most frequent magnitude, and (c) the 
dispersion. When these are known the function is com- 
pletely described. 

The form of the frequency-curve, together with the dis- 
persion, has been determined from apparent magnitudes 
in various sets of data. The results are fairly consistent : 
the curve, to anticipate, approximates a normal error- 
curve, and the dispersion is somewhat less than a magni- 
tude. The value of the mean absolute magnitude. Mo, as it 
is termed, can be derived only from nebulae whose dis- 
tances are known. Members of the local group are too few 
for the purpose and so the determination of Mo depends 
primarily on the sample collection of resolved nebulae in 
the general field. 

The gradual development of distance criteria was in- 
evitable but is none the less impressive. The field of ex- 
ploration was enlarged step by step. Each criterion fur- 
nished a sample collection of objects which calibrated a 
new criterion, less precise but ranging to greater dis- 



154 THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 

tances. The first step was within the solar system — the 
distance of the sun, which is the astronomical unit. Then 
followed, within the stellar system, parallaxes of stars, 
stellar motions, spectrographic parallaxes, and Cepheids. 
This last criterion furnished the link with extragalactio 
regions. It led to brightest stars in nebulse, luminosities 
of nebulae, and finally, as will be seen, brightest nebulae 
in clusters. 

Light from the sun reaches the earth in about eight 
minutes (more precisely, 500 seconds) ; from the most dis- 
tant cluster that has been measured, the journey requires 
240 million years. The multiplication factor is about 1.5 
X 10’®, yet the distance of the cluster is known with an 
uncertainty that is probably not more than 15 per cent. 
The comparison emphasizes the high order of consistency 
encountered in the realm of the nebulae. Such precision can 
be expected only when statistical methods are applied to 
large bodies of closely comparable data. 

Brightest Stars. 

The study of the general field begins with the comparison 
between members of the local group and the nearer field- 
nebulae. Cepheids are by no means the brightest objects 
that can be recognized in the members of the local group. 
They are surpassed by certain types of irregular vari- 
ables, normal novae, brightest stars, globular clusters, 
open clusters, and patches of emission-nebulosity. With 
increasing distance, these objects should fade out class 
by class, and the actual observations do, in fact, present a 
series of nebulae in just the expected sequence. Eventually, 
when the last detail of stellar contents is lost to the tele- 
scope, there remain only the total luminosities of the 
nebulae and the red-shifts in their spectra, as possible 
criteria of distances. 

The only exceptions to this statement are the exceed- 
ingly rare supemovae which appear in any one nebula 
at average intervals of the order of 500 to 1,000 years. 
From the scanty data available, they are believed to reach. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


155 


at maxima, a fairly uniform intrinsic luminosity which is 
comparable with the average luminosity of the nebulae 
themselves. Supemovae can be detected at immense dis- 
tances and, in principle, they are a criterion of distance 
about as reliable as that of total luminosities of the nebu- 
lae, Actually, however, the maxima are so seldom observed 
and the novae themselves are so rare that they contribute 
very little to the present problem. 

A few irregular variables and normal novae have been 
identified in three or four of the nearest field-nebulae, but 
not in sufficient numbers to furnish very precise distances. 
Open clusters and patches of emission-nebulosity are 
more frequent, but they are difficult to identify with cer- 
tainty, and their group characteristics are not well enough 
known to inspire confidence in their validity as criteria. 
The problem at present seems to be the determination of 
their group characteristics on the basis of distances de- 
rived from other independent sources. 

Globular clusters also present anomalies to be investi- 
gated. Stars can be readily distinguished from typical 
clusters down to apparent magnitude 19, and, under the 
best conditions, to perhaps 19.5. A survey of nebulae in 
which stars are found brighter than these limiting magni- 
tudes indicates that globular clusters, if they are gener- 
ally present, must vary widely from system to system. 
The brightest cluster in a system seldom surpasses the 
brightest star, and even then the difference is small.^ 
Near the limits of photographic plates, occasional clusters 

1 Within a given nebula, the globular clusters appear to range through 
about four or five magnitudes. The brightest clusters are slightly brighter 
than the brightest stars in M31 and MlOl, but are considerably fainter than 
the brightest star in M33, NGC 6822 and other nebulas, probably including 
the Magellanic Clouds. The relation in the galactic system is rather uncer- 
tain, although available data suggest that the clusters are exceptionally 
luminous as a group. The brighter ones, if current estimates of their intrinsic 
luminosities are reliable, would be conspicuous objects in members of the 
local group and would be readily identified in the nearer field-nebulae and 
even in members of the Virgo cluster. The observed absence of such objects 
in the nearer nebulae suggests that globular clusters in the galactic system 
are unique or that the estimates of their intrinsic luminosities are excessive. 



166 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


may be mistaken for brightest stars, but the effect of the 
confusion is not serious in deriving average results from 
considerable bodies of data. 

The brightest stars thus appear to be the last useful 
criteria in the stellar contents of nebul® to fade out with 
increasing distance. These stars are believed to be about 
equally luminous in all the resolved nebulae. The assump- 
tion is supported by two arguments, the one theoretical, 
the other, empirical. There are theoretical reasons, as 
Eddington has shown, for supposing the existence of a 
fairly definite upper limit to the luminosity which normal 
stars ever attain.^ If such a limit exists, it would probably 
be approached by some objects in any normal sample col- 
lection containing many millions of stars. The nebulae, or 
at least the later-type spirals, represent normal sample 
collections of the requisite order, and therefore each of 
them should include some stars which are close to the 
limit.® 

But aside from theory, it is found, as an empirical fact, 
that the brightest stars are fairly comparable in resolved 
nebulae whose distances are known from other criteria. 
Such nebulae are not numerous. The list consists of the 
galactic system, six members of the local group and three 
of the nearest nebulae in the general field.^ The term 

2 The argument is that luminosity is a direct function of mass (mass- 
luminosity relation) and that the mass cannot exceed a certain limit (of the 
order of a hundred suns) because the radiation-pressure would then become 
so great that the star would be unstable. See Eddington, The Internal Con- 
stitution of the Stars (1926), chaps, i, vi, and vii; ‘‘Stars and Atoms’’ 
(First Lecture), 1927. 

8 The absence of very bright stars in ellipticals and early spirals suggests 
that these nebulae represent abnormal sample collections of stars and may 
have evolutional significance. 

4 The field-nebulee are MlOl, M81, and NGG 2403, in which distances are 
indicated by novae, irregular variables, and globular clusters, in addition to 
brightest stars. Certain variables which may be Cepheids are found in MlOl, 
but the identification is not yet established. The distances are not so reli- 
able as those for members of the local group, but the addition to the list 
of separate nebulae is believed to more than balance the uncertainties. See 
Hubble and Humason, The V elodty -Distance Belation among Extra-Galactic 
Nehulce, “Mt. Wilson Contr.,'’ No. 427; Astrophysical Journal, 74, 43, 1931. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


167 


“brightest star” has been arbitrarily defined as the mean 
of .the three or four brightest stars in a nebula. These 
stars in general are about equally luminous, so the use of 
several merely reduces the effects of exceptional cases or 
misidentifications without seriously restricting the appli- 
cation of the criterion. In this sense, the brightest stars in 
the ten systems range through about two magnitudes. The 
mean for all ten systems, together with the dispersion, o, 
which measures the scatter, is 

M, = - 6.1 
0 = 0 . 41 . 

The brightest stars thus average about 48,000 times 
brighter than the sun. 

These numerical values represent the yardstick by 
which distances of resolved nebulae are measured. The 
calibration is made from very scanty data and will be re- 
vised when reliable distances of more field-nebulae are 
available. A few may be determined, in time, with the 100- 
inch reflector, but significant additions are not expected 
until the 200-inch reflector, now under construction, can 
be applied to the problem. 

It has already been mentioned that the brightest stars 
in different nebulae are not all equally luminous. Excep- 
tionally bright stars cannot be distinguished from the ex- 
ceptionally faint, unless distances are already known 
from other sources. In large groups of nebulae, the excep- 
tional cases tend to cancel out, but, for an individual neb- 
ula, there is necessarily an uncertainty since the brightest 
star may be normal or abnormal. When the numerical 
value of the dispersion is known, the uncertainties can be 
calculated for individual nebulae or for groups of any 
size. 

Dispersion in such criteria of distance introduces effects 
of selection in statistical surveys. The effect is small when 
brightest stars furnish the criterion, but later, when total 
luminosities of the nebulae themselves are employed, it 
becomes important and will be discussed in some detail. 



158 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


Meanwhile it will be stated, without further explanation, 
that, when nebulae are selected on the basis of the appar- 
ent magnitudes of their brightest stars, the mean abso- 
lute magnitude of these brightest stars is not that derived 
in the calibration, namely, Ma = —6.1, but is brighter by 
the amount, 1.382 o^, where o is the dispersion. Therefore, 
in the survey of resolved nebulae, the value j/j = —6.35 
must be used as the yardstick for statistical distances. 
The corresponding luminosity is about 60,000 times that 
of the sun. 

Uncertainties in the Criterion of Brightest Stars. 

Because of the great significance of the criterion of 
brightest stars, its uncertainties and limitations will be 
reviewed before it is actually applied to the general field. 
Stars are observed only in certain types of nebulae, 
namely, the intermediate- and late-type spirals and the ir- 
regulars. Among these nebulae, the upper limit of stellar 
luminosity seems to vary systematically with the type. 
The variation has not been precisely determined but it is 
known to be small. However, since the great majority of 
nebulae in which stars can be detected are of a single type. 
Sc, the variation will affect the dispersion of residuals in 
statistical investigations rather than the mean results. 

The objection can be raised that images identified as in- 
dividual stars might represent groups or clusters. This 
criticism seems well founded because, in a distant nebula, 
the contents of a large volume of space would be indis- 
tinguishable from a single star. However, a study of clus- 
ters and groups in the galactic system, as they would ap- 
pear from great distances, indicates that the uncertainties 
in distinguishing the brightest individual stars would not 
be serious. The conclusion is confirmed by a similar study 
of clusters in members of the local group. These neigh- 
boring nebulae are especially significant. The Cepheids are 
obviously single stars. Objects selected as brightest stars 
are brighter than Cepheids, and the ratio is about the 
same as that found between corresponding objects in the 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


159 


galactic system. For this reason, it is highly probable that 
the ^objects selected as brightest stars in members of the 
local group are actually individual stars. Finally, as will 
appear later, the relative luminosity of nebulae and their 
brightest stars is much the same in the local group as in 
the field-nebulae.' Therefore, the brightest stars in the 
field-nebulae also are probably individual stars. 

Moreover, regardless of their real nature, the objects 
selected as brightest stars appear to represent strictly 
comparable bodies. They are selected in the examination 
of homogeneous material — comparable photographs — and 
their luminosities, relative to the nebulae in which they lie, 
do not vary systematically with apparent faintness. This 
evidence of homogeneity is important since the observa- 
tions, in general, are carried out near the limits of the 
telescopes, where systematic errors are difiicult to avoid. 
Other uncertainties are of minor importance. The elimi- 
nation of field-stars is a simple statistical problem which 
may introduce slight accidental, but no appreciable sys- 
tematic, errors. The occasional confusion of stars and 
globular clusters has already been mentioned. 

The criterion appears to function very well for pur- 
poses of preliminary reconnaissance and independent evi- 
dence of consistency is furnished by the velocity-distance 
relation. 

Application of the Criterion of Brightest Stars. 

(a) THE LUMINOSITY-FUNCTION FOB EESOLVED NEBUL.E. 

The criterion of brightest stars has been applied to three 
major problems, all of which contribute to the formula- 
tion of the general luminosity-function. The problems are 
(o) the luminosity-function of resolved field-nebulae, (b) 

6 The mean difference w. — uncorrected for nebular type, is 7.93 for 
the six resolved nebulse which are definitely known to be members of the 
local group. Reduced to the type, S^, the mean is 8.28. If the doubtful cases 
10 342 and NGC 6946 are included, the mean is 7.96. These values are of 
the same order as that for the field-nebulss, namely, 7.85. 



160 THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 

the distance of the Virgo cluster, and (c) the numerical 
calibration of the velocity-distance relation. 

The luminosity-function, as previously mentioned, is 
technically the frequency-distribution of absolute magni- 
tudes among nebulae in a given volume of space. It is im- 
possible to assemble just these data, but the same fre- 
quency-distribution can be derived from any large collec- 
tion of nebulae which are selected at random and whose 
individual distances are known. It is essential, however, 
that the dispersion in the criterion of distance should be 
reasonably small. The resolved field-nebulae furnish the 
only considerable list of data which approximate the 
specifications. 

On photographs made with the large reflectors on 
Mount Wilson, stars can be identified with some confi- 
dence in about 125 nebulae.® Apparent magnitudes of the 
brightest stars, ms, and of the nebulae themselves,’ mn, 
have been measured or estimated, and the difference 
Ms — mn, has been calculated for each nebula. The differ- 
ences measure the luminosities of the nebulae in terms of 
the luminosities of their brightest stars. A difference of 
five magnitudes, for instance, means that a nebula is 100 
times brighter than its brightest star ; a difference of ten 
magnitudes, 10,000 times brighter. If the stars were all 
precisely equal, the differences would directly indicate the 
absolute magnitudes of the nebulae. The frequency-distri- 
bution of the differences would then completely determine 
the luminosity-function. Actually, of course, the disper- 
sion among the brightest stars complicates the problem, 
although the effects are small and can be calculated. 

6 Preliminary lists of such data are given by Hubble ('^Mt. Wilson 
Contr./’ No. 324; Astrophysical Journal, 64, 321, 1926) and by Hubble 
and Humason (‘^Mt. Wilson Contr.,’’ No. 427; Astrophysical Journal, 74, 
43, 1931). The more extensive list discussed here includes additional data 
assembled by the writer, which will be published in a forthcoming ^‘Mt. 
Wilson Contr.,’^ No. 548. 

7 The nebular magnitudes, in general, represent actual measures by Steb- 
bins and his associates, using a photoelectric cell directly at the focus of 
the telescope, or magnitudes listed in the Harvard survey of bright nebulae, 
reduced to the system of the photoelectric measures. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


161 


The frequency-distribution of the differences, m, — Wn, 
is shown in Fig. 11. The points are well represented by 



Fig. 11. Frequency-Distribution of m, — mn. 

and are the apparent magnitudes of nebulae and of their brightest 
stars. Since the intrinsic luminosity (candle power) of the brightest stars is 
approximately the same in all nebulae, the differences, ~ indicate the 
intrinsic luminosities of the nebulae in terms of the brightest star as the unit. 
Therefore, when the absolute magnitude of the unit, ~ —6.35, is sub- 
tracted from the values, the diagram represents the relative fre- 

quency of various absolute magnitudes of the nebulae. 

About 125 nebulae are included in the diagram and the observed distri- 
bution (dash line) has been smoothed by the use of overlapping sums of 
three successive values. The full line is a normal error-curve with a dispersion 
of <r = 0.9. 


the normal error-curve which has been adjusted to fit the 
data. The mean or most frequent difference is 7.84 mag., 
and the dispersion is 0.94 mag.® The dispersion includes 
that of the brightest stars as well as that of the nebulse. 
When the former is removed, the dispersion for the nebu- 
lae alone is found to be about o = 0.84. 

8 The simple differences range from 5,2 to 11.3, with a mean about 7.9 
mag. The frequency-distribution is symmetrical, approximating a normal- 
curve, with a dispersion slightly less than 1 mag. 

Of the 125 nebulas, 11 are irregulars, 16 are intermediate spirals, and the 




162 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


The luminosity-function for resolved nebulae is thus a 
normal error-curve with 

Mo = -6.35 — 7.84 = —14.2 
0 = 0.84. 

The mean luminosity of the nebulae is about 85 million 
times as bright as the sun. The dispersion indicates that 
about half of the nebulae are within the narrow range 
from one half to twice the mean luminosity. The generali- 
zation of the function to include all types follows from a 
comparative study of the different types as they appear 
in clusters, and in the velocity-distance relation. 

(h) DISTANCE OF THE VIKGO CLUSTEB. 

Axil types of nebulae are found in clusters, although ellip- 
ticals and early spirals predominate. A study of apparent 
magnitudes within single clusters shows that the mean 
luminosities, and the dispersions, of the various types 
are comparable throughout the sequence of classification. 
If systematic variations occur, they are too small to be 
established by the data at hand. Therefore, the luminosity- 
function for resolved nebulae may be provisionally applied 
to all types, provided the cluster-nebulae, as a group, are 
comparable with field-nebulae. 

The question of comparability can be answered only 

remainder, 98 in all, are late spirals. The mean differences for the separate 
types are as follows: 


Type 

No. 


s. 

16 

8.57 ± 0.20 

s. 

98 

7.84 ± 0.06 

Ir 

11 

7.15 ± 0.25 


These results indicate a systematic decrease in luminosities of nebulae, or a 
systematic increase in luminosities of brightest stars along the sequence of 
classification. Data from other sources suggest that both phenomena may 
be involved, but that the variation in brightest stars is the more important. 
In any case, the results justify the reduction of the intermediate spirals and 
the irregulars to the system of the late-type spirals. The corrections do not 
materially affect the mean difference or the form of the frequency-distribu- 
tion, but they reduce the dispersion to the value mentioned above, namely, 
0.9 mag. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


163 


when distances of clusters are available. The clusters, 
as ;previously mentioned, are very similar among them- 
selves. Their relative distances are so well known that the 
absolute distance of any one cluster will determine the 
absolute distances of them all. Fortunately, the distance 
of the nearest cluster can be estimated by means of the 
same criterion that has been used for the resolved field- 
nebulae, namely, by the brightest stars. 

The Virgo cluster, which is the nearest, is compara- 
tively rich in spirals. Stars can be identified in most of the 
late-type spirals (So), but in very few of the earlier types.® 
The brightest stars actually observed range from about 
m = 19 to w = 21, with a mean value between 20 and 20.5. 
The true mean, including the unresolved spirals as well 
as the resolved, must be estimated from the frequency- 
distribution of the observed magnitudes. The adopted 
value, m = 20.6, is probably of the right order. The corre- 
sponding absolute magnitude of these stars is M, = —6.1, 
for the effect of selection does not apply to a cluster in 
which the members are all at about the same distance 
from the observer. Thus the difference between apparent 
and absolute magnitude, known as the modulus of the 
distance, is 

m-Jlf = 26.7 

and the distance^® is about seven million light-years. 

Since the observations are incomplete — since aU the 
spirals in the clusters have not been resolved — ^the results 
are not final. Nevertheless the general order of the dis- 
tance is established, and a large sample collection of clus- 

0 This conclusion is based on unpublished data assembled by the writer. 
References to fragmentary data are found in. Hubble and Humason, ‘‘Mt. 
Wilson Contr.,’’ No. 427; Astrophysieal Journal, 74, 43, 1931; also, in Hub- 
ble, Bed-Shifts in the Spectra of Nehulce, being the Halley Lecture (Oxford), 
1934. 

10 The distance is given by the formula 

log d (l.y.) = 0.2 (m - M) + 1.513 

which follows directly from the definition of M, namely, that M = m when d 
= 32.6 l.y. = 10 parsecs. Shapley has derived a distance for the Virgo cluster 
of 10.5 million l.y. Harvard College Observatory Bulletin, No. 873, 1930. 



M90-> 


PLATE XIII 

Nebulce in the Virgo Cluster {M90 and MlOO), 

The Virgo Cluster (distance = seven million l.y.) is the nearest of the 
great clusters of nebulae and is exceptional in containing a considerable 
number of intermediate and late spirals in addition to the early spirals 
and ellipticals which dominate the normal clusters. For these reasons, the 
Virgo Cluster furnishes an opportunity for comparing the stellar con- 
tents of nebulae at various stages in the sequence of classification. 

Most of the Sc nebulae in the cluster are partially resolved with the 
100-inch reflector, and the apparent faintness of the brightest stars indi- 
cates the order of the distance. The brightest stars of all are found in 
MlOO (shown in the Plate). 

Only a few of the Sb nebulae can be resolved, and their brightest stars 
are systematically fainter than those in the Sg nebulae. MOO is a border- 
line example; a few very faint objects have been uncertainly identified 
as individual stars. Cluster members of earlier types are, in general, un- 
resolved. 

The photographs were made with the 100-inch reflector — that of MOO, 
on December 21, 1935; that of MlOO, on January 21, 1925, In both cases, 
north is at the top (outer margin of the page), and the scale is 1 mm. = 
4".25. 


M100-> 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


166 


ter-nebulsB of all types is available for comparison with 
resolved nebulie in the general field. Apparent magni- 
tudes of the cluster-nebulae range from m = 10.2 to w = 
15 or fainter, and the most frequent magnitude is prob- 
ably about 12.7 ±. The brighter limit is well determined, 
but the fainter limit, where the occasional cluster-mem- 
bers are difficult to distinguish from field-nebulae, is un- 
certain. The corresponding absolute magnitudes, derived 
from the modulus, m — M = 26.7, are : range, —16.5 to 
—11.7 or fainter; most frequent, — 14 ±. The cluster- 
nebulae are thus comparable with resolved field-nebulae. 
The luminosity-function for the latter can be safely gen- 
eralized to include nebulae of all types. 

(c) VELOCITY-DISTANCE EELATION. 

The third problem to which the criterion of brightest 
stars has been applied is the numerical formulation of the 
velocity-distance relation. The relation, when calibrated, 
indicates the distances, and hence the intrinsic luminosi- 
ties, of all nebulae whose velocities are known. Since all 
types of nebulae are included, the information is an im- 
portant contribution to the problem of the luminosity- 
function. 

The velocity-distance relation is derived from very 
simple data, namely, red-shifts in nebular spectra and ap- 
parent magnitudes of nebulae or of their brightest stars. 
The velocities (simple multiples of red-shifts) are cor- 
rected for solar motion, but, of course, include the un- 
known peculiar motions of the nebulae. The peculiar mo- 
tions appear as accidental errors in the distance effect 
and, although they are unknown for individual nebulae, 
their influence on statistical averages can be estimated 
and partially eliminated. 

Magnitudes are corrected for galactic obscuration and 
also for certain effects due to the red-shifts, which will be 
more fully discussed in Chapter VIII. For the present, 
the term “corrected” magnitude, Wc, will be used without 



166 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


further explanation, instead of the “ observed ” magni- 
tude nio. The relation is 

me — nto — AWfl 

where Amo is the etfect of red-shifts. The numerical values 
of the corrections, Amo, increase with red-shifts, but do 
not become important until the shifts correspond to ve- 
locities of 3,000 miles/sec., and greater. 

Correlations between logarithms of velocities, log v, 
and apparent magnitudes, me, have been derived from 
three independent sets of data. The first correlation is 
between velocities of resolved field-nebulae” and magni- 
tudes of the brightest stars (29 eases) ; the second is be- 
tween velocities of field-nebulae of all types, whether re- 
solved or unresolved, and magnitudes of the nebulae 
themselves (103 cases) ; the third is between velocities of 
clusters (each cluster-velocity representing the mean of 
all velocities observed within the cluster), and the magni- 
tudes of the fifth brightest nebulae in the clusters (10 
cases).” 

The three correlations,” which are shown graphically 
in Figs. 12, 13, 14, are represented by the formulas 

log V = 0.2 me — 1.197 (brightest stars) 

= 0.2 me -f- 0.553 (field-nebulae) 

= 0.2 Me -j- 0.818 (clusters) 

where the velocity, v, is expressed in miles per second. 
These formulas represent precisely the same velocity- 
distance relation. The differences in the constants refer 
to differences in the absolute magnitudes of the objects 

11 Members of the local group were not included. They are so near that 
peculiar motions may be large compared to distance effects and, moreover, 
it is not yet certain whether distance-effects exist within the group. 

12 The great clusters are remarkably similar, and significant correlations 
can be derived by using any one of say the first ten magnitudes, or the mean 
of the first several. Actually, the fifth brightest magnitude differs system- 
atically from the mean of the ten brightest, by less than 0.05 mag. Without 
regard to sign, the average residual is less than 0.1 mag. 

18 The correlations represent analyses of all data available at the end of 
1935. Details will be published in * * Mt. Wilson Contr., ’ ' No. 549. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


167 


used as criteria of distances. The mean absolute magni- 
tude of one criterion, namely, that of the brightest stars, 
is already known, therefore the direct relation between 
velocities and distances can be expressed numerically, 
and the absolute magnitudes of the other criteria can be 
determined. Both results are of major importance. 



Fig. 12. V elocity-Distance Relation from Brightest Stars. 

Logarithms of velocities (in km/sec. and corrected for solar motion) are 
plotted against apparent magnitudes of brightest stars in nebulae (corrected 
for local obscuration). Nebulae in the local group are omitted. The three 
points below the main body of the correlation diagram may be accounted for 
by peculiar motions. 


Calibration of the Velocity-Distance Relation. 

The calibration of the velocity-distance relation is as fol- 
lows. The expression for distance (in light-years) is 

log d = 0.2 (mo — M) -f 1.513 

where M is the absolute magnitude of the object whose 





168 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 



Fig. 13. Velocity-Distance Relation for Field-Nehuloe, 

Logarithms of velocities (in kra/sec. and corrected for solar motion) are 
plotted against apparent magnitudes of nebulae (corrected for local obscura- 
tion). Effects of peculiar motions are appreciable among the brighter 
(nearer) nebulae. 


apparent magnitude is mo. Therefore, in the case of the 
brightest stars, where M = —6.35, 

0.2 m-c = log d — 2.783. 

When this value of 0.2 me is substituted in the correlation 
for brightest stars, 

log V = log d — 3.98 
V = 0.000105 d 
d = 9550 V. 

Thus the apparent velocity of a nebula is about 105 miles/ 
sec. for each million light-years of distance (550 km/sec. 
per million parsecs). 

Another method of analyzing the data leads to slightly 
smaller, but more probable, values of the coefficients. The 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


169 



Fig. 14. Velocity -Distance Relation for Clusters. 

Logarithms of velocities (in km/sec. and corrected for solar motions) are 
plotted against apparent magnitudes of the fifth brightest nebulae in clusters 
(corrected for galactic obscuration). Each cluster-velocity is the mean of the 
various individual velocities observed in the cluster, the number being indi- 
cated by the figure in brackets. 


correlations between log v and Wc, which are more pre- 
cisely described as velocity-magnitude rather than ve- 
locity-distance relations, are subject to uncertainties aris- 
ing from the unsymmetrical distribution of residuals due 
to peculiar motions. The lack of symmetry is difficult to 
evaluate and correct, especially in the case of the resolved 
nebulae for which the distance-effects are necessarily 
small. Nevertheless, these nebulae are the only ones whose 
distances are derived from a fundamental criterion, and 
they must be used for the numerical calibration. 

The uncertainties in the velocity-magnitude relation 
may be avoided by using simple velocities rather than log 








170 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


V, and simple distances calculated from the moduli, mo — 
M. The residuals due to peculiar motions are then sym- 
metrically distributed and tend to cancel out when mean 
velocities of large numbers of nebulae are considered. The 
mean distances, on the contrary, will be systematically in 
error^‘ but the necessary corrections are small and can be 
readily calculated. In the ease of the resolved nebulae, 
where the dispersion in the absolute magnitudes of the 
brightest stars is 0.4 mag., the mean distance must be in- 
creased by only 1.7 per cent. 

The velocity-distance relation starts from the origin of 
coordinates (the observer) and is known to be approxi- 
mately linear (from observations of clusters and remote 
field-nebulae). Now the mean velocity and the mean dis- 
tance of the resolved nebulae, as a group, furnish a point 
through which the relation must pass. This point deter- 
mines the slope of the relation (the rate of increase of 
velocity with distance). The data now available — for the 
29 resolved field-nebulae — lead to the values which are 
given below, 

d =. 4.07 million l.y. 

V = 412 miles/see. 
v/d = 101 miles/sec. per million l.y. 

= 530 km/sec. per million parsecs. 

The value of d includes the correction of 1.7 per cent 
which was mentioned in the preceding paragraph. When 
the correction is omitted, the constant in the velocity- 
magnitude relation can be computed on the assumption 
that peculiar motions are negligible. The value, constant 

Since the frequencies of the absolute magnitudes of the distance -criteria 
are symmetrically distributed about the mean value (luminosity-f unctions 
are normal error-curves), frequencies of the logarithms of distances, for ob- 
jects of a particular apparent magnitude, are also distributed normally. 
Therefore, the simple distances will show a skew frequency -distribution. 
However, the relation between the means is very simple; 

log d = log d + 1.152 <r2 

where <r, the dispersion in log d, is one-fifth of the dispersion in M. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


171 


= —1.204, is closely comparable with the value, —1.197, 
previously adopted for the correlation. 

Similar calibrations of the velocity-distance relation 
may be made from the field-nebul® in general and from 
the clusters. The results are comparable with those from 
resolved nebulae but they are not independent because the 
distances, or, more precisely, the absolute magnitudes of 
the distance-criteria, are derived from the fundamental 
criterion of brightest stars. Therefore, the agreement in 
the various calibrations emphasizes the consistency of the 
data, but contributes very little to the absolute scale of 
the distance-effects. 

The calibration of the distance-effect directly from the 
velocity-distance relation permits an estimation of the 
dispersion among peculiar motions of nebulae. The total 
dispersion of residuals from the relation, expressed in 
terms of velocities, is about 155 miles/sec. The peculiar 
motions contribute about 125 miles/sec. and the remain- 
der is divided between accidental errors and the scatter 
in the absolute magnitudes of brightest stars. 

Although the coefiScient, 101 miles/sec. per million l.y., 
is the more reliable measure of the absolute distance- 
effect, the coefiScient derived from the velocity-magnitude 
relation serves well enough for the comparison of dis- 
tance criteria in the three correlations. The formula might 
be applied to each nebula and cluster whose velocity is 
known. Velocities, in miles/sec., divided by 105, give dis- 
tances in millions of light-years. The distances, together 
with the apparent magnitudes, determine absolute magni- 
tudes. Analysis of the list of absolute magnitudes thus as- 
sembled would determine the luminosity-function, includ- 
ing the form of the frequency-distribution, the mean mag- 
nitude, and the dispersion. 

The information, however, can be derived in a much 
simpler way, directly from the constants and the residu- 
als in the three correlations. The differences in the mean 
absolute magnitudes of the various criteria of distances 



172 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


are evidently five times the differences in the constants 
appearing in the correlation formulas." Thus the field- 
nebulae are brighter than the brightest stars, by the 
amount 5 X (1.197 + 0.553) = 8.75 mag. The fifth bright- 
est nebulae in clusters differ from the brightest stars by 
5 X (1.197 -1- 0.818) = 10.05 mag. The absolute magni- 
tudes of the three criteria are therefore 

Mg = —6.35 (brightest stars) 

M = -15.1 (field-nebulffi) 

If j = —16.4 (fifth brightest nebulae in clusters) . 

Luminosities of Cluster-N ebulce. 

The fifth brightest nebulae in clusters average half a mag- 
nitude, or less, fainter than the brightest nebulae. There- 
fore, the mean absolute magnitude of the latter is about 
—16.9. The difference between the brightest and the mean, 
or the most frequent, magnitude in a cluster is not pre- 
cisely determined, but the approximate value, 2.5 mag., 
has long been used. The mean absolute magnitude of clus- 
ter-nebulae" thus appears to be of the order of —14.4, as 
compared with the value, —14.0, previously derived from 
the brightest stars in cluster members. The mean of these 

15 When Wg is eliminated from the two equations 
log V — 0.2 me + constant 
log d = 0.2 me - 0.2 M + 1.513 

then 

log V — log d = 0.2 M + (constant — 1.513) 
and from the calibration by brightest stars, 

0.2 M -f (constant - 1.513) = -3.98. 

Therefore, differences in the constants appearing in the three correlations 
equal one fifth the differences in M for the various criteria. 

15 The agreement is probably better than the comparison suggests. The 
ten clusters from which the difference between the first and fifth brightest 
nebulas is derived, include two exceptional cases. One (Perseus Cluster) 
contains an outstanding giant member (NGC 1275) and the other (Pegasus), 
is a very sparse cluster with two unusually bright members. If these clusters 
are omitted, the normal difference between the first and fifth nebulas would 
be about 0.3 mag., the brightest nebulas about —16.7, and the mean or most 
frequent magnitude about —14.2, in excellent agreement with the field- 
nebulas. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


178 


two approximate values, namely —14.2, agrees with that 
found for resolved nebulae in the general field, where 
brightest stars are used as the criterion of distance. 

Effect of Selection on Statistical Criteria of Distances. 

These values refer to the mean of all nebulae in a given 
volume of space, which is designated by the symbol Mo. 
Another symbol, M, has been employed for the mean ab- 
solute magnitude of the field-nebulae used in the correla- 
tion. M refers to the mean of all nebulae of a given appar- 
ent magnitude. The two quantities would be the same only 
if the intrinsic luminosities of all nebulae were precisely 
equal. Actually, some nebulae are as much as ten times 
brighter than the average and others are ten times 
fainter. A list of nebulae of a particular apparent lumi- 
nosity contains a mixture of nebulae of different intrinsic 
luminosities, scattered over a great range in distance. 
Some are faint and near, others are bright and remote 
(Fig. 15). 

Now the distribution of nebulae in space is approxi- 
mately uniform, and the statement applies to neWae of 
any particular intrinsic luminosity as well as to the nebu- 
lae of all luminosities. The uniform distribution, together 
with the scatter in intrinsic luminosities, leads to a curi- 
ous result. Consider for a moment, the list of nebulae with 
the same apparent luminosity. The intrinsically faint 
nebulae, since they are near, are distributed through a 
relatively small volume of space, while the intrinsically 
bright objects, since they are remote, are distributed 
through a relatively large volume of space. Therefore, the 
intrinsically bright nebulae greatly outnumber the faint 
ones among nebulae with a given apparent luminosity. 
Evidently M will be brighter than Mo. The situation arises 
whenever photometric criteria of distances, in which the 
dispersions are appreciable, are used in statistical inves- 
tigations. 

The complete solution of the problem can be stated as 



174 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


follows.^^ If the space distribution is uniform and if the 
luminosity-function (the frequency-distribution of abso- 



Fig. 15. Distribution in Space of Nebulce with the Same 
Apparent Luminosity. 

Among nebulm which appear equally bright are included objects of various 
intrinsic luminosities, scattered over a wide range in distance. Thus, if the 
normal nebula (Mo) is at the distance, D = 3, the intrinsically faint (F) and 
very faint (VF) objects will be at smaller distances (down to about = 1), 
while the bright (B) and very bright (VB) objects will be spread over 
greater distances (out to about D = 9). The relative volumes of space through 
which the four grades {FF to VB) are scattered, are indicated by the num- 
bers below the symbols. 

Since the distribution of nebulae is approximately uniform, there will be 
many more intrinsically bright, than intrinskally faint nebulae, among those 
which appear equally luminous. Therefore, M, the mean absolute magnitude 
of nebulas with a given apparent magnitude, will be brighter than the 
mean absolute magnitude of nebulae in a given volume of space. 


lute magnitudes in a given volume of space) is a nor- 
mal error-curve with a maximum, Mo, and a dispersion, o, 
then the frequency-distribution of absolute magnitudes 

17 Malmquist, * ^ On Some Eelations in Stellar Statistics, ^ ’ ArTciv for Mat., 
Astr., och Fysik, 16, No. 23, 1921. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


175 


for a given apparent magnitude will be a normal error- 
curve with the same dispersion, o, but with a maximum, 
M, which is brighter than Mo by the amount 

Mo-M = 1.382 aK 

The difference is the effect of selection previously men- 
tioned in connection with the dispersion among brightest 
stars. M must be used when nebulae are selected on the 
basis of apparent magnitudes, as they are in the velocity- 
distance relation for field-nebulae, and in surveys to suc- 
cessive limiting magnitudes. Mo applies to nebulae selected 
on the basis of stars involved, and to clusters. 

Luminosities of Field-Nebulce. 

The value, M = —15.1, is derived from the correlation 
for field-nebulae of all types, and the value. Mo = —14.2, is 
derived from resolved field-nebulae selected on the basis 
of brightest stars. The dispersion for the latter group is 
a = 0.84. Therefore, the resolved field-nebulae furnish the 
value 

M = Mo- 1.382 a" 

_14.2 _ 0.93 
= -15.13 

which is about that actually observed among the field- 
nebulae of all types. The dispersion for the latter group can 
be calculated directly from the residuals in the velocity- 
distance relation. When effects of peculiar motions are re- 
moved, the dispersion in M is of the order of o = 0.85 or 
slightly less, in substantial agreement with that for the 
resolved nebulae. The dispersion among cluster-nebulae has 
not been precisely determined, but it appears to be of the 
same general order as that for the field-nebulae. The nu- 
merical results are thus thoroughly consistent and no 
conspicuous differences are found among the various 
groups. 

A more detailed analysis of the data used in the veloc- 



176 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


ity-distance correlation for field-nebulse, yields the follow- 
ing values of M for various individual types. 

TABLE VI. 


Absolute Magnitudes of Various Types of Nebulce, 


Type 

No. 

M 

EO — E2 

11 

—15.3 

E3-B7 

12 

15.2 

Sa-SB. 

23 

15.2 

Sb-SBb 

27 

15.1 

Se-SBe 

25 

15.1 

Ir 

5 

—14.4 


The values are all comparable, except that for the five 
irregular nebulae, and the numbers are too limited to estab- 
lish fully the slight systematic differences between the 
early and the late types, which are suggested by the data. 
The abnormally low luminosity of the irregular nebulae 
appears to be real since it is confirmed by the mean mag- 
nitude of the four additional irregulars in the local group. 

The two sample collections of 125 resolved nebulae and 
103 field-nebulae, have 29 objects in common, but other- 
wise they are independent. Analyses of the two lists and 
of the ten clusters lead to the conclusion that all nebulae 
are comparable systems, whether they are members of 
clusters or isolated in the general field, and regardless of 
type. The only exception appears to be that the rare, ir- 
regular nebulae may average about half as bright as other 
nebulae. If systematic differences in the mean luminosi- 
ties of other types exist, they are so small that they will 
emerge only from large bodies of very accurate data. 

The realm of the neMlae, or at least the portion that has 
been explored, thus appears as a vast region of space in 
which comparable systems are uniformly distributed. The 
scale of nebular distances is known. Intrinsic luminosities 
have been discussed at considerable length, but the re- 
sults may be summarized for convenience. The nebulae 
average about 85 million times as bright as the sun. The 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


177 


brightest are about 10 times brighter than the average 
and the faintest are about 10 times fainter, but about half 
of the nebulae are within the narrow range from one half 
to twice the average luminosity of them all. Other general 
features concerning which information can be assembled 
are absolute dimensions and masses. 

Dimensions of Nebulce. 

Linear dimensions are derived from the diameter-lumi- 
nosity relations presented in the discussion of classifica- 
tion (Chap. II). At any stage in the sequence of classifi- 
cation, the relation is 

«i -p 5 log Da = constant 

where m is the apparent magnitude of a nebula and Da is 
the angular diameter in minutes of arc. The constant in- 
creases continuously through the sequence, from globular 
nebulae to open spirals, and it has been evaluated for the 
various standard stages or types. Therefore, when the in- 
trinsic, or linear, diameter is known for any one type, it 
can be readily calculated for other types. 

The reduction from apparent to intrinsic luminosities 
and dimensions is made by means of the relations 

log d (l.y.) = 0.2 (m - M) -f 1.513 

from which 

m = 5 log d — 22.665 

and 

n 0..00 V ^ linear diameter 

Da = 3438 X 

distance 

the last of which is merely a definition. Introducing these 
expressions into the diameter-luminosity relation, the 
linear diameter (in l.y.), termed Di, is found to be 

log Di = 0.2 X constant -f- 0.997. 

Numerical values of Di follow at once from the previously 
determined values of the constant for the various types 
of nebulie (Chap. II). 



178 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


It may be emphasized that the angular diameters of 
nebular images are rather arbitrary quantities. They vary 
widely with exposure-conditions and methods of measure- 
ment, and the values of the constants vary accordingly. 
Any homogeneous body of data furnishes fairly reliable 
relative values of the constants along the sequence, but 
the zero-point of the scale depends upon the specifications 
(exposure and method of measurement). With these res- 
ervations, the approximate^® linear diameters of the main 
bodies for various types of nebula? are listed in Table VII. 
They correspond to the constants previously given for a 
particular body of data. 


TABLE VII. 
Diameters of Nebulce. 


Type 

Diameter 

Type 

Diameter 

EO 

1,900 Ly. 

(SO) 

(5,300) l.y 

B3 

2,800 

Sa 

6,000 

E7 

4,800 

s. 

7,600 

SBa 

5,500 

S„ 

9,500 

SB, 

6,300 

Ir 

6,300 

SBo 

8,700 




Masses of Nebulte. 

The determination of reliable masses is an outstanding 
problem in nebular research. Two methods have been em- 
ployed, leading to widely different results. Nevertheless, 
when considered together, they suggest a general order of 

18 The linear diameters are not strictly accurate because the effects of 
dispersion have been neglected. The numerical values correspond to log D, 
the mean of the logarithms of the angular diameters, and not to log D, the 
logarithm of the mean of the diameters. The two terms are not necessarily 
the same and the difference is a function of the dispersion in D. The cal- 
culation of dispersions for various types, and the necessary corrections, are 
deferred until a body of definitive data is available for investigation. 

The dispersion in distances corresponding to a given apparent magnitude 
is also involved, although that quantity is known and the effects can be 
determined. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


179 


mass which may be tentatively adopted pending a more 
satisfactory solution of the problem. 

One method is based upon spectrographic rotation.^® 
The nebulae, in general, are lens-shaped systems in rapid 
rotation about their minor axes. In a few cases, where the 
nebulae are oriented nearly edge-on, radial velocities have 
been measured at various points along the major axes, 
and the nature of the rotation has been determined. The 
nuclear regions, out to considerable distances, appear to 
hold their forms and to rotate like solid bodies. The outer 
regions, however, lag behind, and the lag increases with 
distance from the nucleus. Interpretation of this behav- 
ior on simple dynamical principles is not very clear. It 
suggests uniform density throughout a large nuclear re- 
gion, in sharp contrast with the observed luminosity- 
gradient. 

Apart from uncertainties in the dynamical picture, the 
orbital motion of a point in the equatorial plane of a neb- 
ula should be determined by the mass of material inside 
the orbit. That mass can be calculated in much the same 
way in which the mass of the sun is found from the orbital 
motion of the earth (or of the other planets). The exterior 
mass in the nebula, beyond the orbit under consideration, 
can only be estimated. If the most distant points with 
known velocities are used for the calculations, the exterior 
mass should be a relatively small fraction of the interior 
mass, and errors in the estimates should be still smaller. 

Spectrographic masses of four nebulae, together with 
that of the galactic system are listed in Table VIII. They 
range from about 1,000 million to 200,000 million times 
the mass of the sun, and average about 50,000 million 
suns. These nebulfe, however, are much larger and 
brighter than average and doubtless their masses also are 
abnormally large. The appropriate correction is specula- 
tive, but, as a first approximation, we may assume that 
masses vary directly with luminosities. In this case, the 

19 First used by Oepik, * An Estimate of the Distance of the Andromeda 
Nebula/^ Astrophysical Journal, 55, 406, 1922. 



180 THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 

average nebulae would be about 2,000 million times as 
massive as the sun. 

The second method of estimating nebular masses was 
recently employed by Sinclair Smith.*® Analysis of radial 
velocities of 32 members of the Virgo cluster, suggested a 
velocity of escape for the cluster of about 1,500 km/see. 
This quantity measured the gravitational field and, there- 

TABLE VIII. 


Spectrographic Masses of Nehulce, 


Nebula 

Type 

Hass 

Luminosity 

M*/L 

M33 

s„ 

10® suns 

1.45 X 10® suns 

7 

M31 

Sb 

3 X 10"® 

1.7 XIO® 

18 

NGC 4594 

Sa 

3.5 X 10"® 

1.5 XIO® 

23 

NGC 3115 

E7 

9 X 10® 

1.6 XlO® 

56 

Gal. Sys. 

(Sc?) 

2 X 10"" ± 



Mean 


5 X 10"® 


26 


* M represents mass and not absolute magnitude. The variation of the 
ratio, M/Ly with nebular type is suggestive, but the data are too few to 
establish it as a general characteristic. The results for NGC 3115 are derived 
from unpublished measures of rotation by Humason. 


fore, the total mass of the cluster. The total mass, divided 
by the number of members, gave the average mass per 
nebula. The latter was of the order of 2 X 10“ suns, or 
about 100 times the order of mass suggested by spectro- 
graphic rotations. Intemebular material in the cluster 
was neglected. Such material may exist, but observations 
give no reason to suppose that the amount is large com- 
pared with the amount of material concentrated in the 
nebulae. 

The discrepancy seems to be real and important. The 
dynamical problem presented by the clusters appears to 
be simpler than that of nebular rotation, and to this ex- 
tent the cluster-masses may carry the greater conviction. 
The cluster-masses are, in a sense, upper limits, while the 

20 The Mass of the Virgo Cluster, Wilson Contr.,’^ No. 532; Astro- 
physical Journal, 83, 23, 1936. 



THE GENERAL FIELD 


181 


rotational masses, because of assumptions concerning 
material in tbe extreme outer regions, may possibly be re- 
garded as lower limits. However, tbe results must be con- 
sidered as unsatisfactory until the discrepancy is very 
materially reduced. 

The discussion of masses completes the preliminary re- 
connaissance of the nebulae. The investigations are beset 
with uncertainties, and the numerical results are mainly 
estimates which will be revised when more elaborate tech- 
niques and larger telescopes have been applied to the 
problems. Nevertheless, valuable information has been 
assembled concerning the scale of nebular distances, the 
general features of nebulae, such as their luminosities, di- 
mensions, and masses, their structure and stellar con- 
tents, their large-scale distribution in space, and the curi- 
ous velocity-distance relation. These data serve to sketch 
the broad features of the realm of the nebulae. The out- 
lines are perhaps not yet in a definitive form, but they are 
sufiiciently clear to permit individual problems to be in- 
vestigated with some knowledge of their relation to the 
general scheme. 



CHAPTER Vni 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 

T he preceding chapters have described the appar- 
ent features of nebulae and their distribution, the 
development of methods for investigating their in- 
trinsic characteristics, and the nature of the results to 
which the new methods have led. It is now possible to con- 
sider the realm of the nebulae as a unit, and to discuss the 
observable region as a sample of the universe. 

The explorations started from within an isolated stellar 
system — a nebula. They penetrated through the swarm of 
stars into a vast region of space thinly populated with 
other nebulae. The nebulae are all curiously similar — ^mem- 
bers of a single family. Since their intrinsic luminosities 
are known, their distances can be determined and their 
distribution mapped. They are found singly, in groups, 
and, occasionally, in great clusters, but when very large 
regions are compared, the tendency to cluster averages 
out and one region is very much like another. 

Preliminary reconnaissance indicated approximate uni- 
formity throughout the whole of the observable region. 
Obviously, the next step was to follow the reconnaissance 
with a careful survey and to interpret the results in the 
light of all available data concerning the nebulae them- 
selves. As information accumulated, the results could be 
reinterpreted and the surveys repeated with greater pre- 
cision. Thus, by successive approximations, it would be 
possible to approach a comprehensive knowledge of the 
sample of the universe open to our inspection. Only then 
could extrapolations be pushed beyond the reach of tele- 
scopes, and conclusions drawn that were more significant 
than mere speculations. 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


183 


Surveys to Successive Limits. 

A STEP in the slow advance is represented by the surveys 
mentioned in the discussion of apparent features of nebu- 
lar distribution (Chap. III). Five surveys with large 
reflectors have been completed, to limiting magnitudes 
18.5, 19.0, 19.4, 20.0, and 21.0, respectively. A casual 
examination of the results suggests that the distribution 
in space is roughly uniform. Nevertheless, detailed analy- 
sis reveals an apparent thinning out. The departures 
from uniformity, although small, increase systematically 
with the distances to which the surveys extend. 

Now red-shifts are known to introduce these very ef- 
fects. By reducing the apparent luminosities, red-shifts 
increase apparent distances ; therefore, the fainter nebu- 
lae appear to be scattered through a larger volume of 
space than actually happens. The numerical values of the 
expected departures from apparent uniformity differ 
slightly according to the particular interpretations of 
red-shifts that are used in the calculations. On all inter- 
pretations, however, they are of the same order as the 
observed departures. Therefore, after the luminosities in 
the surveys have been corrected for red-shifts, the nebu- 
lar distribution again appears to be uniform and now to 
a very close approximation. As a final step, the argument 
is reversed. The distribution is assumed to be strictly 
uniform and the observed departures are used to test the 
various interpretations of red-shifts. 

The essential data from the surveys are the average 
numbers of nebulae per unit area, W, equal to, or brighter 
than, various apparent magnitudes, m. These numbers 
are denoted by Fm, where the unit area is one square de- 
gree (about five times the area of the fuU moon). The 
nebular distribution is indicated by the manner in which 
Wm increases with m. 

One of the five surveys, namely, that to m = 19.0, was 
made by Mayall with the 36-inch reflector at the Lick Ob- 



184 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


servatory.^ The other surveys were made with the 60-inch 
and the 100-ineh reflectors at Mount Wilson.* The data 
represent counts of nebulae in about nine hundred fields 
well distributed over the whole of the northern polar cap, 
and over one half or more of the southern cap. The galac- 
tic belt was avoided because of the uncertainties intro- 
duced by local obscuration. 

The numbers of nebulae actually identified were reduced 
to standard conditions by corrections for variation in defi- 
nition, atmospheric extinction, and galactic obscuration. 
The corrected counts, representing more than a hundred 
thousand nebulae, were transformed to numbers per 
square degree in order to facilitate the comparison of 
mean results obtained from the different telescopes. In- 
vestigations of possible sources of errors suggest that the 
corrected counts are probably satisfactory as regards 
completeness, but that the very faint, limiting magnitudes 
are necessarily subject to some uncertainties. 

The surveys individually exhibit the same general 
features of distribution over the sky that were described 
in Chapter III. Mean results for the two polar caps are 
similar ; there are no systematic variations over the face 
of the sky; the scatter among the individual samples 
diminishes as the average size of samples increases. The 
large-scale distribution over the sky, as derived from each 
survey, is approximately uniform. 

Distribution of Nebulce in Depth. 

Each suiwey furnishes the number of nebulae within a 
certain sphere whose radius is indicated by the limiting 
magnitude of the survey. The apparent distribution in 
depth may be derived by comparing the numbers of nebu- 

1 A Study of the Distribution of Extra-Galactic Nebulae Based on Plates 
Taken with the Crossley Reflector/^ lAclc Observatory BulletiUj No. 458, 1934. 

2 The surveys to m = 19.4 and m = 20.0 are found in Hubble, The Distri- 
bution of Extra-Galactic Nebulce, ‘‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,'^ No. 485; Astro- 
physical Journal, 79, 8, 1934. The surveys to m = 18.5 and m = 21 are un- 
published but will appear in a forthcoming ‘‘Mt. Wilson Contr. 



THE REALM OF THE NEBUL2E 


185 


IsB in the successive spheres. Specifically, the problem in- 
volves the determination of Wm as a function of m. 

If the distribution were uniform, the numbers of nebu- 
lae would be proportional to the volumes of space through 
which they are scattered. The data would then be repre- 
sented by the linear relation® 

log Nra = 0.6 m -j- constant. 

This straight line, together with the relation actually ob- 
served, is shown graphically in Fig. 16. The two relations 
are obviously not parallel. The numbers of nebulae in- 
crease less rapidly than the corresponding volumes of 
space ; in other words, the nebulae appear to thin out more 
and more as the distance increases. The departures from 
uniformity are already appreciable in the shallowest sur- 
vey (the slope of the observed relation is less than the 
theoretical slope), and they increase steadily with the 
limiting magnitudes. 

The source of the departures is evidently in N or in m, 
for no other quantities are observed in the surveys. If N 
alone were involved, the observed relation would repre- 
sent the true distribution. The galactic system would then 
be considered as lying near the center of a large and more 
or less spherical system of nebulae which thinned out in all 
directions. On the other hand, if m were involved, the ap- 
parent luminosities of nebulae would be fading with dis- 
tance faster than could be accounted for by the familiar 
law of inverse-squares. It would then be necessary to dis- 
cover the cause of the fading, and to eliminate the effects, 
before the true distribution could be examined. With this 
end in view, the departures may be expressed as incre- 

8 The volume of space (and hence the number of nebulas) out to a given 
limit, is proportional to the cube of the distance. To the limiting magnitude, 
m, the distance, d, is 

log d = 0.2 m -f- constant. 

Hence log F = 0.6 m + constant 
and log N = log V + constant. 



186 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJS 


ments to the magnitudes, Lm, and the observed relation 
represented by the formula 

log JVm = 0.6 (m — Am) + constant. 

The problem now is to examine all known etfects which 
might reduce the apparent luminosities, and to evaluate 
the probable departures, Aw, arising from these sources. 
If the known effects do not completely account for the ob- 
served departures, the residuals must be attributed either 



Fig. 16. Apparent Distribution of Nebulae in Depth. 

Each point on the Observed Eelation represents the average number (actu- 
aEy log 2V^) of nebulae per square degree which are equal to, or brighter than, 
a particular apparent magnitude, as determined by an entire survey. The line 
through the points (Observed Eelation) is a least square solution in the 
form, log N = 0.6 (m — Am) + constant, derived from the assumption that 
Am is a linear function of distance. 

In the vicinity of the galactic system. Am should be negligible, and the Ob- 
served Eelation should coincide with a Uniform Distribution indicated by the 
straight line. As the surveys are extended to greater distances (fainter limit- 
ing magnitudes). Am increases, and the Observed Eelation departs from the 
line representing Uniform Distribution, The departures. Am (horizonal dis- 
placements between the two lines), are plotted against m (limiting magni- 
tudes of the surveys) in the lowest curve. The departures are interpreted as 
effects of red-shifts. 




THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


187 


to real deviations from uniformity, or to unknown sources 
of fading. The investigation proves to be unexpectedly 
sinaple. Red-shifts reduce apparent luminosities, and the 
effects increase with distance. The phenomena will be dis- 
cussed later in considerable detail, but it will be con- 
venient to anticipate one of the conclusions. Within the 
uncertainties of the data, red-shifts completely account 
for the observed departures. 

Other possible sources of fading may be ignored be- 
cause, if they made appreciable contributions, they would 
overcorrect the observed departures. The density of the 
nebular distribution would then increase radially in all 
directions — a conception so highly artificial that it would 
be seriously considered only as a last resort to save the 
phenomena. 

The only known mechanism for increasing the apparent 
luminosities (and thus counteracting space-absorption or 
other sources of fading) is the possibility that abnormally 
high intensities in the ultraviolet regions of nebular spec- 
tra (conceivably arising from giant blue stars) might be 
moved into the photographic region by large red-shifts. 
This possibility has been investigated in various ways — 
for instance, by examining ultraviolet spectra of bright 
neighboring nebulae and the colors of spirals in very dis- 
tant clusters — and the effects of blue giants appear to be 
unimportant. 

It does not seem possible, with the information so far 
obtained, to undercorrect the observed departures. Thus, 
in order to avoid the unwelcome idea of a spherically sym- 
metrical, increasing density, uniform distribution must 
be postulated and space-absorption neglected. The ob- 
served departures then stand out as effects of red-shifts 
alone, and serve to test their interpretations. 

Quantitative Description of the Distribution. 

Unipobm distribution thus appears to be the most plau- 
sible interpretation of the nebular counts. At any rate, it 
may be stated with confidence that the distribution is uni- 
form within the uncertainties of the data, and that the un- 



188 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


certainties are small. This conclusion is represented by 
the straight line in Fig. 16 and by the relation 

log Nm = 0.6 (m — Am) — 9.09. 

The value of the constant, as derived from the five sur- 
veys, is consistent with data from other sources. The most 
important of such data are those in the Harvard survey* 
of the brighter nebulee, which is believed to be complete 
over the entire sky to about m = 12.9. Since effects of red- 
shifts, Aw, are negligible to this limit, the data can be 
used directly to determine the constant. When the great 
Virgo cluster is eliminated and the galactic belt is 
avoided, the data furnish the value —9.10, which is of the 
same order as that given above. When various corrections 
are applied, reducing the data to the scale of the deeper 
surveys, the agreement is less precise, but is still satis- 
factory in view of the limited numbers of nebulae involved, 
and the various uncertainties. 

The numerical value of the constant indicates the num- 
ber of nebulae brighter than any given apparent magni- 
tude. The actual space-distribution — the number of nebu- 
lae per unit volume of space — ^is readily derived with the 
help of the mean absolute magnitude for nebulae of a 
given apparent magnitude, M = —15.1, which was derived 
in Chapter VII. There is, on the average, about one neb- 
ula per 5 X 10^® cubic light years.® The average distance 

^ Shapley and Ames, ' * A Survey of tlie External Galaxies Brighter than 
the Thirteenth Magnitude,’^ Harvard College Observatory Annals j 88, No. 2, 
1932. 

0 The distribution density of nebulae, the number per unit volume, is 
log Q — log N — log F. 

Introducing the number of square degrees over the sky, 
log N = 0.6 (w ~ Aw) - 9.09 -f 4.62. 

The volume of the sphere in cubic parsecs is 

log F = log 4/3 jt + 0.6 (w - Aw) - 0.6 M + 4.539. 

Hence log p = 0.6 M — 9.62. 

Since M = —15.1 

p = 2 X 10-19 (nebula per cu. l.y.) 

= 7 X 10-18 (nebula per cu. parsec). 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


189 


between a nebula and its nearest neighbor is of the gen- 
eral order of two million light-years. The smaller separa- 
tions among the immediate neighbors of the galactic sys- 
tem emphasize the relative isolation of the local group. 

Since the average type among isolated nebulae is prob- 
ably about Sb, the average diameter is of the order of ten 
thousand light-years and the distribution may be roughly 
represented by nebulae scattered at random with an aver- 
age separation of about two hundred times the diameters. 
Tennis balls fifty feet apart suggest the relative scale. 

The average mass of nebulae is uncertain, but the two 
values previously mentioned, 2 X 10“ suns, from spectro- 
graphic rotations, and 2 X 10‘^ suns, from radial velocities 
in the Virgo cluster, may be tentatively used as minimum 
and maximum estimates. Introducing these values into 
the expression for space-distribution, the smoothed-out 
density of nebular material in space, in grams per cubic 
centimeter, is found to be 


or 


Q = 10'®“ (minimum) 

Q = 10"®® (maximum) . 


Internebular Space. 

These values include all the material that can be actually 
observed with present methods. The question of matter 
in internebular space is wholly speculative. The only ob- 
servational evidence which bears on the question is the 
complete absence of any sensible obscuration out to the 
limit of the deepest survey. Space-absorption, if it exists, 
is probably less than 0.1 mag. (about 10 per cent), in a 
light-path of the order of a hundred million parsecs (326 
million l.y.). 

Obscuration by diffuse material varies enormously 
with the form of the material. Three general forms may 
be distinguished, following H. N. Eussell of Princeton, as 
gas (molecules, atoms, and electrons), dust (particles 
with diameters comparable with the wave-length of light) 



190 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


and chunks (diameters large compared with the wave- 
length of light). 

For a given mass of material, dust is highly efficient in 
obscuring distant light sources, gas is less efficient and 
chunks are highly inefficient. The presence of intemebu- 
lar dust would be readily detected if its mass were only a 
few per cent of the mass of material concentrated in the 
nebulae. Therefore, dust, in the optimal form, does not 
contribute materially to the smoothed-out density of mat- 
ter in space. Gas might be present in large quantities. 
Free electrons would be detected only if the density were 
a hundred times that of nebular material. In other forms, 
still larger quantities would be required. Chunks, such as 
dark stars and meteors, might exist in almost any num- 
bers. Masses which were many thousands of times the 
total mass of the nebulae, would produce no appreciable 
obscuration. Thus the density of matter in space cannot 
be completely determined by photometric methods alone. 

Nevertheless, it is possible, from an examination of the 
galactic system itself, to set a reasonably definite, upper 
limit to the mean density of internebular space, regard- 
less of the form of the material. The total density of both 
stars and interstellar material within any nebula, includ- 
ing the galactic system, is obviously greater than the 
density in outer space. Moreover, there is a density- 
gradient outward from the nucleus of a nebula, and the 
nebular material fades away to undefined borders. 

Within the galactic system, the sun is situated well out 
from the nucleus, in an unusually dense region known as 
the “local system.” Since the local density is high, and 
the general system continues to thin out for great dis- 
tances toward the boundaries, it is probable that the sys- 
tem can be traced to densities as low as one per cent of 
the local density. The current value of the local density, 
derived largely from dynamical considerations, is of the 
order of 10"^®, hence the value 10'®' should fairly represent 
the border density. This value is the extreme upper limit 
of the possible density in internebular space. 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


191 


The Observable Region. 

The. observable region is thus homogeneous and isotropic 
— ^much the same everywhere and in all directions — and 
the smoothed-out density of matter in space is greater 
than 10'®® and less than 10"®®. There is no observational 
evidence for supposing the density to be greater than 
10 -“. 

The size of the observable region is largely a matter of 
definition. Within the limits of the deepest survey, m = 
21, there should be some 60 million nebulae, but a con- 
siderable fraction of the total number are lost in galactic 
obscuration. The nebulae at the limiting magnitude repre- 
sent an average distance of the general order of 400 mil- 
lion light-years. Some of these must be dwarf nebulae 
much nearer than the average, while others are giants at 
still greater distances. Since dwarfs and giants cannot be 
distinguished from one another, distances, in those re- 
mote regions, can be used only in a statistical sense. 

The figures just given refer to a systematic survey and 
do not represent the extreme limit of telescopic power. 
With long exposures under good conditions, the 100-inch 
reflector records nebulae which can be distinguished from 
stars, as faint as magnitude 21.5. In the directions of the 
galactic poles, where obscuration is least, the recogniz- 
able nebulae average about 2,400 per square degree and 
are more numerous than the stars. The limiting magni- 
tude represents an average distance of the order of 500 
million light-years, and about 100 million nebulae may be 
expected within a sphere of this radius. Images of still 
fainter nebulae, which cannot be distinguished from stars, 
are recorded on the photographic plates, and among them, 
no doubt, are extremely bright giants. Nevertheless, it is 
improbable that any object has been recorded whose dis- 
tance is double the average distance mentioned above. 

Effects of Red-Shifts on Apparent Luminosity. 

The features of the observable region which have just 
been described follow directly from the conclusion that 



PLATE XIV 

The Depths of Space. 

The illustration is an enlargement from a photograph made with the 
100-inch reflector of a region including the north galactic pole. The ex- 
posure was 200 min., on a special emulsion furnished by Dr. C. K. Mees 
of the Eastman Kodak Company. This emulsion (marked I'O) had the 
highest threshold sensitivity of all that have been used with the 100-inch, 
and, therefore, the photograph shows the faintest objects that have been 
recorded with telescopes now available. 

The arrow points to a fair example of the faintest objects that can be 
recognized as nebulae. Such nebulae (apparent magnitude estimated as 
about 21.5) are at an average distance of the order of 500 million light- 
jears. 

The plate records fully as many recognizable nebulae as stars, and the 
equality is a spectacular description of the penetrating power of the 
telescope. The plate, made on March 8, 1934, is centered about 6' north 
of the star BD -f 28°. 2145. The negative print is reversed so that, while 
east is at the top, north is to the left ; 1 mm. = 2".35. 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


198 


the nebular distribution is approximately uniform. The 
final step in the analysis boldly assumes that the distri- 
bution is precisely uniform, and that apparent departures 
represent no more than the combined effects of red-shifts 
and observational errors. The effects of red-shifts are 
calculated on the alternative assumptions that (a) they 
represent motion (are velocity-shifts) and (b) they do 
not represent motion. Since the numerical results are not 
the same, the observed departures may be used to iden- 
tify the correct interpretation. The differences between 
the two sets of calculated effects are small quantities and 
may be lost among the small observational errors. Never- 
theless, an investigation of this dim threshold region is 
justified by the fundamental importance of the question 
at issue, although the final conclusion must be phrased 
with proper reservations. 

Radiation from a nebula may be pictured as light — 
quanta-parcels of energy — streaming out in all direc- 
tions. Apparent luminosity is measured by the rate at 
which the quanta reach the observer, together with the 
energy in the quanta. If either the energy or the rate of 
arrival is reduced, the apparent luminosity is diminished. 
Red-shifts reduce the energy in the quanta whether the 
nebulae are stationary or receding. Thus an “energy- 
effect” may be expected, regardless of the interpretation 
of red-shifts. The rate of arrival (i.e., the number of 
quanta reaching the observer per second) is reduced if 
the nebulae are receding from the observer, but not other- 
wise. This phenomenon, known as the “number-effect,” 
should in principle furnish a crucial test of the interpre- 
tation of red-shifts as velocity-shifts. 

The Number-Effect. 

The operation of the number-effect may be described as 
follows. Consider two similar nebulae at the same dis- 
tance, one stationary with respect to the observer, and the 
other receding with velocity v. Both nebulae radiate the 



194 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


same number of quanta per second in the direction of the 
observer. At the end of a second, the quanta from the 
stationary nebula are scattered over a path whose dis- 
tance is c, where c is the velocity of light ; the quanta from 
the receding nebula are scattered over the path c + v, 
which is longer than the other path by the factor (1 -f- 
v/c). The density of the stream of quanta from the reced- 
ing nebula is evidently less than the density of the stream 
from the stationary nebula. Consequently, the observer 
receives fewer quanta per second, and the receding neb- 
ula appears fainter than the stationary object. The re- 
duction factor for the apparent luminosity is that given 
above, (1 v/c), which, for our purpose, is equivalent to 

(l-fdA/A). 

The number-effect is nonselective — ^is the same for all 
wave-lengths — and adds the same magnitude-increment. 
Am, to magnitudes on any system — the bolometric for in- 
stance, or the photographic. The increment is 

Am (N.E.) = 2.5 log (1 -f dA/A) 
where N.E. signifies number-effect. 

The Energy-Effect. 

The energy-effect, which operates regardless of whether 
or not the nebulas are receding, is evaluated from the 
fundamental relation 

energy X wave-length = constant 

which holds for all quanta. Red-shifts, since they increase 
the wave-lengths, must decrease the energies if the prod- 
uct remains constant. The factor is the same as that for 
the number-effect, (1 + dX/X), but the energy-effect is 
selective. 

If the total radiation over all wave-lengths could be 
measured outside the earth’s atmosphere, the apparent 
luminosity, known as the bolometric luminosity, would be 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULAE 


196 


reduced by the factor (1 + dX/X). Thus the increment to 
the bolometric magnitude is 

Awib {E.E.) = 2.5 log (1 + d\/\) 

where E.E. signifies energy-effect. 

The effect, since it is selective, must be traced through 
the atmosphere (selective absorption), and through the 
telescope (selective reflection), up to the photographic 
plate (selective sensitivity), before the increment to the 
photographic magnitude can be evaluated. The proce- 
dure is complicated and will not be described in detail. It 
will be assumed, instead, that the calculations have been 
made and that the total effect of selection, expressed in 
magnitudes, is represented by K. Then the photographic 
increment is 

Ampg {E.E.) = 2.5 log (1 + dk/K) -f K 

where 

K = Ampg — Amp 

and K varies with the red-shifts. 

The evaluation of K depends to a certain extent on 
properties of the initial unshifted radiation which cannot 
be directly observed. The properties must be inferred, 
and the major uncertainties in the calculated effects of 
red-shifts arise from this necessity. The plausible as- 
sumption that nebulae radiate like stars whose effective 
temperatures are about 6,000°, slightly higher t)ia;a that 
of the sun, leads to values of K which are probably of 
the right order. The values are considerably larger than 
the increment representing the number-effect aioiie. 
Therefore, the uncertainties, although relatively small 
fractions of K, may be rather large compared to the 
number-effect, which is the object of investigation. 

The significant points in this rather long discussion 
may be stated with commendable brevity. Effects of red- 
shifts on photographic magnitudes are 

Am (cal.) = 5 log (1 -f- dk/\) -f- K 
or 

2.5 log (1-f dX/X) -hJr 



196 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


according to whether the red-shifts do, or do not, repre- 
sent motion. For effective nebular temperatures of 6,000°, 
the calculated values of Am, are closely proportional to 
the red-shifts, dX/X, and are represented by the relations® 

Am (cal.) =4:dX./\ (motion) 

= 3 d\/\ (no motion). 

Effects of Red-Shifts and Observed Departures from 
Uniformity. 

These simple relations may now be compared with the 
apparent departures from uniformity observed in the 
surveys. The departures increase with distance, and the 
relation is approximately linear. On the assumption that 
the relation is really linear, the apparent distribution is 
expressed by 

log Nm = 0.6 (m — Am) -j- constanti 

where 

log Am = 0.2 (m — Am) -f- constantj 

and the constants can be derived from the observed data 
by the usual methods of least squares. The solution is 
shown graphically in Fig. 16 by the smooth curve through 
the observed points. The fidelity with which the observa- 
tions are represented by the curve supports the validity 
of the assumption that Am is a linear function of distance. 

Now red-shifts, dX/X, are also linear functions of dis- 

6 Various methods of calculating the increments are discussed by Hubble 
and Tolman, ‘^Mt. Wilson Contr./^ No. 527; Astrophysical Journal, 82, 302, 
1935, although the numerical results are not given, de Sitter {Bulletin of the 
AstronomicdJ Institutes of the Netherlands, 261, 1934) gives detailed cal- 
culations, using one method, for the increment here termed the ^^energy- 
effect. ^ ^ The results are expressed in the form 

Ampj = 2.9 d\/\ + (dX/X)2 

which closely approximates that given above, over the range of the surveys, 
namely, dX/X < 0.25. 

The addition of the number-effect, 2.5 log (1 + dX/X), leads to the series 

AWpg = 3.99 dX/X + 0.48 (dX/X)2 + . . . 
which also approximates the relation given above for red-shifts interpreted 
as velocity shifts. 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


197 


tance’' (Chap. V). Therefore Am is a linear function of 
dl/X. The relation,® as derived from observations is about 

Am (obs.) = 2.7 d\/\. 

The observed coefficient is smaller here than that in 
the relation calculated on either interpretation of red- 
shifts, but is much closer to the coefficient representing no 
motion. Careful examination of possible sources of un- 
certainties suggests that the observations can probably he 
accounted for if red-shifts are not velocity-shifts. If red- 
shifts are velocity-shifts then some vital factors must 
have been neglected in the investigation. 

A review of the problem discloses at least one neglected 
factor, namely, the difference in time required for light to 
reach the observer from the limits of the various surveys. 
As we look out into space, we look back into time. The 
surveys were made recently, hut the light left the twenty- 
first magnitude nebulae perhaps 120 million years before 
it passed the twentieth magnitude nebulae, and 250 million 
years before it reached the 18.5 magnitude nebulae. 
During these immense periods, the nebulae, if red-shifts 
were velocity-shifts, would have receded to appreciably 
greater distances than those estimated from the apparent 
faintness. Thus the observed distribution would require 
corrections to reduce it to a “simultaneous” description. 

Attempts to determine the corrections raise questions 
concerning the measurement of distances and their inter- 
pretation, and ultimately force the research into the field 
of relativistic cosmology. 

7 The function is observed to dX/X = 0.14, corresponding to m = 19.5 for 
isolated nebulae, and to this limit it is sensibly linear. Beyond this limit the 
function must be extrapolated, but unless abrupt departures occur (an 
unlikely contingency) the assumption of linearity should approximate the 
general order of the red-shifts. 

8 Since log dX/X and log Aw are both represented by the expression 
0.2 (w — Aw) + constant (the constant, of course, differing in the two 
cases). Aw is directly proportional to dX/X, and the factor is the anti-log 
of the difference between the constants. 



198 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


Theories of Cosmology. 

CuRKEKT theories of cosmology employ a model knowir as 
the homogeneous, expanding universe of general rela- 
tivity or, more briefly, as the expanding universe. It is 
derived from the cosmological equation which expresses 
a principle of general relativity — that the geometry of 
space is determined by the contents of space. The equa- 
tion transcends the body of factual knowledge and can 
be interpreted and solved only with the aid of assump- 
tions concerning the nature of the universe. 

The first solutions, by Einstein and de Sitter (1917), 
employed the assumptions that the universe is homogene- 
ous and isotropic and also that it is static, i.e., does not 
vary systematically with time. These solutions were 
special cases of the general problem and have since been 
abandoned — Einstein’s, because it did not account for 
red-shifts ; de Sitter’s, because it neglected the existence 
of matter. The Einstein universe, it was said, contained 
matter and no motion, while the de Sitter universe con- 
tained motion and no matter. The general problem was 
first discussed by Friedmann (1922). Subsequently, Eob- 
ertson (1929) derived the most general formulation (of 
the line element) from properties of symmetry alone.® 

The solution involved the “cosmological constant” and 
the “radius of curvature of space” as undetermined 
quantities. By arbitrarily assigning different values to 
the parameters, various classes of possible universes 
were described, and among them, it was supposed, the 
type corresponding to the actual universe would be in- 
cluded. The problem for the observer was to determine 

» For further information on this great field of theoretical investigation, 
the reader is referred to Eobertson^s authoritative review of the development 
of the subject up to the end of 1932 ; ‘ ‘ Belativistic Cosmology, ^ * Reviews of 
Modern Physics, 5, 1, 1933. A complete bibliography of the more important 
contributions, with short descriptions of their contents, is included, and also 
a list of recommended, nontechnical discussions of the field. Among the latter 
is an exceptionally clear statement from the mathematical point of view, by 
Eobertson himself (*^The Expanding Universe,’^ Science, 76, 221, 1932). 



THE REALM OF THE NEBUUE 199 

the actual values of the constants, or at least to narrow 
the range within which they must lie. 

The general solution was nonstatic, and the radius of 
curvature of space varied with time. Therefore, the pos- 
sible universes were contracting or expanding. The equa- 
tions did not indicate which alternative to expect, but the 
observed red-shifts were generally accepted as direct 
evidence that the actual universe was expanding at the 
present time, and this interpretation was incorporated in 
the theory. Thus the model came to be known as the homo- 
geneous, expanding model of general relativity. 

The cosmological problem is of wide interest and dis- 
cussions have not been confined entirely to the field of 
general relativity. Milne, in particular, has developed a 
“Kinematical” model which appears to possess unusu- 
ally significant features.^* For our present purpose, how- 
ever, it does not require special consideration since it has 
been shown to correspond very closely to a particular 
case of the general relativity model — namely the hyper- 
bolic model with negative curvature. 

For any theory of the structure of the universe it is 
possible to make a “world-map,” to use Milne’s phrase, 
which indicates the actual distribution of nebulae at a 
given epoch of time. The apparent distribution, which an 
observer should expect to record on his photographs (if 
the theory corresponds to the actual universe), has been 
called a “world-picture,” another of Milne’s phrases. 
World-pictures must differ from world-maps, if red-shifts 
are velocity-shifts, since the nebulae continue to recede 
while light travels to the observer. The theories can be 
tested by comparing the observed distribution with the 
calculated world-pictures. 

Certain features of the world-picture for the general 
relativity model have been calculated by Tolman.“ 

10 Belativity, Gravitation and World Structure, 1935. 

Belati/vity Thermodynamics and Cosmology (1934), chap. x. The ap- 
plication to the immediate problem of nebular surTeys is discussed in Hubble 
and Tolman, Two Methods of Investigatvng the Nature of the Nebular Bed- 
Shifts, ‘‘Mt. Wilson Contr.,'^ No. 527; Astrophysical Journal, 82, 302, 1935. 



200 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULA 


Among them is the formula expressing the relative num- 
bers of nebulae that should be observed at a given epoch, 
within various limits of apparent magnitude. From £his 
relation the effects of red-shifts (interpreted as velocity- 
shifts) on the nebular counts, are readily derived. It then 
appears that the effects of red-shifts in the world-picture, 
are precisely those discussed in the previous section, with 
the addition (to the former) of a term in R, the radius of 
curvature of space. 

Curvature was neglected in the previous discussion, 
and the discrepancies which were found when red-shifts 
were interpreted as velocity-shifts, might conceivably be 
explained by the neglected factor. It will be recalled that 
it was just possible to explain the nebular counts on the 
assumption that red-shifts were not velocity-shifts. If 
red-shifts were velocity-shifts, additional corrections, 
called “number-effects,” were required, and these ap- 
peared as discrepancies. The question now arises whether 
sufficient curvature can be introduced to balance the num- 
ber-effects and thus remove the apparent discrepancies. 

Tolman’s formula indicates that a positive value of R 
would reduce the discrepancies, while a negative value 
would increase them. Thus a negative curvature, implying 
an open universe, is ruled out, and the possible, expand- 
ing universes are restricted to those with positive curva- 
ture. If red-shifts are velocity-shifts, it follows that the 
universe is closed, having a finite volume and finite con- 
tents. 

The curvature required to remove the discrepancies is 
very great, and hence the radius of curvature, R, is very 
small. Actually, it is comparable with the radius of the 
observable region as defined with existing telescopes. 
Thus, in order to save the velocity-shifts, we would be 
forced to conclude that the universe itself is so small that 
we are now observing a large fraction of the whole. 

Some further information may be found in the fact that 
the radius, R, in a closed universe, bears a definite rela- 
tion to the density of matter (and radiation) in space. A 



THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


201 


radius of the dimensions necessary to save the velocity- 
shifts represents a mean density appreciably higher than 
10"*® gm/cc. This value is many times greater than even 
the maximum estimates of the smoothed-out density of 
material concentrated in nebulae, and we find no evidence 
of any considerable amount of intemebular material 
which might increase the density. A sufficient amount of 
the latter material might conceivably exist provided it 
were in forms that cannot be detected, but an upper limit 
can be set even to matter in these forms. The density 
along the borders of the galactic system, as previously 
mentioned, is probably not greater than 10"®' gm/cc., and 
the density in the surrounding space is presumably still 
less. Radiation would not change the general order of the 
density. 

If the estimations of density were completely reliable, a 
radius of curvature of the necessary dimensions would be 
ruled out by the evidence. But so definite a solution is 
probably unwarranted. The crucial data are surrounded 
by uncertainties. By pressing the data to the limit of their 
tolerance, always in one direction, we might force the ve- 
locity-shifts into the framework of the surveys. The uni- 
verse would then be small, and filled with matter to the 
very threshold of perception. 

On the other hand, if the interpretation as velocity- 
shifts is abandoned, we find in the red-shifts a hitherto 
unrecognized principle whose implications are unknown.^“ 
The expanding universe of general relativity would still 
persist in theory, but the rate of expansion would not be 
indicated by the observations. 

Thus the explorations of space end on a note of uncer- 
tainty. And necessarily so. We are, by definition, in the 
very center of the observable region. We know our imme- 

12 A new method of approach has already been developed by Zwicky, in 
a paper, the main purpose of which ‘‘is to indicate how a statistical theory 
can be developed which makes it possible to discuss in a very general way a 
number of features of the redshift of light through intergalactic space, 
‘‘Bemarks on the Eedshift from Nebulse,’^ Physical Beview, 48, 802, 1935. 



202 


THE REALM OF THE NEBUL2E 


diate neighborhood rather intimately. With increasing 
distance, our knowledge fades, and fades rapidly. Even- 
tually, we reach the dim boundary — the utmost limits of 
our telescopes. There, we measure shadows, and we search 
among ghostly errors of measurement for landmarks that 
are scarcely more substantial. 

The search will continue. Not until the empirical re- 
sources are exhausted, need we pass on to the dreamy 
realms of speculation. 



INDEX 


A bsolute magnitudes, scale of, 
- 13 f . ; of nebulaB, 59, 60, 153, 
162, 172, 173, 175, 176; of bright- 
est stars in nebulae, 157, 158; spec- 
trographic, 51 

Absorbing layer in the galactic sys- 
tem, 30, 64 f ., 67, 69, 128 
Absorption of light in interstellar 
space, 30, 63 f ., 67, 69 ; in inter- 
nebular space, 189, 190 
Almagest, 9 
Alpha Centauri, 7, 8 
Ames, Adelaide, 60, 188 
Anagalactic nebulae, 16, 27 
Angular rotation of nebulae, 85, 97, 
98 

Apparent magnitudes, scale of, 9 f. 
Apparent velocities of nebulae, 34, 
123 

Astronomical unit of distance, 8 
Astronomy, the language of, 7 f. 
Average separation of nebulae, 189 
Average type of nebulae in clusters, 
79, 81; in the general field, 55, 
189 

B aade, waltee, 145 

Barred spirals, 43, 44 
Bernard of Chartres, 1 
Bracey, E. J., 116 
Bracey camera lens, 116 
Brightest stars in nebulae, definition 
of, 152, 157; in local group, 150; 
in resolved field nebulae, 152 f . ; in 
Virgo cluster, 163; as a criterion 
of distance, 158 f., 165 f., 168 

C AMPBELL, NOEMAN, 1, 2 
Canopus, 11 

Catalogues of nebulae. Messier ^s, 18, 
25; HerscheUs General Catalogue 
(GC), 26; Dreyer’s New General 
Catalogue (NGC) and Index Cata- 
logue (IC), 18, 26; Holetschek’s 


list, 50, 55; Harvard Catalogue of 
Bright Nebulae, 19, 50, 55, 60, 188 
Cepheids, 13 f. ; period-luminosity re- 
lation, 13 f . ; in nebulae, 28, 84, 90, 
91, 92 f., 152, 154, 158 
Classification of nebulae, 36 f., 56, 
57; criteria, 37, 38; common pat- 
tern, 37 f.; regular nebulae, 38; ir- 
regulars, 38, 47 f . ; sequence of 
regular nebulae, 38, 45 f . ; peculiar 
nebulae, 47 ; relative frequencies of 
types, 55; average type, 189 
Clusters of nebulae, 77 f., 117, 125, 
131, 134, 135, 143, 144, 145; ra- 
dial velocities, 117 f.; velocity- 
distance relation, 165 f . ; luminosi- 
ties of members, 172 f. 

Color Excess, 52 
Color Index, 12 
Colors of nebulae, 52 f. 

Common pattern of nebulae, 37 f. 
Comparable galaxies, 96 f. 

Cosecant law of local obscuration, 
62, 64 f . 

Cosmological constant, 198 
Cosmological theories, 197, 198 f. 
Cosmology, 122, 135 
Criteria of classification, 37, 38 
Criteria of distance, 84 f., 152 f,; 
novae, 84, 85 f . ; Cepheids, 92 f . ; 
brightest stars, 100 f., 152 f., 

157 f ., 165 f., 168 ; total luminosi- 
ties, 101, 153; red-shifts, 101, 
119 f. 

Curtis, Heber D., 43, 47, 85, 87, 88 
Curvature of space, 198 f. 

D avis, helen, i8 

Delta Cephei, 13 

Density of matter in space, 21, 31, 
189, 191, 201 

Departures from uniform distribu- 
tion, apparent, 71, 183, 196 f. 
Derham, William, 24 



204 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJE 


Designation of nebulae, 18 f. 
de Sitter, W., 108, 109, 110, 111, 196, 
198 

Diameter -luminosity relation, 48 f., 
177 

Diffuse nebulae, 27 

Dimensions of nebulae, 29, 98 f., 
177 f.; in local group, 126, 127; 
relative dimensions of M31 and 
the galactic system, 98, 99 
Distances of nebulae, development of 
criteria, 83 f . ; early estimates, 
87 f.; see criteria of distances 
Distance, units of, 71, 154; light- 
year, parsec, astronomical unit, 7, 
8; modulus of distance, 13 
Distribution of nebulae, 58 f., 183 f.; 
methods of investigation, 58 f . ; ef- 
fects of selection, 60; nebular sur- 
veys, Harvard, 60, 188; MayalHs, 
183, 184; Mt. Wilson, 61 f., 183 f.; 
zone of avoidance, 62, 64; absorb- 
ing layer, 62, 64 f . ; polar caps, 
galactic belt and general field, 
67 f., 184; large scale distribution 
over sky, 21, 30, 31, 69, 70, 184; 
large scale distribution in depth, 
30, 31, 70 f., 183, 184 f. ; compari- 
son with stellar distribution, 71, 
72; small scale distribution, 29, 

72 f.; dispersion among samples, 

73 f . ; formula for uniform distri- 
bution, 70, 71, 185; apparent de- 
partures, 71, 183, 196 f.; cause of 
departures, 185, 186; corrected 
distribution, 187, 188; quantita- 
tive description, 188, 189 

Dose, A., Ill 
Dreyer, J. L. E., 18, 26 
Duncan, John C., 92, 95 

E ddington, sir Arthur, 

109, 156 

Effective temperatures of nebulae, 
195 

Effects of red-shifts on apparent lu- 
minosities, 183, 187, 191 f ., 196 f . ; 
number effect, 193, 194, 200; en- 
ergy effect, 193, 194 f . 


Effects of selection on nebular dis- 
tribution, 60; on mean absolute 
magnitudes, 172, 173 f. 

Einstein, Albert, 108, 198 
Einstein universe, 108, 198 
Elliptical nebulae, 38, 39 f ., 56 ; typi- 
cal example, 137 f. 

Ellipticity, definition of, 41 
Energy effect, 193, 194 f. 

Evolution of nebulae, 39, 46, 54, 76 
Expanding universe, 33, 122, 198 f. 
Exploration of space, 20 f ., 182 ; suc- 
cessive phases, 21, 22 
External galaxies, 16 f. 

Extragalactic nebulae, 16, 17, 27 ; 
distinguished from galactic nebu- 
Irn, 26, 27 

Extrapolation, 3, 182 

F aintest nebulae recorded, 31, 
72, 191 

Path, E. A., 102 

Formula for uniform distribution, 
70, 71, 185 
Friedmann, A., 198 

G alactic belt, 67, 68, i84 

Galactic nebulae, 16, 27 
Galactic obscuration, 62 f . ; see ab- 
sorbing layer and zone of avoid- 
ance 

Galactic system, 129 f., 190 
Galaxy, definition of, 17 ; external 
galaxies, 16 f. 

Galileo, 26 

General field, 152 f . ; nebular distri- 
bution in, 67 f. ; luminosities in, 
159 f., 165, 175 f. 

Globular clusters, 52, 67, 98 f., 125, 
131, 133, 135 f., 154 f. 

Glossary of astronomical terms, 7 f. 
Groups of nebulae, 76, 77; local 
group, 77, 124 f . 

H AARK, G. E. H., 87 
Hale, George E., 116 
Herschel, Sir John, 26 
Herschel, Sir William, 25, 26 
Hertzsprung, E., 15 



INDEX 


205 


Holetschek, J., 50, 55 
Hubble, Edwin, 38, 39, 48, 61, 98, 
114, 117, 120, 134, 135, 136, 139, 
141, 144, 147, 156, 160, 163, 184, 
196, 199 

Huggins, Sir William, 26, 102 
Humason, Milton, 50, 53, 115, 116, 
117, 119, 120, 135, 147, 156, 160, 
163 


I NDEX Catalogues (IC), 18; IG 
10, 64, 145 f.; IC 342, 145 f.; IC 
1613, 145 

Internebular space, contents of, 
189 f . ; see density of matter in 
space 

Interpretation of red-shifts, 105, 
106, 196 f. 

Irregular nebulae, 38, 47 f. 

Island universes, 85, 96 f . ; theory of, 
22 f ,, 28 ; Wright ’s speculations, 
23 ; Kant ^s theory, 23 f . ; verifica- 
tion, 28, 96 f ., 100 ; comparable 
galaxies, 96 f. 

Isophotal contours in elliptical nebu- 
lae, 39, 41, 137 

JEANS, SIE JAMES, 39, 88 

K -TEEM in radial-velocities, 
107 f.; as a constant, 107, 108; 
as a function of distance, 108, 109, 
110; as a linear function, 113, 
119 f.; see velocity-distance rela- 
tion 

Kant, Immanuel, 23, 24 
Kant^s theory of island universes, 
23 f. 

I EAVITT, HENEIETTA S., 14, 
A 133 

Local group, 77, 124 f . ; known mem- 
bers, 124 f.; possible members, 
126, 145 f . ; dimensions, 126, 127 ; 
as a sample collection of nebulae, 
149 f . ; brightest stars in, 150 
Logarithms, 10 

Luminosities of nebulae in the gen- 
eral field, 175 f.; variation with 


type, 175, 176; mean M for nebu- 
lae in a given volume of space, 153, 
163; for nebulae of a given m, 172, 
173 f. 

Luminosity-function of nebulae, 59, 
153; in local group, 149; of re- 
solved nebulae, 159 f, ; in the gen- 
eral field, 165, 175 f.; in groups, 
77; in clusters, 79, 172 f. 
Luminosity-gradients in nebulae, 37, 
39 

Luminosity-ratios expressed in mag- 
nitudes, 9 f . 

Lundmark, Knut, 16, 27, 38, 47, 87, 
88, 90, 97, 107, 111, 112, 113 
Luplau- Janssen, C., 87 

M agellanic ciouds i3if.; 

Cepheids in, 14 f . 

Magnitudes, see absolute magmitudes 
and apparent magnitudes 
Main bodies of nebulae, 50, 130, 132, 
141, 144, 178 
Malmquist, K. G., 174 
Masses of nebulae, 178 f.; from spec- 
trographic rotation, 179, 180; 

from internal motion in the Virgo 
Cluster, 180, 181 
Maupertius, 24 
Mayall, N. U., 64, 147, 183 
Messier, Charles, 18, 25 
Messier 31, 134 f.; Messier 32, 

137 f.; Messier 33, 141 f. 

Methods of sampling, 58 f. 

Milky Way, 17, 18; obscuring clouds 
in, 30, 62 f. 

Milne, E. A., 199 
Moon, 7, 11, 13, 22 

N ebula, definition of, 16 f., 
27 ; catalogues of, 18 f . ; na- 
ture, 25 f . ; resolution, 26, 28 ; lu- 
minosities, 28 f., 59 f ., 153, 162, 
172 f., 175 f.; dimensions, 29, 

98 f ., 126, 127, 177 f . ; masses, 
178 f.; classification, 29, 36 f., 56, 
57 

New General Catalogue (NGC), 18 
NGC 205, 139 f.; NGC 6822, 144 f.; 
NGC 6946, 145 f . 



206 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULJS 


Newton, Isaac, 1 
Nichol, J. P., 16 
Normal spirals, 43 
Novae in nebulae, 27, 85, 87, 88, 131, 
132, 133, 135, 143, 149, 150, 154; 
normal novae, 149, 150; super- 
novae, 27, 87, 88, 149 
Nuclei of nebulae, 36, 137, 138; spec- 
tra, 46 

Number effect, 193, 194, 200 
Number of nebulae in observable re- 
gion, 21, 25, 26, 31, 191 

O BSCUItATION in nebul®, 39, 
46, 47 

Obscuration within the galactic sys- 
tem, 30; obscuring clouds, 30, 
62 f . ; absorbing layer, 28, 30, 
64 f., 67, 69; zone of avoidance, 
62 f. 

Observable region of space, 20 f., 
29 f., 34, 182, 189, 191, 201; defi- 
nition, 20; dimensions, 31, 191; 
density, 21, 31, 189, 191, 201; 
number of nebulae in, 21, 25, 26, 
31, 191 

Oepik, E., 87, 179 
Orion nebula, 17, 52 
Ott6, E. 0., 25 

P ARALLAX, 7, 8, 22, 154 

Peculiar motions of nebulae, 
106 f., 115, 171 
Peculiar nebulae, 47 
Period-luminosity relation for Ceph- 
eids, 13 f.; discovery, 14, 15; 
Hertzsprung ^s calibration, 15 ; 

Shapley^s revision, 15, 16 
Planetary nebulae, 27 
Plaskett, J, S., 129 
Pluto, 7 

Pogson, Norman, 10 
Polar caps, 67, 68, 184 
Praesepe, 26 
Ptolemy, 9 

R adial velocities of nebulae, 33, 
84; first velocity, 102; Slipher’s 
list, 28, 85, 105 f., 115, 116; Hu- 
mason^s list, 115 f.; interpreta- 


tion, 106 f.; solar motions, 106 f.; 
peculiar motions of nebulae, 106, 
115, 171; radial velocities in local 
group, 150, 151; in clusters, 

117 f.; in the general field, 119 f. 
Radius of curvature of space, 198 f. 
Ranyard, A. Cowper, 89 
Rayton, W. B., 116 
Rayton camera lens, 116 
Realm of the nebulae, 29 f., 182 f. 
Red-shifts in nebular spectra, 3, 4, 
33 f., 119 f., 191 f.; as a criterion 
of distance, 119 f.; significance, 

120 f.; effects on apparent lumi- 
nosity, 71, 191 f.; interpretation, 

121 f., 196 f. 

Regular nebulae, 38 

Relative frequencies of nebular 
types, 55, 56 ; average type, 189 
Resolution of nebulae, 28, 84, 89 f . ; 
variation along sequence of claissi- 
fication, 52 f. ; variable stars, 92 f . 
Resolved nebulae, sample collection 
of, 153, 160 
Reynolds, J. H., 44, 140 
Ritchey, G. W., 85, 87, 89, 90 
Roberts, Sir Isaac, 89 
Robertson, H. P., 198 
Rosse, Countess of, 16 
Rosse, Lord, 16 

Rotation of nebulae, angular, 85, 97, 
98; spectrographic, 179, 180 
Russell, H. N., 15, 189 

S AMPLE collections of nebulae, 
see local group, resolved nebulae, 
general field, and clusters of nebu- 
lae 

Sarton, George, 1, 2 
Scheiner, J., 102 

Scientific research, 1 f . ; subject mat- 
ter, 1 f . ; methods, 2 f . ; theories, 
5, 35, 197 f . ; observational ap- 
proach, 2 f . ; theoretical approach, 
4f. 

Seares, Frederick H., 54 
Sequence of regular nebulae (classifi- 
cation), 38, 45 f.; variation along 
sequence, surface brightness, 
48 f . ; spectral types, 50 f . ; colors, 



INDEX 


207 


52 ; resolution, 52 f . ; relative fre- 
quencies, 55, 66 

Shapley, Harlow, 15, 16, 18, 27, 60, 
87, 88, 89, 90, 98, 99, 131, 132, 
133, 135, 188 

Slipher, V. M., 28, 85, 102, 103, 105, 
106, 109, 113, 115 

Sirius, 11 

Smith, Sinclair, 39, 139, 180 

Solar motion with respect to nebulas, 
106, 107, 108, 110, 113, 114, 119, 
120 

Solar system, 20 

Space, exploration of, 20 f ., 182 ; in- 
habitants of, 28 f . ; curvature of, 
198 f.; see observable region 

Spectra, types of, 32; solar and stel- 
lar, 33 

Spectra of nebulae, 26, 33 f . ; visual 
observations, 26, 102; early spec- 
trograms, 102; nuclear spectra, 
46; emission spectra, 51, 52, 144, 
150 ; spectral types, 50 f . ; see red- 
shifts 

Spectrographic absolute magnitude 
of M32, 51 

Spectrographic rotation, 180, 181 

Spiral nebulae, 38, 43 f . ; normal 
spirals, 43; barred spirals, 43, 44; 
sequence of spirals, 44 f . 

Standard nebulae, 48 f. 

Star clusters, distinguished from 
nebulae, 26 

Stebbins, Joel, 52, 53, 67, 99, 135 

Stellar system, 20; see galactic sys- 
tem 

Stromberg, Gustaf, 105, 111, 112 

Sun, distance, 7, 8, 20; apparent 
magnitude, 11; absolute magni- 
tude, 13, 124 

Surface brightness of nebulae, 48 f . 

Surveys of nebulae, 60 f ., 183 f . ; 
Harvard survey, 60, 188 ; May- 
airs, 183, 184; Mt. Wilson, 61 f., 
183 f . ; other surveys, 71 


T en beuggencate, p., 39 

Tolman, Eichard 0., 75, 196, 199 
Truman, A. H., 106 

U NIVEESE, Einstein, 108, 198; 
de Sitter, 108 f., 198 ; expand- 
ing universe, 33, 122, 198 f . ; ob- 
servable region as a sample of, 20, 
34, 35 

AN HEEK, G., 131 
van Maanen, Adriaan, 85, 97, 
98 

Vega, 11 

Velocity-distance relation, 3, 4, 31 f., 
102 f.; early investigations, 106 f.; 
formulation of linear relation, 
113 f.; from clusters, 117, 165 f.; 
from isolated nebulae, 119, 165 f . ; 
from resolved nebulae, 165 f . ; cali- 
bration, 167; in local group, 150, 
151 ; significance, 120 f ., 196 f . 
Venus, 11 

Virgo Cluster, 53, 54, 101, 113, 116; 
distance, 162 f.; resolution of 
members, 163; luminosities in, 
164, 165, 172 f.; mass, 180, 181 
von Humboldt, Alexander, 25 
von Zeipel, H., 90 

W ATTENBUEG, D., 131 
Whitford, A. E., 99, 135 
Wilson, E. E., 131 

Wirtz, C., 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 
112 

Wolf, Max, 102 
World maps, 199 
World pictures, 199, 200 
Wright, Thomas, 23 

Z ONE of avoidance, 62 f . 

Zwicky, Fritz, 201 





SILLIMAN MEMORIAL LECTURES 
PUBLISHED BY YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Electricioty and Matter. By Joseph John Thomson, D.Sc., LL.D., 
Ph.D., F.R.S., Fellow of Trinity College and Cavendish Professor of 
Experimental Physics, Cambridge University. (Out of print.) 

The Integrative Action op the Nervous System. By Charles S. 
Sherrington, D.Sc., M.D., Hon. LL.D. Tor., F.R.S., Holt Professor 
of Physiology, University of Liverpool. (Out of print.) 

Experimental and Theoretical Applications op Thermodynamics 
TO Chemistry. By Dr. Walter Nernst, Professor and Director of 
the Institute of P^sical Chemistry in the University of Berlin. 

Radioactive Transpormations. By Ernest Rutherford, D.Sc., LL.D., 
P.R.S., Macdonald Professor of Physics, McGill University. (Out of 
print.) 

Theories op Solutions. By Svante Arrhenius, Ph.D., Sc.D., M.D., 
Director of the Physico-Chemical Department of the Nobel Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (Fourth printing.) 

Irritabhity. a Physiological Analysis of the General Effect of Stimuli 
in Living Substances. By Max Verworn, M.D., Ph.D., Professor at 
Bonn Physiological Institute. (Second printing.) 

Stellar Motions. With Special Reference to Motions Determined by 
Means of the Spectrograph. By William Wallace Campbell, Sc.D., 
LL.D., Director of the Lick Observatory, University of California. 
(Second printing.) 

Problems of Genetics. By William Bateson, M.A., F.R.S., Director 
of the John Innes Horticultural Institution, Merton Park, Surrey, 
England. (Out of print.) 

The Problem op Volcanism. By Joseph Paxson Iddings, Ph.B., 
Sc.D. (Second printing.) 

Problems op American Geology. By William North Rice, Frank D. 
Adams, Arthur P. Coleman, Charles D. Walcott, Waldbmar 
Lindgren, Frederick Leslie Ransome, and William D. Matthew. 
(Second printing.) 

Organism and Environment as Illustrated by the Physiology op 
Breathing. By J. S. Haldane, M.A., M.D., F.R.S., Hon. LL.D. 
Birm. and Edin., Fellow of New College, Oxford; Honorary Profes- 
sor, Birmingham University. (Second printing.) 

A Century op Science in America. With Special Reference to the 
American Journal of Science 1818-1918. By Edward Salisbury 
Dana, Charles Schuchert, Herbert E. Gregory, Joseph Barrell, 
George Otis Smith, Richard Swann Lull, Louis V. Pirsson, Wil- 



210 


THE REALM OF THE NEBULiE 


liiAM E. Ford, R. B. Sosmait, Horace L. Weia,s, Harry W. Fooo®, 
Leigh Page, WesiiEY R. Coe, and George L. Goodale. 

A Treatise oh the Transformation of the Intestinal Flora "with 
Special Reference to the Implantation of Bacillus Acidophilus. 
By Leo F. Rettger, Professor of Bacteriology, Yale University, and 
Harry A. Cheplin, Seessel Fellow in Bacteriology, Yale University. 
(Out of print.) 

The Evolution of Modern Medicine. By Sir William Osler, Bart., 
M.D., F.R.S. (Fourth printing.) 

Respiration. By J. S. Haldane, M.A., M.D., F.R.S., Hon. LL.D. Birm. 
AND Edin., Fellow of New College, Oxford; Honorary Professor, 
Birmingham University. (Second printing.) 

After Life in Roman Paganism. By Franz Cumont. (Second edi- 
tion. ) 

The Anatomy and Physiology of Capillaries. By August Krogh, 
Ph.D., LL.D., Professor of Zoo-physiology, Copenhagen University. 
(Second printing. Second edition.) 

Lectures on Caughy^s Problem in Linear Partial Differential 
Equations. By Jacques Hadamabd, LL.D., Member of the French 
Academy of Sciences; Foreign Honorary Member of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences. 

The Theory of the Gene. By Thomas Hunt Morgan, LL.D., Sc.D., 
Ph.D., Professor of Experimental Zoology in Columbia University. 
(Third printing. Second edition.) 

The Anatomy of Science. By Gilbert N. Lewis, Ph.D., Sc.D., Pro- 
fessor of Chemistry and Dean of the College of Chemistry, Univer- 
sity of California. (Second printing.) 

Blood. A Study in General Physiology. By Lawrence J. Henderson, 
A.B., M.D., Professor of Biological Chemistry in Harvard University. 

On the Mechanism of Oxidation. By Heinrich Wieland, Professor 
of Organic Chemistry, University of Munich. (Second printing.) 

Molecular Hydrogen and Its Spectrum. By Owen Willans Rich- 
ardson, Yarrow Research Professor of the Royal Society, King’s Col- 
lege, London. 

The Changing World of the Ice Age. By Reginald Ald worth Daly, 
Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology, Harvard University. (Second 
printing.) 

The Realm of the Nebula. By Edwin Hubble. 











