For Ann Druyan 


In the vastness of space and the immensity of time, 
it is my joy to share 
a planet and an epoch with Annie. 



Contents 


Introduction — xi 

1 — The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 3 
2 — One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 23 
3 — The Harmony of Worlds — 45 
4 — Heaven and Hell — 73 
5 — Blues for a Red Planet — 105 
6 — Travelers’ Tales —137 
7 — The Backbone of Night — 167 
8 — Travels in Space and Time —195 

9 — The Lives of the Stars — 217 

10 — The Edge of Forever — 245 

11 — The Persistence of Memory — 269 
12 — Encyclopaedia Galactica — 291 
13 — Who Speaks for Earth? — 317 
Appendix 1: Reductio ad A bsurdum and the Square Root of Two — 347 
Appendix 2: The Five Pythagorean Solids — 348 
For Further Reading — 350 
Index -357 



INTRODUCTION 


The time will come when diligent research over long 
periods will bring to light things which now lie hidden. A 
single lifetime, even though entirely devoted to the sky, 
would not be enough for the investigation of so vast a 
subject . . . And so this knowledge will be unfolded only 
through long successive ages. There will come a time when 
our descendants will be amazed that we did not know 
things that are so plain to them . . . Many discoveries are 
reserved for ages still to come, when memory of us will 
have been effaced. Our universe is a sorry little affair unless 
it has in it something for every age to investigate . . . Nature 
does not reveal her mysteries once and for all. 

—Seneca, Natural Questions , 
Book 7, first century 

In ancient times, in everyday speech and custom, the most 
mundane happenings were connected with the grandest cosmic 
events. A charming example is an incantation against the worm 
which the Assyrians of 1000 B.C. imagined to cause toothaches. 
It begins with the origin of the universe and ends with a cure for 
toothache: 

After Anu had created the heaven, 

And the heaven had created the earth, 

And the earth had created the rivers, 

And the rivers had created the canals, 

And the canals had created the morass, 

And the morass had created the worm, 

The worm went before Shamash, weeping, 

His tears flowing before Ea: 

“What wilt thou give me for my food, 

What wilt thou give me for my drink?” 

“I will give thee the dried fig 
And the apricot.” 

“What are these to me? The dried fig 
And the apricot! 

Lift me up, and among the teeth 
And the gums let me dwell!...” 

Because thou hast said this, O worm, 

May Ea smite thee with the might of 
His hand! 

(Incantation against toothache.) 

Its treatment: Second-grade beer . . . and oil thou shalt mix 
together; 

The incantation thou shalt recite three times thereon and 
shalt put the medicine upon the tooth. 



xii - Introduction 


Our ancestors were eager to understand the world but had not 
quite stumbled upon the method. They imagined a small, quaint, 
tidy universe in which the dominant forces were gods like Anu, 
Ea, and Shamash. In that universe humans played an important if 
not a central role. We were intimately bound up with the rest of 
nature. The treatment of toothache with second-rate beer was 
tied to the deepest cosmological mysteries. 

Today we have discovered a powerful and elegant way to 
understand the universe, a method called science; it has revealed 
to us a universe so ancient and so vast that human affairs seem at 
first sight to be of little consequence. We have grown distant 
from the Cosmos. It has seemed remote and irrelevant to every¬ 
day concerns. But science has found not only that the universe 
has a reeling and ecstatic grandeur, not only that it is accessible to 
human understanding, but also that we are, in a very real and 
profound sense, a part of that Cosmos, born from it, our fate 
deeply connected with it. The most basic human events and the 
most trivial trace back to the universe and its origins. This book 
is devoted to the exploration of that cosmic perspective. 

In the summer and fall of 1976, as a member of the Viking 
Lander Imaging Flight Team, I was engaged, with a hundred of 
my scientific colleagues, in the exploration of the planet Mars. 
For the first time in human history we had landed two space 
vehicles on the surface of another world. The results, described 
more fully in Chapter 5, were spectacular, the historical signifi¬ 
cance of the mission utterly apparent. And yet the general public 
was learning almost nothing of these great happenings. The press 
was largely inattentive; television ignored the mission almost 
altogether. When it became clear that a definitive answer on 
whether there is life on Mars would not be forthcoming, interest 
dwindled still further. There was little tolerance for ambiguity. 
When we found the sky of Mars to be a kind of pinkish-yellow 
rather than the blue which had erroneously first been reported, 
the announcement was greeted by a chorus of good-natured boos 
from the assembled reporters—they wanted Mars to be, even in 
this respect, like the Earth. They believed that their audiences 
would be progressively disinterested as Mars was revealed to be 
less and less like the Earth. And yet the Martian landscapes are 
staggering, the vistas breathtaking. I was positive from my own 
experience that an enormous global interest exists in the explo¬ 
ration of the planets and in many kindred scientific topics—the 
origin of life, the Earth, and the Cosmos, the search for extrater¬ 
restrial intelligence, our connection with the universe. And I was 
certain that this interest could be excited through that most 
powerful communications medium, television. 

My feelings were shared by B. Gentry Lee, the Viking Data 
Analysis and Mission Planning Director, a man of extraordinary 
organizational abilities. We decided, gamely, to do something 
about the problem ourselves. Lee proposed that we form a 



Introduction - xiii 


production company devoted to the communication of science in an 
engaging and accessible way. In the following months we were 
approached on a number of projects. But by far the most inter- 
esting was an inquiry tendered by KCET, the Public Broadcasting 
Service’s outlet in Los Angeles. Eventually, we jointly agreed to 
produce a thirteen-part television series oriented toward astron- 
omy but with a very broad human perspective. It was to be 
aimed at popular audiences, to be visually and musically stum 
ning, and to engage the heart as well as the mind. We talked with 
underwriters, hired an executive producer, and found ourselves 
embarked on a three-year project called Cosmos. At this writing 
it has an estimated worldwide viewing audience of 140 million 
people, or 3 percent of the human population of the planet Earth. 
It is dedicated to the proposition that the public is far more 
intelligent than it has generally been given credit for; that the 
deepest scientific questions on the nature and origin of the world 
excite the interests and passions of enormous numbers of people. 
The present epoch is a major crossroads for our civilization and 
perhaps for our species. Whatever road we take, our fate is 
indissolubly bound up with science. It is essential as a matter of 
simple survival for us to understand science. In addition, science 
is a delight; evolution has arranged that we take pleasure in 
understanding—those who understand are more likely to survive. 
The Cosmos television series and this book represent a hopeful 
experiment in communicating some of the ideas, methods and 
joys of science. 

The book and the television series evolved together. In some 
sense each is based on the other. Many illustrations in this book 
are based on the striking visuals prepared for the television series. 
But books and television series have somewhat different audi¬ 
ences and admit differing approaches. One of the great virtues of 
a book is that it is possible for the reader to return repeatedly to 
obscure or difficult passages; this is only beginning to become 
possible, with the development of videotape and video-disc 
technology, for television. There is much more freedom for the 
author in choosing the range and depth of topics for a chapter in 
a book than for the procrustean fifty-eight minutes, thirty sec¬ 
onds of a noncommercial television program. This book goes 
more deeply into many topics than does the television series. 
There are topics discussed in the book which are not treated in 
the television series and vice versa. The sequence of drawings, 
after Tenniel, of Alice and her friends in high- and low-gravity 
environments were uncertain, at this writing, to survive the 
rigors of television editing. I am delighted that these charming 
illustrations by the artist, Brown, and the accompanying discus¬ 
sion have found a home here. On the other hand, explicit rep¬ 
resentations of the Cosmic Calendar, featured in the television 
series, do not appear here—in part because the Cosmic Calendar 
is discussed in my book The Dragons of Eden; likewise, I do not 



xiv — Introduction 


here discuss the life of Robert Goddard in much detail, because 
there is a chapter in Brocas Brain devoted to him. But each 
episode of the television series follows fairly closely the corre- 
sponding chapter of this book; and I like to think that the plea- 
sure of each will be enhanced by reference to the other. 

For clarity, I have in a number of cases introduced an idea 
more than once—the first time lightly, and with deeper passes on 
subsequent appearances. This occurs, for example, in the intro- 
duction to cosmic objects in Chapter 1, which are examined in 
greater detail later on; or in the discussion of mutations, enzymes 
and nucleic acids in Chapter 2. In a few cases, concepts are 
presented out of historical order. For example, the ideas of the 
ancient Greek scientists are presented in Chapter 7, well after the 
discussion of Johannes Kepler in Chapter 3. But I believe an 
appreciation of the Greeks can best be provided after we see 
what they barely missed achieving. 

Because science is inseparable from the rest of the human 
endeavor, it cannot be discussed without making contact, some¬ 
times glancing, sometimes head-on, with a number of social, 
political, religious and philosophical issues. Even in the filming of 
a television series on science, the worldwide devotion to military 
activities becomes intrusive. Simulating the exploration of Mars 
in the Mohave Desert with a full-scale version of the Viking 
Lander, we were repeatedly interrupted by the United States Air 
Force, performing bombing runs in a nearby test range. In Alex¬ 
andria, Egypt, from nine to eleven A.M. every morning, our hotel 
was the subject of practice strafing runs by the Egyptian Air 
Force. In Samos, Greece, permission to film anywhere was with¬ 
held until the very last moment because of NATO maneuvers 
and what was clearly the construction of a warren of under¬ 
ground and hillside emplacements for artillery and tanks. In 
Czechoslovakia the use of walkie-talkies for organizing the film¬ 
ing logistics on a rural road attracted the attention of a Czech Air 
Force fighter, which circled overhead until reassured in Czech 
that no threat to national security was being perpetrated. In 
Greece, Egypt and Czechoslovakia our film crews were accom¬ 
panied everywhere by agents of the state security apparatus. 
Preliminary inquiries about filming in Kaluga, U.S.S.R., for a 
proposed discussion of the life of the Russian pioneer of astro¬ 
nautics Konstantin Tsiolkovsky were discouraged—because, as 
we later discovered, trials of dissidents were to be conducted 
there. Our camera crews met innumerable kindnesses in every 
country we visited; but the global military presence, the fear in 
the hearts of the nations, was everywhere. The experience con¬ 
firmed my resolve to treat, when relevant, social questions both 
in the series and in the book. 

The essence of science is that it is self-correcting. New experi¬ 
mental results and novel ideas are continually resolving old mys¬ 
teries. For example, in Chapter 9 we discuss the fact that the Sun 



Introduction — xv 


seems to be generating too few of the elusive particles called 
neutrinos. Some proposed explanations are listed. In Chapter 10 
we wonder whether there is enough matter in the universe 
eventually to stop the recession of distant galaxies, and whether 
the universe is infinitely old and therefore uncreated. Some light 
on both these questions may since have been cast in experiments 
by Frederick Reines, of the University of California, who be- 
lieves he has discovered (a) that neutrinos exist in three different 
states, only one of which could be detected by neutrino tele- 
scopes studying the Sun; and (b) that neutrinos—unlike light- 
have mass, so that the gravity of all the neutrinos in space may 
help to close the Cosmos and prevent it from expanding forever. 
Future experiments will show whether these ideas are correct. 
But they illustrate the continuing and vigorous reassessment of 
received wisdom which is fundamental to the scientific enter- 
prise. 

On a project of this magnitude it is impossible to thank every- 
one who has made a contribution. However, I would like to 
acknowledge, especially, B. Gentry Lee; the Cosmos production 
staff, including the senior producers Geoffrey Haines-Stiles and 
David Kennard and the executive producer Adrian Malone; the 
artists Jon Lomberg (who played a critical role in the original 
design and organization of the Cosmos visuals), John Allison, 
Adolf Schaller, Rick Sternbach, Don Davis, Brown, and Anne 
Norcia; consultants Donald Goldsmith, Owen Gingerich, Paul 
Fox, and Diane Ackerman; Cameron Beck; the KCET manage- 
ment, particularly Greg Andorfer, who first carried KCET’s pn> 
posal to us, Chuck Allen, William Lamb, and James Loper; and 
the underwriters and co-producers of the Cosmos television 
series, including the Atlantic Richfield Company, the Corpora- 
tion for Public Broadcasting, the Arthur Vining Davis Founda- 
tions, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the British Broadcasting 
Corporation, and Polytel International. Others who helped in 
clarifying matters of fact or approach are listed at the back of the 
book. The final responsibility for the content of the book is, 
however, of course mine. I thank the staff at Random House, 
particularly my editor, Anne Freedgood, and the book designer, 
Robert Aulicino, for their capable work and their patience when 
the deadlines for the television series and the book seemed to be 
in conflict. I owe a special debt of gratitude to Shirley Arden, my 
Executive Assistant, for typing the early drafts of this book and 
ushering the later drafts through all stages of production with her 
usual cheerful competence. This is only one of many ways in 
which the Cosmos project is deeply indebted to her. I am more 
grateful than I can say to the administration of Cornell Univer¬ 
sity for granting me a two-year leave of absence to pursue this 
project, to my colleagues and students there, and to my col¬ 
leagues at NASA, JPL and on the Voyager Imaging Team. 

My greatest debt for the writing of Cosmos is owed to Ann 



xvi — Introduction 


Druyan and Steven Soter, my co-writers in the television series. 
They made fundamental and frequent contributions to the basic 
ideas and their connections, to the overall intellectual structure 
of the episodes, and to the felicity of style. I am deeply grateful 
for their vigorous critical readings of early versions of this book, 
their constructive and creative suggestions for revision through 
many drafts, and their major contributions to the television script 
which in many ways influenced the content of this book. The 
delight I found in our many discussions is one of my chief 
rewards from the Cosmos project. 


Ithaca and Los Angeles 
May 1980 



COSMOS 



A small cluster of galaxies, including a spiral and an elliptical Painting by Adolf Schaller. 




THE SHORES 
OF THE COSMIC OCEAN 


The first men to be created and formed were called the Sorcerer of Fatal 
Laughter, the Sorcerer of Night, Unkempt, and the Black Sorcerer . . . They 
were endowed with intelligence, they succeeded in knowing all that there is 
in the world. When they looked, instantly they saw all that is around them, 
and they contemplated in turn the arc of heaven and the round face of the 
earth .. . [Then the Creator said]: “They know all. . . what shall we do with 
them now? Let their sight reach only to that which is near; let them see only 
a little of the face of the earth! . . . Are they not by nature simple creatures 
of our making? Must they also be gods?” 

—The Popol Vuh of the Quiche Maya 


Have you comprehended the expanse of the earth? 
Where is the way to the dwelling of light, 

And where is the place of darkness . . . ? 

—The Book of Job 


It is not from space that I must seek my dignity, but from the government of 
my thought. I shall have no more if I possess worlds. By space the universe 
encompasses and swallows me up like an atom; by thought I comprehend 
the world. 

—Blaise Pascal, Pensees 


The known is finite, the unknown infinite; intellectually we stand on an islet 
in the midst of an illimitable ocean of inexplicability. Our business in every 
generation is to reclaim a little more land. 

-T. H. Huxley, 1887 




4 — Cosmos 



A more extended cluster of galaxies, in¬ 
cluding (bottom right ) an irregular galaxy. 
Painting by Adolf Schaller and Rick 
Sternbach. 


A rare ring galaxy, with one of its constit¬ 
uent stars glowing blue in a supernova ex¬ 
plosion. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 


The Cosmos is all that is or ever was or ever will 

BE. Our feeblest contemplations of the Cosmos stir us—there is a 
tingling in the spine, a catch in the voice, a faint sensation, as if a 
distant memory, of falling from a height. We know we are ap¬ 
proaching the greatest of mysteries. 

The size and age of the Cosmos are beyond ordinary human 
understanding. Lost somewhere between immensity and eternity 
is our tiny planetary home. In a cosmic perspective, most human 
concerns seem insignificant, even petty. And yet our species is 
young and curious and brave and shows much promise. In the 
last few millennia we have made the most astonishing and unex¬ 
pected discoveries about the Cosmos and our place within it, 
explorations that are exhilarating to consider. They remind us 
that humans have evolved to wonder, that understanding is a 
joy, that knowledge is prerequisite to survival. I believe our 
future depends on how well we know this Cosmos in which we 
float like a mote of dust in the morning sky. 

Those explorations required skepticism and imagination both. 
Imagination will often carry us to worlds that never were. But 
without it, we go nowhere. Skepticism enables us to distinguish 
fancy from fact, to test our speculations. The Cosmos is rich 
beyond measure—in elegant facts, in exquisite interrelationships, 
in the subtle machinery of awe. 




The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 5 


The surface of the Earth is the shore of the cosmic ocean. 

From it we have learned most of what we know. Recently, we 
have waded a little out to sea, enough to dampen our toes or, at 
most, wet our ankles. The water seems inviting. The ocean calls. 

Some part of our being knows this is from where we came. We 
long to return. These aspirations are not, I think, irreverent, 
although they may trouble whatever gods may be. 

The dimensions of the Cosmos are so large that using familiar 
units of distance, such as meters or miles, chosen for their utility 
on Earth, would make little sense. Instead, we measure distance 
with the speed of light. In one second a beam of light travels Exploding radio galaxy with symmetrical 
186,000 miles, nearly 300,000 kilometers or seven times around jets. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 
the Earth. In eight minutes it will travel from the Sun to the 
Earth. We can say the Sun is eight light-minutes away. In a year, 
it crosses nearly ten trillion kilometers, about six trillion miles, of 
intervening space. That unit of length, the distance light goes in a 
year, is called a light-year. It measures not time but distances— 
enormous distances. 

The Earth is a place. It is by no means the only place. It is not 
even a typical place. No planet or star or galaxy can be typical, 
because the Cosmos is mostly empty. The only typical place is 
within the vast, cold, universal vacuum, the everlasting night of 
intergalactic space, a place so strange and desolate that, by com¬ 
parison, planets and stars and galaxies seem achingly rare and 
lovely. If we were randomly inserted into the Cosmos, the 
chance that we would find ourselves on or near a planet would 
be less than one in a billion trillion trillion* (10 33 , a one followed 
by 33 zeroes). In everyday life such odds are called compelling. 

Worlds are precious. 

From an intergalactic vantage point we would see, strewn like 
sea froth on the waves of space, innumerable faint, wispy tendrils 
of light. These are the galaxies. Some are solitary wanderers; 
most inhabit communal clusters, huddling together, drifting end¬ 
lessly in the great cosmic dark. Before us is the Cosmos on the 
grandest scale we know. We are in the realm of the nebulae, 
eight billion light-years from Earth, halfway to the edge of the 
known universe. 

A galaxy is composed of gas and dust and stars—billions upon 
billions of stars. Every star may be a sun to someone. Within a 
galaxy are stars and worlds and, it may be, a proliferation of 
living things and intelligent beings and spacefaring civilizations. 

But from afar, a galaxy reminds me more of a collection of lovely 
found objects—seashells, perhaps, or corals, the productions of 
Nature laboring for aeons in the cosmic ocean. 

There are some hundred billion (10 11 ) galaxies, each with, on 



* We use the American scientific convention for large numbers: one 
billion = 1,000,000,000 = 10 9 ; one trillion = 1,000,000,000,000 = 
10 12 , etc. The exponent counts the number of zeroes after the one. 





6 — Cosmos 



The large-scale texture of the Cosmos: a small sampling from a map of the million brightest galaxies, all within a 
billion light-years distance from the Earth. Each little square is a galaxy containing billions of stars. The map is based 
on a telescopic survey, taking twelve years to complete, by Donald Shane and Carl Wirtanen at the University of 
California’s Lick Observatory. Courtesy Stewart Brand. 



The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 7 


the average, a hundred billion stars. In all the galaxies, there are 
perhaps as many planets as stars, 10 11 * 10 11 = 10 22 , ten billion 
trillion. In the face of such overpowering numbers, what is the 
likelihood that only one ordinary star, the Sun, is accompanied 
by an inhabited planet? Why should we, tucked away in some 
forgotten corner of the Cosmos, be so fortunate? To me, it seems 
far more likely that the universe is brimming over with life. But 
we humans do not yet know. We are just beginning our explora- 
tions. From eight billion light-years away we are hard pressed to 
find even the cluster in which our Milky Way Galaxy is embed¬ 
ded, much less the Sun or the Earth. The only planet we are sure 
is inhabited is a tiny speck of rock and metal, shining feebly by 
reflected sunlight, and at this distance utterly lost. 

But presently our journey takes us to what astronomers on 
Earth like to call the Local Group of galaxies. Several million 


A barred spiral galaxy, so-called from the 
bar of stars and dust which transects the 
core. Painting by Jon Lomberg. 


A typical spiral galaxy. Painting by Jon 
Lomberg. 





8 - Cosmos 


The Milky Way from slightly above the 
plane of its spiral arms, which are illume 
nated by billions of hot, young blue stars. 
The galactic core, illuminated by older, 
redder stars, is seen in the distance. Paint- 
ing by Jon Lomberg. 


light-years across, it is composed of some twenty constituent 
galaxies. It is a sparse and obscure and unpretentious cluster. One 
of these galaxies is M31, seen from the Earth in the constellation 
Andromeda. Like other spiral galaxies, it is a huge pinwheel of 
stars, gas and dust. M31 has two small satellites, dwarf elliptical 
galaxies bound to it by gravity, by the identical law of physics 
that tends to keep me in my chair. The laws of nature are the 
same throughout the Cosmos. We are now two million light- 
years from home. 

Beyond M31 is another, very similar galaxy, our own, its spiral 
arms turning slowly, once every quarter billion years. Now, forty 
thousand light-years from home, we find ourselves falling toward 
the massive center of the Milky Way. But if we wish to find the 
Earth, we must redirect our course to the remote outskirts of the 
Galaxy, to an obscure locale near the edge of a distant spiral arm. 

Our overwhelming impression, even between the spiral arms, 
is of stars streaming by us—a vast array of exquisitely self-lumi¬ 
nous stars, some as flimsy as a soap bubble and so large that they 
could contain ten thousand Suns or a trillion Earths; others the 




The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 9 



A globular cluster of stars, orbiting the galactic core. Painting by Anne Norcia. 





10 — Cosmos 



The core of the Milky Way Galaxy, seen 
edge-on. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 



A red giant star (foreground) and a spiral 
arm in the distance, seen edge-on. Painting 
by John Allison and Adolf Schaller. 


size of a small town and a hundred trillion times denser than lead. 
Some stars are solitary, like the Sun. Most have companions. 
Systems are commonly double, two stars orbiting one another. 
But there is a continuous gradation from triple systems through 
loose clusters of a few dozen stars to the great globular clusters, 
resplendent with a million suns. Some double stars are so close 
that they touch, and starstuff flows between them. Most are as 
separated as Jupiter is from the Sun. Some stars, the supernovae, 
are as bright as the entire galaxy that contains them; others, the 
black holes, are invisible from a few kilometers away. Some shine 
with a constant brightness; others flicker uncertainly or blink 
with an unfaltering rhythm. Some rotate in stately elegance; 
others spin so feverishly that they distort themselves to oblate¬ 
ness. Most shine mainly in visible and infrared light; others are 
also brilliant sources of X-rays or radio waves. Blue stars are hot 
and young; yellow stars, conventional and middle-aged; red stars, 
often elderly and dying; and small white or black stars are in the 
final throes of death. The Milky Way contains some 400 billion 
stars of all sorts moving with a complex and orderly grace. Of all 
the stars, the inhabitants of Earth know close-up, so far, but one. 

Each star system is an island in space, quarantined from its 
neighbors by the light-years. I can imagine creatures evolving 
into glimmerings of knowledge on innumerable worlds, every 
one of them assuming at first their puny planet and paltry few 
suns to be all that is. We grow up in isolation. Only slowly do we 
teach ourselves the Cosmos. 

Some stars may be surrounded by millions of lifeless and rocky 
worldlets, planetary systems frozen at some early stage in their 
evolution. Perhaps many stars have planetary systems rather like 
our own: at the periphery, great gaseous ringed planets and icy 
moons, and nearer to the center, small, warm, blue-white, cloud- 


A black dust cloud, and stars embedded in 
gaseous nebulosities; behind them is the 
Milky Way, edge-on. Painting by Adolf 
Schaller and John Allison. 







The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean -11 


covered worlds. On some, intelligent life may have evolved, 
reworking the planetary surface in some massive engineering 
enterprise. These are our brothers and sisters in the Cosmos. Are 
they very different from us? What is their form, biochemistry, 
neurobiology, history, politics, science, technology, art, music, 
religion, philosophy? Perhaps some day we will know them. 

We have now reached our own backyard, a light-year from 
Earth. Surrounding our Sun is a spherical swarm of giant snow¬ 
balls composed of ice and rock and organic molecules: the come¬ 
tary nuclei. Every now and then a passing star gives a tiny 
gravitational tug, and one of them obligingly careens into the 
inner solar system. There the Sun heats it, the ice is vaporized, 
and a lovely cometary tail develops. 

We approach the planets of our system, largish worlds, cap¬ 
tives of the Sun, gravitationally constrained to follow nearly 
circular orbits, heated mainly by sunlight. Pluto, covered with 
methane ice and accompanied by its solitary giant moon Charon, 
is illuminated by a distant Sun, which appears as no more than a 
bright point of light in a pitch-black sky. The giant gas worlds, 
Neptune, Uranus, Saturn—the jewel of the solar system—and 
Jupiter all have an entourage of icy moons. Interior to the region 
of gassy planets and orbiting icebergs are the warm, rocky prov¬ 
inces of the inner solar system. There is, for example, the red 
planet Mars, with soaring volcanoes, great rift valleys, enormous 
planet-wide sandstorms, and, just possibly, some simple forms of 
life. All the planets orbit the Sun, the nearest star, an inferno of 
hydrogen and helium gas engaged in thermonuclear reactions, 
flooding the solar system with light. 

Finally, at the end of all our wanderings, we return to our tiny, 
fragile, blue-white world, lost in a cosmic ocean vast beyond our 
most courageous imaginings. It is a world among an immensity of 
others. It may be significant only for us. The Earth is our home, 
our parent. Our kind of life arose and evolved here. The human 
species is coming of age here. It is on this world that we developed 



The interior of a black dust cloud, where 
young stars are just beginning to shine. 
Nearby icy planets are evaporating and 
the released gas is being blown away, like a 
comet’s tail. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 



A rapidly rotating, flashing pulsar at the 
center of a supernova remnant. Painting 
by John Allison. 



The nebula, or illuminated gas cloud, sur¬ 
rounding a supernova explosion. Painting 
by John Allison. 





12 — Cosmos 


The other side of the Orion Nebula, un- 
observable from Earth. The three blue 
stars comprise the belt of Orion in the 
conventional terrestrial constellation. 
Painting by John Allison. 



An approach to the interior of the Great 
Nebula in Orion. The gas is shining in 
several colors, stimulated by the light of 
hot stars. Part of the nebula is obscured by 
a cloud of absorbing dust. The Orion 
Nebula can be seen from the Earth with 
the naked eye. Painting by John Allison. 



our passion for exploring the Cosmos, and it is here that we 
are, in some pain and with no guarantees, working out our des^ 
tiny. 

Welcome to the planet Earth—a place of blue nitrogen skies, 
oceans of liquid water, cool forests and soft meadows, a world 
positively rippling with life. In the cosmic perspective it is, as I 
have said, poignantly beautiful and rare; but it is also, for the 
moment, unique. In all our journeying through space and time, it 
is, so far, the only world on which we know with certainty that 
the matter of the Cosmos has become alive and aware. There 
must be many such worlds scattered through space, but our 
search for them begins here, with the accumulated wisdom of the 
men and women of our species, garnered at great cost over a 
million years. We are privileged to live among brilliant and 
passionately inquisitive people, and in a time when the search for 
knowledge is generally prized. Human beings, born ultimately of 
the stars and now for a while inhabiting a world called Earth, 
have begun their long voyage home. 

The discovery that the Earth is a little world was made, as so 




The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean - 13 



We emerge through the dark dust of the 
Orion Nebula to its hidden interior, bril¬ 
liantly illuminated by hot young stars. 
Painting by John Allison. 




The Pleiades, young stars that have re^ 
cently left the nebulae in which they were 
born, still trailing clouds of illuminated 
dust. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 













14 - Cosmos 



Pluto, covered with methane frost, and its 
giant moon Charon. Usually the outer- 
most planet, Plutos orbit has recently can 
ried it interior to the orbit of Neptune. 
Painting by John Allison. 



Saturn. Model by Adolf Schaller, Rick 
Sternbach and John Allison. 



Io, the innermost large moon of Jupiter. 
Model by Don Davis. 


many important human discoveries were, in the ancient Near 
East, in a time some humans call the third century b.c., in the 
greatest metropolis of the age, the Egyptian city of Alexandria. 
Here there lived a man named Eratosthenes. One of his envious 
contemporaries called him “Beta,” the second letter of the Greek 
alphabet, because, he said, Eratosthenes was second best in the 
world in everything. But it seems clear that in almost everything 
Eratosthenes was “Alpha.” He was an astronomer, historian, ge- 
ographer, philosopher, poet, theater critic and mathematician. 
The titles of the books he wrote range from Astronomy to On 
Freedom from Pain . He was also the director of the great library 
of Alexandria, where one day he read in a papyrus book that in 
the southern frontier outpost of Syene, near the first cataract of 
the Nile, at noon on June 21 vertical sticks cast no shadows. On 
the summer solstice, the longest day of the year, as the hours 
crept toward midday, the shadows of temple columns grew 
shorter. At noon, they were gone. A reflection of the Sun could 
then be seen in the water at the bottom of a deep well. The Sun 
was directly overhead. 

It was an observation that someone else might easily have 
ignored. Sticks, shadows, reflections in wells, the position of the 
Sun—of what possible importance could such simple everyday 
matters be? But Eratosthenes was a scientist, and his musings on 
these commonplaces changed the world; in a way, they made the 
world. Eratosthenes had the presence of mind to do an experi¬ 
ment, actually to observe whether in Alexandria vertical sticks 
cast shadows near noon on June 21. And, he discovered, sticks 
do. 

Eratosthenes asked himself how, at the same moment, a stick 
in Syene could cast no shadow and a stick in Alexandria, far to 
the north, could cast a pronounced shadow. Consider a map of 
ancient Egypt with two vertical sticks of equal length, one stuck 
in Alexandria, the other in Syene. Suppose that, at a certain 
moment, each stick casts no shadow at all. This is perfectly easy 
to understand—provided the Earth is flat. The Sun would then 
be directly overhead. If the two sticks cast shadows of equal 
length, that also would make sense on a flat Earth: the Sun’s rays 
would then be inclined at the same angle to the two sticks. But 
how could it be that at the same instant there was no shadow at 
Syene and a substantial shadow at Alexandria? (See p. 16.) 

The only possible answer, he saw, was that the surface of the 
Earth is curved. Not only that: the greater the curvature, the 
greater the difference in the shadow lengths. The Sun is so far 
away that its rays are parallel when they reach the Earth. Sticks 
placed at different angles to the Sun’s rays cast shadows of dif¬ 
ferent lengths. For the observed difference in the shadow 
lengths, the distance between Alexandria and Syene had to be 
about seven degrees along the surface of the Earth; that is, if you 
imagine the sticks extending down to the center of the Earth, 






The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 15 


they would there intersect at an angle of seven degrees. Seven 
degrees is something like one-fiftieth of three hundred and sixty 
degrees, the full circumference of the Earth. Eratosthenes knew 
that the distance between Alexandria and Syene was approxi- 
mately 800 kilometers, because he hired a man to pace it out. 
Eight hundred kilometers times 50 is 40,000 kilometers: so that 
must be the circumference of the Earth.* 

This is the right answer. Eratosthenes’ only tools were sticks, 
eyes, feet and brains, plus a taste for experiment. With them he 
deduced the circumference of the Earth with an error of only a 
few percent, a remarkable achievement for 2,200 years ago. He 
was the first person accurately to measure the size of a planet. 

The Mediterranean world at that time was famous for seafar- 
ing. Alexandria was the greatest seaport on the planet. Once you 
knew the Earth to be a sphere of modest diameter, would you 
not be tempted to make voyages of exploration, to seek out 
undiscovered lands, perhaps even to attempt to sail around the 
planet? Four hundred years before Eratosthenes, Africa had been 
circumnavigated by a Phoenician fleet in the employ of the 
Egyptian Pharaoh Necho. They set sail, probably in frail open 
boats, from the Red Sea, turned down the east coast of Africa up 
into the Atlantic, returning through the Mediterranean. This 
epic journey took three years, about as long as a modern Voyager 
spacecraft takes to fly from Earth to Saturn. 

After Eratosthenes’ discovery, many great voyages were an 
tempted by brave and venturesome sailors. Their ships were tiny. 
They had only rudimentary navigational instruments. They used 
dead reckoning and followed coastlines as far as they could. In an 
unknown ocean they could determine their latitude, but not their 
longitude, by observing, night after night, the position of the 
constellations with respect to the horizon. The familiar constel¬ 
lations must have been reassuring in the midst of an unexplored 
ocean. The stars are the friends of explorers, then with seagoing 
ships on Earth and now with spacefaring ships in the sky. After 
Eratosthenes, some may have tried, but not until the time of 
Magellan did anyone succeed in circumnavigating the Earth. 
What tales of daring and adventure must earlier have been re¬ 
counted as sailors and navigators, practical men of the world, 
gambled their lives on the mathematics of a scientist from Alex¬ 
andria? 

In Eratosthenes’ time, globes were constructed portraying the 
Earth as viewed from space; they were essentially correct in the 
well-explored Mediterranean but became more and more inaccu¬ 
rate the farther they strayed from home. Our present knowledge 
of the Cosmos shares this disagreeable but inevitable feature. In 


* Or if you like to measure things in miles, the distance between Alex¬ 
andria and Syene is about 500 miles, and 500 miles x 50 = 25,000 
miles. 



Olympus Mons (Mount Olympus), a giant 
volcanic construct, 30 kilometers high and 
500 kilometers across, on the surface of 
Mars. Model by Don Davis. 



A portrait of the Sun. Painting by Anne 
Norcia. 


Parallel Sun Rays 



From the shadow length in Alexandria, 
the angle A can be measured. But from 
simple geometry (“if two parallel straight 
lines are transected by a third line, the 
alternate interior angles are equal”), angle 
B equals angle A. So by measuring the 
shadow length in Alexandria, Eratos¬ 
thenes concluded that Syene was A = B 
= 7° away on the circumference of the 
Earth. 

















16 — Cosmos 



Looking up from the bottom of the well 
in ancient Syene, near present-day Abu 
Simbel, in Egypt, which according to local 
tradition is the origin of Eratosthenes’ 
study of the circumference of the Earth. 


the first century, the Alexandrian geographer Strabo wrote: 

Those who have returned from an attempt to circumnavi¬ 
gate the Earth do not say they have been prevented by an 
opposing continent, for the sea remained perfectly open, 
but, rather, through want of resolution and scarcity of pro¬ 
vision. . . . Eratosthenes says that if the extent of the At¬ 
lantic Ocean were not an obstacle, we might easily pass by 
sea from Iberia to India. ... It is quite possible that in the 
temperate zone there may be one or two habitable Earths. 

. . . Indeed, if [this other part of the world] is inhabited, it is 
not inhabited by men such as exist in our parts, and we 
should have to regard it as another inhabited world. 

Humans were beginning to venture, in almost every sense that 
matters, to other worlds. 

The subsequent exploration of the Earth was a worldwide 
endeavor, including voyages from as well as to China and Poly¬ 
nesia. The culmination was, of course, the discovery of America 
by Christopher Columbus and the journeys of the following few 
centuries, which completed the geographical exploration of the 
Earth. Columbus’ first voyage is connected in the most straight¬ 
forward way with the calculations of Eratosthenes. Columbus 
was fascinated by what he called “the Enterprise of the Indies,” a 
project to reach Japan, China and India not by following the 
coastline of Africa and sailing East but rather by plunging boldly 
into the unknown Western ocean—or, as Eratosthenes had said 
with startling prescience, “to pass by sea from Iberia to India.” 
Columbus had been an itinerant peddler of old maps and an 



A flat map of ancient Egypt. When 
the Sun is directly overhead, verti¬ 
cal obelisks cast no shadows in 
Alexandria or in Syene. 



A flat map of ancient Egypt. When 
the Sun is not directly overhead, 
vertical obelisks cast shadows of 
equal length in Alexandria and in 
Syene. 



A curved map of ancient Egypt. 
The Sun can be directly overhead in 
Syene but not in Alexandria, thus 
accounting for the fact that the 
obelisk in Syene casts no shadow, 
while that in Alexandria casts a 
pronounced shadow. 











The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 17 




Maps of the world. In the time of Homer, 
the world was thought to extend no fan 
ther than the basin of the Mediterranean 
(which means “middle of the Earth”), sun 
rounded by a world ocean. Significant inn 
provements were added by Eratosthenes 
and by Ptolemy. By the eleventh century, 
ancient geographical knowledge had been 
well-preserved (and extended to China) by 
the Arabs, but almost totally lost among 
the Europeans, who imagined a flat Earth 
centered on Jerusalem. The last map be¬ 
fore the discovery of America (shown in 
outline ) is that of the Florentine astron¬ 
omer Toscanelli. Columbus probably car¬ 
ried Toscanelli’s map with him on his first 
voyage. The name America, commem¬ 
orating Columbus’ friend Amerigo Ves¬ 
pucci, was suggested in Waldseemuller’s 
(1507) book, An Introduction to Cosmog¬ 
raphy. Reproduced courtesy Scottish 
Geographical Magazine. 


assiduous reader of the books by and about the ancient geogra¬ 
phers, including Eratosthenes, Strabo and Ptolemy. But for the 
Enterprise of the Indies to work, for ships and crews to survive 
the long voyage, the Earth had to be smaller than Eratosthenes 
had said. Columbus therefore cheated on his calculations, as the 
examining faculty of the University of Salamanca quite correctly 
pointed out. He used the smallest possible circumference of the 
Earth and the greatest eastward extension of Asia he could find 
in all the books available to him, and then exaggerated even 
those. Had the Americas not been in the way, Columbus’ expe¬ 
ditions would have failed utterly. 

The Earth is now thoroughly explored. It no longer promises 
new continents or lost lands. But the technology that allowed us 


WHEEL MAP 

Tzuago Hundi XI Coat. 






































18 — Cosmos 


to explore and inhabit the most remote regions of the Earth now 
permits us to leave our planet, to venture into space, to explore 
other worlds. Leaving the Earth, we are now able to view it from 
above, to see its solid spherical shape of Eratosthenian dimen¬ 
sions and the outlines of its continents, confirming that many of 
the ancient mapmakers were remarkably competent. What a 
pleasure such a view would have given to Eratosthenes and the 
other Alexandrian geographers. 

It was in Alexandria, during the six hundred years beginning 
around 300 B.C., that human beings, in an important sense, began 
the intellectual adventure that has led us to the shores of space. 
But of the look and feel of that glorious marble city, nothing 
remains. Oppression and the fear of learning have obliterated 
almost all memory of ancient Alexandria. Its population was 
marvelously diverse. Macedonian and later Roman soldiers, 

Egyptian priests, Greek aristocrats, Phoenician sailors, Jewish 
merchants, visitors from India and sub-Saharan Africa— 

everyone, except the vast slave population—lived together in 
harmony and mutual respect for most of the period of Alexan¬ 
dria’s greatness. 

The city was founded by Alexander the Great and constructed 
by his former bodyguard. Alexander encouraged respect for alien 
cultures and the open-minded pursuit of knowledge. According 
to tradition—and it does not much matter whether it really hap¬ 
pened—he descended beneath the Red Sea in the world’s first 
diving bell. He encouraged his generals and soldiers to marry 

Persian and Indian women. He respected the gods of other na¬ 

tions. He collected exotic lifeforms, including an elephant for 
Aristotle, his teacher. His city was constructed on a lavish scale, 
to be the world center of commerce, culture and learning. It was 
graced with broad avenues thirty meters wide, elegant architec¬ 
ture and statuary, Alexander’s monumental tomb, and an enor¬ 
mous lighthouse, the Pharos, one of the seven wonders of the 
ancient world. 

But the greatest marvel of Alexandria was the library and its 
associated museum (literally, an institution devoted to the spe¬ 
cialties of the Nine Muses). Of that legendary library, the most 
that survives today is a dank and forgotten cellar of the Sera- 
peum, the library annex, once a temple and later reconsecrated to 
knowledge. A few moldering shelves may be its only physical 
remains. Yet this place was once the brain and glory of the 
greatest city on the planet, the first true research institute in the 
history of the world. The scholars of the library studied the 
entire Cosmos. Cosmos is a Greek word for the order of the 
universe. It is, in a way, the opposite of Chaos . It implies the deep 
interconnectedness of all things. It conveys awe for the intricate 
and subtle way in which the universe is put together. Here was a 
community of scholars, exploring physics, literature, medicine, 
astronomy, geography, philosophy, mathematics, biology, and 



The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean — 19 



Cheng Ho, c» 1430 AD . LaPerouse, 1785 


engineering. Science and scholarship had come of age. Genius Exploratory routes of some of the great 

flourished there. The Alexandrian Library is where we humans voyages of discovery, 

first collected, seriously and systematically, the knowledge of the 
world. 

In addition to Eratosthenes, there was the astronomer Hip¬ 
parchus, who mapped the constellations and estimated the 
brightness of the stars; Euclid, who brilliantly systematized ge¬ 
ometry and told his king, struggling over a difficult mathematical 
problem, “There is no royal road to geometry”; Dionysius of 
Thrace, the man who defined the parts of speech and did for the 
study of language what Euclid did for geometry; Herophilus, the 
physiologist who firmly established that the brain rather than the 
heart is the seat of intelligence; Heron of Alexandria, inventor of 
gear trains and steam engines and the author of Automata , the 
first book on robots; Apollonius of Perga, the mathematician 
who demonstrated the forms of the conic sections*—ellipse, pa¬ 
rabola and hyperbola—the curves, as we now know, followed in 
their orbits by the planets, the comets and the stars; Archimedes, 
the greatest mechanical genius until Leonardo da Vinci; and the 
astronomer and geographer Ptolemy, who compiled much of 
what is today the pseudoscience of astrology: his Earth-centered 


* So called because they can be produced by slicing through a cone at 
various angles. Eighteen centuries later, the writings of Apollonius on 
conic sections would be employed by Johannes Kepler in understanding 
for the first time the movement of the planets. 













20 — Cosmos 



Serapis, a synthetic god, combining Greek 
and Egyptian attributes, introduced into 
Egypt by Ptolemy I in the third century 
B.C. He bolds a scepter as Cerberus, the 
three-headed dog of the underworld, 
waits at bis feet. 



Alexander the Great, with crook and flail, 
and pharaonic headgear, as he might have 
appeared in the Library of Alexandria. 



The lost books of Aristarchus, as they 
might have been stored on the shelves of 
the Alexandrian Library. 


universe held sway for 1,500 years, a reminder that intellectual 
capacity is no guarantee against being dead wrong. And among 
those great men was a great woman, Hypatia, mathematician and 
astronomer, the last light of the library, whose martyrdom was 
bound up with the destruction of the library seven centuries after 
its founding, a story to which we will return. 

The Greek Kings of Egypt who succeeded Alexander were 
serious about learning. For centuries, they supported research 
and maintained in the library a working environment for the best 
minds of the age. It contained ten large research halls, each 
devoted to a separate subject; fountains and colonnades; botani- 
cal gardens; a zoo; dissecting rooms; an observatory; and a great 
dining hall where, at leisure, was conducted the critical discussion 
of ideas. 

The heart of the library was its collection of books. The 
organizers combed all the cultures and languages of the world. 
They sent agents abroad to buy up libraries. Commercial ships 
docking in Alexandria were searched by the police—not for com 
traband, but for books. The scrolls were borrowed, copied and 
then returned to their owners. Accurate numbers are difficult to 
estimate, but it seems probable that the Library contained half a 
million volumes, each a handwritten papyrus scroll. What hap¬ 
pened to all those books? The classical civilization that created 
them disintegrated, and the library itself was deliberately de¬ 
stroyed. Only a small fraction of its works survived, along with a 
few pathetic scattered fragments. And how tantalizing those bits 
and pieces are! We know, for example, that there was on the 
library shelves a book by the astronomer Aristarchus of Samos, 
who argued that the Earth is one of the planets, which like them 
orbits the Sun, and that the stars are enormously far away. Each 
of these conclusions is entirely correct, but we had to wait nearly 
two thousand years for their rediscovery. If we multiply by a 
hundred thousand our sense of loss for this work of Aristarchus, 
we begin to appreciate the grandeur of the achievement of classi¬ 
cal civilization and the tragedy of its destruction. 

We have far surpassed the science known to the ancient 
world. But there are irreparable gaps in our historical knowledge. 
Imagine what mysteries about our past could be solved with a 
borrower’s card to the Alexandrian Library. We know of a 
three-volume history of the world, now lost, by a Babylonian 
priest named Berossus. The first volume dealt with the interval 
from the Creation to the Flood, a period he took to be 432,000 
years or about a hundred times longer than the Old Testament 
chronology. I wonder what was in it. 

The ancients knew that the world is very old. They sought to 
look into the distant past. We now know that the Cosmos is far 
older than they ever imagined. We have examined the universe 
in space and seen that we live on a mote of dust circling a 
humdrum star in the remotest corner of an obscure galaxy. And 










The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean - 21 



if we are a speck in the immensity of space, we also occupy an The Great Hall of the ancient Library of 

instant in the expanse of ages. We now know that our unf Alexandria in Egypt. A reconstruction 

verse—or at least its most recent incarnation—is some fifteen or based on scholarly evidence, 
twenty billion years old. This is the time since a remarkable 
explosive event called the Big Bang. At the beginning of this 
universe, there were no galaxies, stars or planets, no life or civili- 
zations, merely a uniform, radiant fireball filling all of space. The 
passage from the Chaos of the Big Bang to the Cosmos that we 
are beginning to know is the most awesome transformation of 
matter and energy that we have been privileged to glimpse. And 
until we find more intelligent beings elsewhere, we are ourselves 
the most spectacular of all the transformations—the remote de¬ 
scendants of the Big Bang, dedicated to understanding and fur¬ 
ther transforming the Cosmos from which we spring. 



















Life on Earth: A scanning electron micrograph of a mite, with hibiscus pollen. Courtesy JeamPaul Revel, California 
Institute of Technology. 



Chapter II 

ONEVOICE 

IN THE COSMIC FUGUE 


I am bidden to surrender myself to the Lord of the Worlds. 

He it is who created you of the dust. . . 

—The Koran, Sura 40 

The oldest of all philosophies, that of Evolution, was bound hand and foot 
and cast into utter darkness during the millennium of theological scholastic^ 
ism. But Darwin poured new lifeblood into the ancient frame; the bonds 
burst, and the revivified thought of ancient Greece has proved itself to be a 
more adequate expression of the universal order of things than any of the 
schemes which have been accepted by the credulity and welcomed by the 
superstition of 70 later generations of men. 

-T. H. Huxley, 1887 

Probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have 
descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first 
breathed. . . . There is grandeur in this view of life . . . that, whilst this 
planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so 
simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have 
been, and are being, evolved. 

—Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species, 1859 

A community of matter appears to exist throughout the visible universe, for 
the stars contain many of the elements which exist in the Sun and Earth. It is 
remarkable that the elements most widely diffused through the host of stars 
are some of those most closely connected with the living organisms of our 
globe, including hydrogen, sodium, magnesium, and iron. May it not be 
that, at least, the brighter stars are like our Sun, the upholding and energiz¬ 
ing centres of systems of worlds, adapted to be the abode of living beings? 

—William Huggins, 1865 





24 — Cosmos 



All MY LIFE I HAVE WONDERED about the possibility of life 
elsewhere. What would it be like? Of what would it be made? 
All living things on our planet are constructed of organic mole¬ 
cules—complex microscopic architectures in which the carbon 
atom plays a central role. There was once a time before life, 
when the Earth was barren and utterly desolate. Our world is 
now overflowing with life. How did it come about? How, in the 
absence of life, were carbon-based organic molecules made? How 
did the first living things arise? How did life evolve to produce 
beings as elaborate and complex as we, able to explore the mys¬ 
tery of our own origins? 


Dark cloud of interstellar dust. Such cloud 
complexes are filled with simple organic 
gases; the individual dust grains them¬ 
selves may be composed in part of organic 
molecules. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 


And on the countless other planets that may circle other suns, 
is there life also? Is extraterrestrial life, if it exists, based on the 
same organic molecules as life on Earth? Do the beings of other 
worlds look much like life on Earth? Or are they stunningly 
different—other adaptations to other environments? What else is 
possible? The nature of life on Earth and the search for life 
elsewhere are two sides of the same question—the search for who 
we are. 

In the great dark between the stars there are clouds of gas and 
dust and organic matter. Dozens of different kinds of organic 
molecules have been found there by radio telescopes. The abun¬ 
dance of these molecules suggests that the stuff of life is every¬ 
where. Perhaps the origin and evolution of life is, given enough 
time, a cosmic inevitability. On some of the billions of planets in 
the Milky Way Galaxy, life may never arise. On others, it may 
arise and die out, or never evolve beyond its simplest forms. And 
on some small fraction of worlds there may develop intelligences 
and civilizations more advanced than our own. 

Occasionally someone remarks on what a lucky coincidence it 
is that the Earth is perfectly suitable for life—moderate tempera¬ 
tures, liquid water, oxygen atmosphere, and so on. But this is, at 
least in part, a confusion of cause and effect. We earthlings are 
supremely well adapted to the environment of the Earth because 
we grew up here. Those earlier forms of life that were not well 
adapted died. We are descended from the organisms that did 
well. Organisms that evolve on a quite different world will 
doubtless sing its praises too. 

All life on Earth is closely related. We have a common organic 
chemistry and a common evolutionary heritage. As a result, our 
biologists are profoundly limited. They study only a single kind 
of biology, one lonely theme in the music of life. Is this faint and 
reedy tune the only voice for thousands of light-years? Or is there 
a kind of cosmic fugue, with themes and counterpoints, disso¬ 
nances and harmonies, a billion different voices playing the life 
music of the Galaxy? 

Let me tell you a story about one little phrase in the music of 
life on Earth. In the year 1185, the Emperor of Japan was a 
seven-year-old boy named Antoku. He was the nominal leader of 



One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 25 


a clan of samurai called the Heike, who were engaged in a long 
and bloody war with another samurai clan, the Genji. Each 
asserted a superior ancestral claim to the imperial throne. Their 
decisive naval encounter, with the Emperor on board ship, oc¬ 
curred at Danno-ura in the Japanese Inland Sea on April 24, 
1185. The Heike were outnumbered, and outmaneuvered. Many 
were killed. The survivors, in massive numbers, threw them¬ 
selves into the sea and drowned. The Lady Nii, grandmother of 
the Emperor, resolved that she and Antoku would not be cap¬ 
tured by the enemy. What happened next is told in The Tale of 
the Heike: 

The Emperor was seven years old that year but looked 
much older. He was so lovely that he seemed to shed a 
brilliant radiance and his long, black hair hung loose far 
down his back. With a look of surprise and anxiety on his 
face he asked the Lady Nii, “Where are you to take me?” 

She turned to the youthful sovereign, with tears stream¬ 
ing down her cheeks, and . . . comforted him, binding up 
his long hair in his dove-colored robe. Blinded with tears, 
the child sovereign put his beautiful, small hands together. 

He turned first to the East to say farewell to the god of Ise 
and then to the West to repeat the Nembutsu [a prayer to 
the Amida Buddha]. The Lady Nii took him tightly in her 
arms and with the words “In the depths of the ocean is our 
capitol,” sank with him at last beneath the waves. 


A samurai in the armor of feudal Japan. In 
Japanese literature, The Tale of the Heike 
has a significance comparable to that of 
the Iliad in the literature of the West. 
Courtesy, C.C. Lee. 



The entire Heike battle fleet was destroyed. Only forty-three 
women survived. These ladies-in-waiting of the imperial court 
were forced to sell flowers and other favors to the fishermen near 
the scene of the battle. The Heike almost vanished from history. 
But a ragtag group of the former ladies-in-waiting and their off¬ 
spring by the fisherfolk established a festival to commemorate 
the battle. It takes place on the twenty-fourth of April every year 
to this day. Fishermen who are the descendants of the Heike 
dress in hemp and black headgear and proceed to the Akama 
shrine which contains the mausoleum of the drowned Emperor. 
There they watch a play portraying the events that followed the 
Battle of Danno-ura. For centuries after, people imagined that 
they could discern ghostly samurai armies vainly striving to bail 
the sea, to cleanse it of blood and defeat and humiliation. 

The fishermen say the Heike samurai wander the bottoms of 
the Inland Sea still—in the form of crabs. There are crabs to be 
found here with curious markings on their backs, patterns and 
indentations that disturbingly resemble the face of a samurai. 
When caught, these crabs are not eaten, but are returned to the 
sea in commemoration of the doleful events at Danno-ura. 

This legend raises a lovely problem. How does it come about 
that the face of a warrior is incised on the carapace of a crab? The 
answer seems to be that humans made the face. The patterns on 
the crab’s shell are inherited. But among crabs, as among people, 



A Heike crab from the Japanese Inland 
Sea. 



26 — Cosmos 


there are many different hereditary lines. Suppose that, by 
chance, among the distant ancestors of this crab, one arose with a 
pattern that resembled, even slightly, a human face. Even before 
the battle of Danno-ura, fishermen may have been reluctant to 
eat such a crab. In throwing it back, they set in motion an 
evolutionary process: If you are a crab and your carapace is 
ordinary, the humans will eat you. Your line will leave fewer 
descendants. If your carapace looks a little like a face, they will 
throw you back. You will leave more descendants. Crabs had a 
substantial investment in the patterns on their carapaces. As the 
generations passed, of crabs and fishermen alike, the crabs with 
patterns that most resembled a samurai face survived preferen- 
dally until eventually there was produced not just a human face, 
not just a Japanese face, but the visage of a fierce and scowling 
samurai. All this has nothing to do with what the crabs want . 
Selection is imposed from the outside. The more you look like a 
samurai, the better are your chances of survival. Eventually, 
there come to be a great many samurai crabs. 

This process is called artificial selection. In the case of the 
Heike crab it was effected more or less unconsciously by the 
fishermen, and certainly without any serious contemplation by 
the crabs. But humans have deliberately selected which plants 
and animals shall live and which shall die for thousands of years. 
We are surrounded from babyhood by familiar farm and domes- 
tic animals, fruits and trees and vegetables. Where do they come 
from? Were they once free-living in the wild and then induced to 
adopt a less strenuous life on the farm? No, the truth is quite 
different. They are, most of them, made by us. 

Ten thousand years ago, there were no dairy cows or ferret 
hounds or large ears of com. When we domesticated the ances- 
tors of these plants and animals—sometimes creatures who 
looked quite different—we controlled their breeding. We made 
sure that certain varieties, having properties we consider desir¬ 
able, preferentially reproduced. When we wanted a dog to help 
us care for sheep, we selected breeds that were intelligent, obedi¬ 
ent and had some pre-existing talent to herd, which is useful for 
animals who hunt in packs. The enormous distended udders of 
dairy cattle are the result of a human interest in milk and cheese. 
Our com, or maize, has been bred for ten thousand generations 
to be more tasty and nutritious than its scrawny ancestors; in¬ 
deed, it is so changed that it cannot even reproduce without 
human intervention. 

The essence of artificial selection—for a Heike crab, a dog, a 
cow or an ear of com—is this: Many physical and behavioral traits 
of plants and animals are inherited. They breed true. Humans, for 
whatever reason, encourage the reproduction of some varieties 
and discourage the reproduction of others. The variety selected 
for preferentially reproduces; it eventually becomes abundant; 
the variety selected against becomes rare and perhaps extinct. 



One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 27 


But if humans can make new varieties of plants and animals, 
must not nature do so also? This related process is called natural 
selection. That life has changed fundamentally over the aeons is 
entirely clear from the alterations we have made in the beasts and 
vegetables during the short tenure of humans on Earth, and from 
the fossil evidence. The fossil record speaks to us unambiguously 
of creatures that once were present in enormous numbers and 
that have now vanished utterly.* Far more species have become 
extinct in the history of the Earth than exist today; they are the 
terminated experiments of evolution. 

The genetic changes induced by domestication have occurred 
very rapidly. The rabbit was not domesticated until early medb 
eval times (it was bred by French monks in the belief that new^ 
born bunnies were fish and therefore exempt from the 
prohibitions against eating meat on certain days in the Church 
calendar); coffee in the fifteenth century; the sugar beet in the 
nineteenth century; and the mink is still in the earliest stages of 
domestication. In less than ten thousand years, domestication has 
increased the weight of wool grown by sheep from less than one 
kilogram of rough hairs to ten or twenty kilograms of uniform, 
fine down; or the volume of milk given by cattle during a lacta^ 
tion period from a few hundred to a million cubic centimeters. If 
artificial selection can make such major changes in so short a 
period of time, what must natural selection, working over billions 
of years, be capable of? The answer is all the beauty and diversity 
of the biological world. Evolution is a fact, not a theory. 

That the mechanism of evolution is natural selection is the 
great discovery associated with the names of Charles Darwin and 
Alfred Russel Wallace. More than a century ago, they stressed 
that nature is prolific, that many more animals and plants are 
born than can possibly survive and that therefore the envirom 
ment selects those varieties which are, by accident, better suited 
for survival. Mutations—sudden changes in heredity—breed true. 
They provide the raw material of evolution. The environment 
selects those few mutations that enhance survival, resulting in a 
series of slow transformations of one lifeform into another, the 
origin of new speciesd 


* Although traditional Western religious opinion stoutly maintained the 
contrary, as for example, the 1770 opinion of John Wesley: “Death is 
never permitted to destroy [even] the most inconsiderable species.” 


t In the Mayan holy book the Popol Vuh, the various forms of life are 
described as unsuccessful attempts by gods with a predilection for ex- 
periment to make people. Early tries were far off the mark, creating the 
lower animals; the penultimate attempt, a near miss, made the monkeys. 
In Chinese myth, human beings arose from the body lice of a god named 
Pan Ku. In the eighteenth century, de Buffon proposed that the Earth 
was much older than Scripture suggested, that the forms of life somehow 
changed slowly over the millennia, but that the apes were the forlorn 




28 — Cosmos 


Darwin’s words in The Origin of Species were: 

Man does not actually produce variability; he only uninten- 
tionally exposes organic beings to new conditions of life, 
and then Nature acts on the organisation, and causes varia¬ 
bility. But man can and does select the variations given to 
him by Nature, and thus accumulate them in any desired 
manner. He thus adapts animals and plants for his own 
benefit or pleasure. He may do this methodically, or he may 
do it unconsciously by preserving the individuals most use¬ 
ful to him at the time, without any thought of altering the 
breed. . . . There is no obvious reason why the principles 
which have acted so efficiently under domestication should 
not have acted under Nature. . . . More individuals are 
born than can possibly survive. . . . The slightest advantage 
in one being, of any age or during any season, over those 
with which it comes into competition, or better adaptation 
in however slight a degree to the surrounding physical con¬ 
ditions, will turn the balance. 

T. H. Huxley, the most effective nineteenth-century defender 
and popularizer of evolution, wrote that the publications of Dar¬ 
win and Wallace were a “flash of light, which to a man who has 
lost himself in a dark night, suddenly reveals a road which, 
whether it takes him straight home or not, certainly goes his 
way. . . . My reflection, when I first made myself master of the 
central idea of the ‘Origin of Species,’ was, ‘How extremely stupid 
not to have thought of that!’ I suppose that Columbus’ compan¬ 
ions said much the same. . . . The facts of variability, of the 
struggle for existence, of adaptation to conditions, were no¬ 
torious enough; but none of us had suspected that the road to the 
heart of the species problem lay through them, until Darwin and 
Wallace dispelled the darkness.” 

Many people were scandalized—some still are—at both ideas, 
evolution and natural selection. Our ancestors looked at the 
elegance of life on Earth, at how appropriate the structures of 
organisms are to their functions, and saw evidence for a Great 
Designer. The simplest one-celled organism is a far more complex 
machine than the finest pocket watch. And yet pocket watches 
do not spontaneously self-assemble, or evolve, in slow stages, on 
their own, from, say, grandfather clocks. A watch implies a 
watchmaker. There seemed to be no way in which atoms and 
molecules could somehow spontaneously fall together to create 
organisms of such awesome complexity and subtle functioning as 
grace every region of the Earth. That each living thing was 
specially designed, that one species did not become another, were 
notions perfectly consistent with what our ancestors with their 


descendants of people. While these notions do not precisely reflect the 
evolutionary process described by Darwin and Wallace, they are an¬ 
ticipations of it—as are the views of Democritus, Empedocles and other 
early Ionian scientists who are discussed in Chapter 7. 



One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 29 


limited historical records knew about life. The idea that every 
organism was meticulously constructed by a Great Designer pro- 
vided a significance and order to nature and an importance to 
human beings that we crave still A Designer is a natural, ap¬ 
pealing and altogether human explanation of the biological 
world. But, as Darwin and Wallace showed, there is another 
way, equally appealing, equally human, and far more compelling: 
natural selection, which makes the music of life more beautiful as 
the aeons pass. 

The fossil evidence could be consistent with the idea of a 
Great Designer; perhaps some species are destroyed when the 
Designer becomes dissatisfied with them, and new experiments 
are attempted on an improved design. But this notion is a little 
disconcerting. Each plant and animal is exquisitely made; should 
not a supremely competent Designer have been able to make the 
intended variety from the start? The fossil record implies trial and 
error, an inability to anticipate the future, features inconsistent 
with an efficient Great Designer (although not with a Designer of 
a more remote and indirect temperament). 

When I was a college undergraduate in the early 1950’s, I was 
fortunate enough to work in the laboratory of H. J. Muller, a 
great geneticist and the man who discovered that radiation pro¬ 
duces mutations. Muller was the person who first called my 
attention to the Heike crab as an example of artificial selection. 
To learn the practical side of genetics, I spent many months 
working with fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster (which means 
the black-bodied dew-lover)—tiny benign beings with two wings 
and big eyes. We kept them in pint milk bottles. We would cross 
two varieties to see what new forms emerged from the rear¬ 
rangement of the parental genes, and from natural and induced 
mutations. The females would deposit their eggs on a kind of 
molasses the technicians placed inside the bottles; the bottles 
were stoppered; and we would wait two weeks for the fertilized 
eggs to become larvae, the larvae pupae, and the pupae to emerge 
as new adult fruit flies. 

One day I was looking through a low-power binocular micro¬ 
scope at a newly arrived batch of adult Drosophila immobilized 
with a little ether, and was busily separating the different varie¬ 
ties with a camels-hair brush. To my astonishment, I came upon 
something very different: not a small variation such as red eyes 
instead of white, or neck bristles instead of no neck bristles. This 
was another, and very well-functioning, kind of creature with 
much more prominent wings and long feathery antennae. Fate 
had arranged, I concluded, that an example of a major evolu¬ 
tionary change in a single generation, the very thing Muller had 
said could never happen, should take place in his own laboratory. 
It was my unhappy task to explain it to him. 

With heavy heart I knocked on his office door. “Come in,” 
came the muffled cry. I entered to discover the room darkened 



30 — Cosmos 


except for a single small lamp illuminating the stage of the mu 
croscope at which he was working. In these gloomy surroundings 
I stumbled through my explanation. I had found a very different 
kind of fly. I was sure it had emerged from one of the pupae in 
the molasses. I didn’t mean to disturb Muller but .. . “Does it 
look more like Lepidoptera than Diptera?” he asked, his face 
illuminated from below. I didn’t know what this meant, so he 
had to explain: “Does it have big wings? Does it have feathery 
antennae?” I glumly nodded assent. 

Muller switched on the overhead light and smiled benignly. It 
was an old story. There was a kind of moth that had adapted to 
Drosophila genetics laboratories. It was nothing like a fruit fly and 
wanted nothing to do with fruit flies. What it wanted was the 
fruit flies’ molasses. In the brief time that the laboratory techni- 
cian took to unstopper and stopper the milk bottle—for example, 
to add fruit flies—the mother moth made a dive-bombing pass, 
dropping her eggs on the run into the tasty molasses. I had not 
discovered a macro-mutation. I had merely stumbled upon an¬ 
other lovely adaptation in nature, itself the product of micromu¬ 
tation and natural selection. 

The secrets of evolution are death and time—the deaths of 
enormous numbers of lifeforms that were imperfectly adapted to 
the environment; and time for a long succession of small muta¬ 
tions that were by accident adaptive, time for the slow accumula¬ 
tion of patterns of favorable mutations. Part of the resistance to 
Darwin and Wallace derives from our difficulty in imagining the 
passage of the millennia, much less the aeons. What does seventy 
million years mean to beings who live only one-millionth as long? 
We are like butterflies who flutter for a day and think it is 
forever. 

What happened here on Earth may be more or less typical of 
the evolution of life on many worlds; but in such details as the 
chemistry of proteins or the neurology of brains, the story of life 
on Earth may be unique in all the Milky Way Galaxy. The Earth 
condensed out of interstellar gas and dust some 4-6 billion years 
ago. We know from the fossil record that the origin of life 
happened soon after, perhaps around 4.0 billion years ago, in the 
ponds and oceans of the primitive Earth. The first living things 
were not anything so complex as a one-celled organism, already a 
highly sophisticated form of life. The first stirrings were much 
more humble. In those early days, lightning and ultraviolet light 
from the Sun were breaking apart the simple hydrogen-rich mol¬ 
ecules of the primitive atmosphere, the fragments spontaneously 
recombining into more and more complex molecules. The prod¬ 
ucts of this early chemistry were dissolved in the oceans, forming 
a kind of organic soup of gradually increasing complexity, until 
one day, quite by accident, a molecule arose that was able to 
make crude copies of itself, using as building blocks other molecules 



One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 31 


in the soup. (We will return to this subject later.) 

This was the earliest ancestor of deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA, 
the master molecule of life on Earth. It is shaped like a ladder 
twisted into a helix, the rungs available in four different molecu¬ 
lar parts, which constitute the four letters of the genetic code. 
These rungs, called nucleotides, spell out the hereditary instruc¬ 
tions for making a given organism. Every lifeform on Earth has a 
different set of instructions, written out in essentially the same 
language. The reason organisms are different is the differences in 
their nucleic acid instructions. A mutation is a change in a nu¬ 
cleotide, copied in the next generation, which breeds true. Since 
mutations are random nucleotide changes, most of them are 
harmful or lethal, coding into existence nonfunctional enzymes. 
It is a long wait before a mutation makes an organism work 
better. And yet it is that improbable event, a small beneficial 
mutation in a nucleotide a ten-millionth of a centimeter across, 
that makes evolution go. 

Four billion years ago, the Earth was a molecular Garden of 
Eden. There were as yet no predators. Some molecules repro¬ 
duced themselves inefficiently, competed for building blocks and 
left crude copies of themselves. With reproduction, mutation 
and the selective elimination of the least efficient varieties, evo¬ 
lution was well under way, even at the molecular level. As time 
went on, they got better at reproducing. Molecules with special¬ 
ized functions eventually joined together, making a kind of mo¬ 
lecular collective—the first cell. Plant cells today have tiny 
molecular factories, called chloroplasts, which are in charge of 
photosynthesis—the conversion of sunlight, water and carbon 
dioxide into carbohydrates and oxygen. The cells in a drop of 
blood contain a different sort of molecular factory, the mito¬ 
chondrion, which combines food with oxygen to extract useful 
energy. These factories exist in plant and animal cells today but 
may once themselves have been free-living cells. 

By three billion years ago, a number of one-celled plants had 
joined together, perhaps because a mutation prevented a single 
cell from separating after splitting in two. The first multicellular 
organisms had evolved. Every cell of your body is a kind of 
commune, with once free-living parts all banded together for the 
common good. And you are made of a hundred trillion cells. We 
are, each of us, a multitude. 

Sex seems to have been invented around two billion years ago. 
Before then, new varieties of organisms could arise only from the 
accumulation of random mutations—the selection of changes, 
letter by letter, in the genetic instructions. Evolution must have 
been agonizingly slow. With the invention of sex, two organisms 
could exchange whole paragraphs, pages and books of their 
DNA code, producing new varieties ready for the sieve of selec¬ 
tion. Organisms are selected to engage in sex—the ones that find 
it uninteresting quickly become extinct. And this is true not only 



32 — Cosmos 




Trilobite fossils. At top, three blind sped- 
mens from half a billion years ago. In 
center and bottom are later, more highly 
evolved specimens, with their eyes beam 
tifully preserved. The trilobites are one of 
many products of the Cambrian explo- 
sion. Reprinted from Trilobites by Rio- 
cardo Levi-Setti by permission of the 
University of Chicago Press. Copyright 
© 1975 by the University of Chicago. 


of the microbes of two billion years ago. We humans also have a 
palpable devotion to exchanging segments of DNA today. 

By one billion years ago, plants, working cooperatively, had 
made a stunning change in the environment of the Earth. Green 
plants generate molecular oxygen. Since the oceans were by now 
filled with simple green plants, oxygen was becoming a major 
constituent of the Earth’s atmosphere, altering it irreversibly from 
its original hydrogen-rich character and ending the epoch of 
Earth history when the stuff of life was made by nonbiological 
processes. But oxygen tends to make organic molecules fall to 
pieces. Despite our fondness for it, it is fundamentally a poison 
for unprotected organic matter. The transition to an oxidizing 
atmosphere posed a supreme crisis in the history of life, and a 
great many organisms, unable to cope with oxygen, perished. A 
few primitive forms, such as the botulism and tetanus bacilli, 
manage to survive even today only in oxygen-free environments. 
The nitrogen in the Earth’s atmosphere is much more chemically 
inert and therefore much more benign than oxygen. But it, too, is 
biologically sustained. Thus, 99 percent of the Earth’s atmo¬ 
sphere is of biological origin. The sky is made by life. 

For most of the four billion years since the origin of life, the 
dominant organisms were microscopic blue-green algae, which 
covered and filled the oceans. Then some 600 million years ago, 
the monopolizing grip of the algae was broken and an enormous 
proliferation of new lifeforms emerged, an event called the Cam¬ 
brian explosion. Life had arisen almost immediately after the 
origin of the Earth, which suggests that life may be an inevitable 
chemical process on an Earth-like planet. But life did not evolve 
much beyond blue-green algae for three billion years, which 
suggests that large lifeforms with specialized organs are hard to 
evolve, harder even than the origin of life. Perhaps there are 
many other planets that today have abundant microbes but no 
big beasts and vegetables. 

Soon after the Cambrian explosion, the oceans teemed with 
many different forms of life. By 500 million years ago there were 
vast herds of trilobites, beautifully constructed animals, a little 
like large insects; some hunted in packs on the ocean floor. They 
stored crystals in their eyes to detect polarized light. But there are 
no trilobites alive today; there have been none for 200 million 
years. The Earth used to be inhabited by plants and animals of 
which there is today no living trace. And of course every species 
now on the planet once did not exist. There is no hint in the old 
rocks of animals like us. Species appear, abide more or less briefly 
and then flicker out. 

Before the Cambrian explosion species seem to have suc¬ 
ceeded one another rather slowly. In part this may be because the 
richness of our information declines rapidly the farther into the 
past we peer; in the early history of our planet, few organisms had 
hard parts and soft beings leave few fossil remains. But in part the 





One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 33 


sluggish rate of appearance of dramatically new forms before the 
Cambrian explosion is real; the painstaking evolution of cell 
structure and biochemistry is not immediately reflected in the 
external forms revealed by the fossil record. After the Cambrian 
explosion, exquisite new adaptations followed one another with 
comparatively breathtaking speed. In rapid succession, the first 
fish and the first vertebrates appeared; plants, previously re- 
stricted to the oceans, began the colonization of the land; the first 
insect evolved, and its descendants became the pioneers in the 
colonization of the land by animals; winged insects arose together 
with the amphibians, creatures something like the lungfish, able 
to survive both on land and in the water; the first trees and the 
first reptiles appeared; the dinosaurs evolved; the mammals 
emerged, and then the first birds; the first flowers appeared; the 
dinosaurs became extinct; the earliest cetaceans, ancestors to the 
dolphins and whales, arose and in the same period the pri- 
mates—the ancestors of the monkeys, the apes and the humans. 
Less than ten million years ago, the first creatures who closely 
resembled human beings evolved, accompanied by a spectacular 
increase in brain size. And then, only a few million years ago, the 
first true humans emerged. 

Human beings grew up in forests; we have a natural affinity for 
them. How lovely a tree is, straining toward the sky. Its leaves 
harvest sunlight to photosynthesize, so trees compete by shad' 
owing their neighbors. If you look closely you can often see two 
trees pushing and shoving with languid grace. Trees are great and 
beautiful machines, powered by sunlight, taking in water from 
the ground and carbon dioxide from the air, converting these 
materials into food for their use and ours. The plant uses the 
carbohydrates it makes as an energy source to go about its planty 
business. And we animals, who are ultimately parasites on the 
plants, steal the carbohydrates so we can go about our business. 
In earing the plants we combine the carbohydrates with oxygen 
dissolved in our blood because of our penchant for breathing air, 
and so extract the energy that makes us go. In the process we 
exhale carbon dioxide, which the plants then recycle to make 
more carbohydrates. What a marvelous cooperative arrange- 
ment—plants and animals each inhaling the other’s exhalations, a 
kind of planet-wide mutual mouth-to-stoma resuscitation, the 
entire elegant cycle powered by a star 150 million kilometers 
away. 

There are tens of billions of known kinds of organic mole¬ 
cules. Yet only about fifty of them are used for the essential 
activities of life. The same patterns are employed over and over 
again, conservatively, ingeniously for different functions. And at 
the very heart of life on Earth—the proteins that control cell 
chemistry, and the nucleic acids that carry the hereditary instruc¬ 
tions—we find these molecules to be essentially identical in all the 
plants and animals. An oak tree and I are made of the same stuff. 



Close relatives: an oak tree and a human. 


34 - Cosmos 



Photomicrograph of human blood cells, 
courtesy D. Golde, UCLA. The dough' 
nut'shaped cells are normal red blood 
cells, which carry oxygen. The larger 
clumps are white blood cells, which engulf 
foreign microorganisms. 


If you go far enough back, we have a common ancestor. 

The living cell is a regime as complex and beautiful as the 
realm of the galaxies and the stars. The elaborate machinery of 
the cell has been painstakingly evolved over four billion years. 
Fragments of food are transmogrified into cellular machinery. 
Today’s white blood cell is yesterday’s creamed spinach. How 
does the cell do it? Inside is a labyrinthine and subtle architecture 
that maintains its own structure, transforms molecules, stores 
energy and prepares for self-replication. If we could enter a cell, 
many of the molecular specks we would see would be protein 
molecules, some in frenzied activity, others merely waiting. The 
most important proteins are enzymes, molecules that control the 
cell’s chemical reactions. Enzymes are like assemblydine workers, 
each specializing in a particular molecular job: Step 4 in the 
construction of the nucleotide guanosine phosphate, say, or Step 
11 in the dismantling of a molecule of sugar to extract energy, the 
currency that pays for getting the other cellular jobs done. But 
the enzymes do not run the show. They receive their instruc¬ 
tions—and are in fact themselves constructed—on orders sent 
from those in charge. The boss molecules are the nucleic acids. 
They live sequestered in a forbidden city in the deep interior, in 
the nucleus of the cell. 

If we plunged through a pore into the nucleus of the cell, we 
would find something that resembles an explosion in a spaghetti 
factory—a disorderly multitude of coils and strands, which are 
the two kinds of nucleic acids: DNA, which knows what to do, 
and RNA, which conveys the instructions issued by DNA to the 
rest of the cell. These are the best that four billion years of 
evolution could produce, containing the full complement of in¬ 
formation on how to make a cell, a tree or a human work. The 
amount of information in human DNA, if written out in ordi¬ 
nary language, would occupy a hundred thick volumes. What is 
more, the DNA molecules know how to make, with only very 
rare exceptions, identical copies of themselves. They know ex¬ 
traordinarily much. 

DNA is a double helix, the two intertwined strands resembling 
a “spiral” staircase. It is the sequence or ordering of the nucleo¬ 
tides along either of the constituent strands that is the language 
of life. During reproduction, the helices separate, assisted by a 
special unwinding protein, each synthesizing an identical copy of 
the other from nucleotide building blocks floating about nearby 
in the viscous liquid of the cell nucleus. Once the unwinding is 
underway, a remarkable enzyme called DNA polymerase helps 
ensure that the copying works almost perfectly. If a mistake is 
made, there are enzymes which snip the mistake out and replace 
the wrong nucleotide by the right one. These enzymes are a 
molecular machine with awesome powers. 

In addition to making accurate copies of itself—which is what 
heredity is about—nuclear DNA directs the activities of the 



One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 35 


cell—which is what metabolism is about—by synthesizing another 
nucleic acid called messenger RNA, each of which passes to the 
extranuclear provinces and there controls the construction, at the 
right time, in the right place, of one enzyme. When all is done, a 
single enzyme molecule has been produced, which then goes 
about ordering one particular aspect of the chemistry of the cell 

Human DNA is a ladder a billion nucleotides long. Most 
possible combinations of nucleotides are nonsense: they would 
cause the synthesis of proteins that perform no useful function. 
Only an extremely limited number of nucleic acid molecules are 
any good for lifeforms as complicated as we. Even so, the number 
of useful ways of putting nucleic acids together is stupefyingly 
large—probably far greater than the total number of electrons 
and protons in the universe. Accordingly, the number of possible 
individual human beings is vastly greater than the number that 
have ever lived: the untapped potential of the human species is 
immense. There must be ways of putting nucleic acids together 
that will function far better—by any criterion we choose—than 
any human being who has ever lived. Fortunately, we do not yet 
know how to assemble alternative sequences of nucleotides to 
make alternative kinds of human beings. In the future we may 
well be able to assemble nucleotides in any desired sequence, to 
produce whatever characteristics we think desirable—a sobering 
and disquieting prospect. 

Evolution works through mutation and selection. Mutations 
might occur during replication if the enzyme DNA polymerase 
makes a mistake. But it rarely makes a mistake. Mutations also 
occur because of radioactivity or ultraviolet light from the Sun or 
cosmic rays or chemicals in the environment, all of which can 
change the nucleotides or tie the nucleic acids up in knots. If the 
mutation rate is too high, we lose the inheritance of four billion 
years of painstaking evolution. If it is too low, new varieties will 
not be available to adapt to some future change in the environ- 
ment. The evolution of life requires a more or less precise bah 
ance between mutation and selection. When that balance is 
achieved, remarkable adaptations occur. 

A change in a single DNA nucleotide causes a change in a 
single amino acid in the protein for which that DNA codes. The 
red blood cells of people of European descent look roughly glob¬ 
ular. The red blood cells of some people of African descent look 
like sickles or crescent moons. Sickle cells carry less oxygen and 
consequently transmit a kind of anemia. They also provide major 
resistance against malaria. There is no question that it is better to 
be anemic than to be dead. This major influence on the function 
of the blood—so striking as to be readily apparent in photographs 
of red blood cells—is the result of a change in a single nucleotide 
out of the ten billion in the DNA of a typical human cell. We are 
still ignorant of the consequences of changes in most of the other 
nucleotides. 



Scanning electron micrographs at succes¬ 
sively higher magnifications of human 
blood cells. Most of the cells at top are red 
blood cells. The cell being approached, 
filling the picture at bottom, is a B- 
lymphocyte, which we enter on the next 
page. It is about one ten-thousandth of a 
centimeter across. Courtesy Jean-Paul 
Revel, California Institute of Technology. 



36 — Cosmos 




















One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 37 



A voyage into the living cell: The human lymphocyte (page 35) is fairly typical of higher organisms on Earth. Cells 
are characteristically about 100 micrometers (^m) across (=0.1 millimeters, the smallest object the human eye 
can see unaided). Passing through the cell membrane, about 0.01 jim thick, we encounter ropy extensions of the 
membrane (a), called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) which plays a major role in the architecture of the cell. Within 
the cytoplasm (b), we see a few of the numerous ribosomes (e.g., the cluster of five dark globules), some attached to 
proteins or messenger RNA, sent from the DNA in the nucleus. Ribosomes are about 0.02 jim across. The threads are 
microtubules, coursing toward the nucleus (light blue, in background). Shaped like sausages, the mitochondria (b, c), 
about 1 \i m thick and 10 ji m long, power the cell. They have their own DNA; their ancestors may once have been 
freediving microbes. The ER is connected to the cell nucleus (c, d). When we plunge through a tunneklike pore (0.05 
jim across) in the nuclear membrane (e), we emerge into the nucleus (f), filled with strands of DNA, and resembling “an 
explosion in a spaghetti factory.” Five full turns of twists of each DNA helix are shown in (g), corresponding to about 
4,000 constituent atoms. One full molecule of human DNA has about a hundred million such twists and about a 
hundred billion atoms, as many as the number of stars in a typical galaxy. One such twist is seen in (h). Each of the two 
green strands marks the backbone of the molecule, made of alternating sugars and phosphates. Shown in yellow, buff, 
red, and brown are the nitrogen-containing nucleotide bases that form the links or cross-struts between the two 
helices. (They represent molecules called adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine. Adenine bonds only with thymine; 
guanine bonds only with cytosine.) The language of life is determined by the sequence of nucleotide bases. The 
individual spheres in this precise model correspond to atoms of hydrogen (the smallest), carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and 
phosphorus. The DNA unwinding enzyme (called a helicase), in blue (i), supervises the breaking of chemical bonds 
between adjacent nucleotide bases preparatory to DNA reproduction: A molecule of the enzyme DNA polymerase 
(blue) supervises the attachment of nearby building blocks onto one of the strands of DNA (j). Each strand of an 
original double helix copies the other in DNA self-replication. When an arriving nucleotide does not match its 
partner, DNA polymerase removes it, an activity that molecular biologists call “proofreading.” A rare proofreading 
error makes a mutation: the genetic instructions have been changed. A typical human DNA polymerase will add a few 
dozen nucleotides every second. Ten thousand of them may be working on a DNA molecule at any given moment 
during its replication. Such exquisite molecular machines exist in every plant, animal and microorganism on Earth. 
Paintings (a-f) by Frank Armitage, John Allison and Adolf Schaller. Computer graphics (g-j) by James Blinn and Pat 
Cole, Jet Propulsion Laboratory. All colors are arbitrary. 







38 - Cosmos 




Synthesis of organic matter at the Labora- 
tory for Planetary Studies, Cornell Uni- 
versity. A transparent mixture of the gases 
methane, ammonia, hydrogen sulfide and 
water begins to be sparked in a glass flask 
(top). After a few hours of sparking, the 
interior of the flask is coated ( bottom) with 
a rich variety of organic molecules rele- 
vant for the origin of life. Courtesy Bk 
shun Khare. 


We humans look rather different than a tree. Without a doubt 
we perceive the world differently than a tree does. But down 
deep, at the molecular heart of life, the trees and we are essen- 
dally identical. We both use nucleic acids for heredity; we both 
use proteins as enzymes to control the chemistry of our cells. 
Most significantly, we both use precisely the same code book for 
translating nucleic acid information into protein information, as 
do virtually all the other creatures on the planet.* The usual 
explanation of this molecular unity is that we are, all of us—trees 
and people, angler fish and slime molds and paramecia—de- 
scended from a single and common instance of the origin of life 
in the early history of our planet. How did the critical molecules 
then arise? 

In my laboratory at Cornell University we work on, among 
other things, prebiological organic chemistry, making some notes 
of the music of life. We mix together and spark the gases of the 
primitive Earth: hydrogen, water, ammonia, methane, hydrogen 
sulfide—all present, incidentally, on the planet Jupiter today and 
throughout the Cosmos. The sparks correspond to lightning— 
also present on the ancient Earth and on modern Jupiter. The 
reaction vessel is initially transparent: the precursor gases are 
entirely invisible. But after ten minutes of sparking, we see a 
strange brown pigment slowly streaking the sides of the vessel. 
The interior gradually becomes opaque, covered with a thick 
brown tar. If we had used ultraviolet light—simulating the early 
Sun—the results would have been more or less the same. The tar 
is an extremely rich collection of complex organic molecules, 
including the constituent parts of proteins and nucleic acids. The 
stuff of life, it turns out, can be very easily made. 

Such experiments were first performed in the early 1950’s by 
Stanley Miller, then a graduate student of the chemist Harold 
Urey. Urey had argued compellingly that the early atmosphere of 
the Earth was hydrogen-rich, as is most of the Cosmos; that the 
hydrogen has since trickled away to space from Earth, but not 
from massive Jupiter; and that the origin of life occurred before 
the hydrogen was lost. After Urey suggested that such gases be 
sparked, someone asked him what he expected to make in such 
an experiment. Urey replied, “Beilstein.” Beilstein is the massive 

* The genetic code turns out to be not quite identical in all parts of all 
organisms on the Earth. At least a few cases are known where the 
transcription from DNA information into protein information in a mi- 
tochondrion employs a different code book from that used by the genes 
in the nucleus of the very same cell. This points to a long evolutionary 
separation of the genetic codes of mitochondria and nuclei, and is com 
sistent with the idea that mitochondria were once free-living organisms 
incorporated into the cell in a symbiotic relationship billions of years ago. 
The development and emerging sophistication of that symbiosis is, in¬ 
cidentally, one answer to the question of what evolution was doing 
between the origin of the cell and the proliferation of many-celled or¬ 
ganisms in the Cambrian explosion. 




One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 39 


German compendium in 28 volumes, listing all the organic moh 
ecules known to chemists. 

Using only the most abundant gases that were present on the 
early Earth and almost any energy source that breaks chemical 
bonds, we can produce the essential building blocks of life. But in 
our vessel are only the notes of the music of life—not the music 
itself. The molecular building blocks must be put together in the 
correct sequence. Life is certainly more than the amino acids that 
make up its proteins and the nucleotides that make up its nucleic 
acids. But even in ordering these building blocks into long-chain 
molecules, there has been substantial laboratory progress. Amino 
acids have been assembled under primitive Earth conditions into 
molecules resembling proteins. Some of them feebly control use- 
ful chemical reactions, as enzymes do. Nucleotides have been put 
together into strands of nucleic acid a few dozen units long. 
Under the right circumstances in the test tube, short nucleic acids 
can synthesize identical copies of themselves. 

No one has so far mixed together the gases and waters of the 
primitive Earth and at the end of the experiment had something 
crawl out of the test tube. The smallest living things known, the 
viroids, are composed of less than 10,000 atoms. They cause 
several different diseases in cultivated plants and have probably 
most recently evolved from more complex organisms rather than 
from simpler ones. Indeed, it is hard to imagine a still simpler 
organism that is in any sense alive. Viroids are composed exclu- 
sively of nucleic acid, unlike the viruses, which also have a 
protein coat. They are no more than a single strand of RNA with 
either a linear or a closed circular geometry. Viroids can be so 
small and still thrive because they are thoroughgoing, unremit¬ 
ting parasites. Like viruses, they simply take over the molecular 
machinery of a much larger, well-functioning cell and change it 
from a factory for making more cells into a factory for making 
more viroids. 

The smallest known free-living organisms are the PPLO 
(pleuropneumonia-like organisms) and similar small beasts. They 
are composed of about fifty million atoms. Such organisms, hav¬ 
ing to be more self-reliant, are also more complicated than viroids 
and viruses. But the environment of the Earth today is not 
extremely favorable for simple forms of life. You have to work 
hard to make a living. You have to be careful about predators. In 
the early history of our planet, however, when enormous 
amounts of organic molecules were being produced by sunlight in 
a hydrogen-rich atmosphere, very simple, nonparasitic organisms 
had a fighting chance. The first living things may have been 
something like free-living viroids only a few hundred nucleotides 
long. Experimental work on making such creatures from scratch 
may begin by the end of the century. There is still much to be 
understood about the origin of life, including the origin of the 
genetic code. But we have been performing such experiments for 



40 - Cosmos 



A science fiction alien by Edd Cartier. 
Compare with the scanning electron mi¬ 
crograph of a terrestrial mite, shown as the 
frontispiece of this chapter. Source: Ham- 
lyn Group Picture Library. 


only some thirty years. Nature has had a four-billion-year head 
start. All in all, we have not done badly. 

Nothing in such experiments is unique to the Earth. The initial 
gases, and the energy sources, are common throughout the 
Cosmos. Chemical reactions like those in our laboratory vessels 
may be responsible for the organic matter in interstellar space and 
the amino acids found in meteorites. Some similar chemistry 
must have occurred on a billion other worlds in the Milky Way 
Galaxy. The molecules of life fill the Cosmos. 

But even if life on another planet has the same molecular 
chemistry as life here, there is no reason to expect it to resemble 
familiar organisms. Consider the enormous diversity of living 
things on Earth, all of which share the same planet and an 
identical molecular biology. Those other beasts and vegetables 
are probably radically different from any organism we know 
here. There may be some convergent evolution because there 
may be only one best solution to a certain environmental prob¬ 
lem—something like two eyes, for example, for binocular vision 
at optical frequencies. But in general the random character of the 
evolutionary process should create extraterrestrial creatures very 
different from any that we know. 

I cannot tell you what an extraterrestrial being would look like. 

I am terribly limited by the fact that I know only one kind of life, 
life on Earth. Some people—science fiction writers and artists, for 
instance—have speculated on what other beings might be like. I 
am skeptical about most of those extraterrestrial visions. They 
seem to me to rely too much on forms of life we already know. 
Any given organism is the way it is because of a long series of 
individually unlikely steps. I do not think life anywhere else 
would look very much like a reptile, or an insect or a human- 
even with such minor cosmetic adjustments as green skin, pointy 
ears and antennae. But if you pressed me, I could try to imagine 
something rather different: 

On a giant gas planet like Jupiter, with an atmosphere rich in 
hydrogen, helium, methane, water and ammonia, there is no 
accessible solid surface, but rather a dense, cloudy atmosphere in 
which organic molecules may be falling from the skies like manna 
from heaven, like the products of our laboratory experiments. 
However, there is a characteristic impediment to life on such a 
planet: the atmosphere is turbulent, and down deep it is very hot. 
An organism must be careful that it is not carried down and fried. 

To show that life is not out of the question in such a very 
different planet, my Cornell colleague E. E. Salpeter and I have 
made some calculations. Of course, we cannot know precisely 
what life would be like in such a place, but we wanted to see if, 
within the laws of physics and chemistry, a world of this sort 
could possibly be inhabited. 

One way to make a living under these conditions is to repro¬ 
duce before you are fried and hope that convection will carry 


One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue — 41 


some of your offspring to the higher and cooler layers of the 
atmosphere. Such organisms could he very little. We call them 
sinkers. But you could also be a floater, some vast hydrogen 
balloon pumping helium and heavier gases out of its interior and 
leaving only the lightest gas, hydrogen; or a hot-air balloon, 
staying buoyant by keeping your interior warm, using energy 
acquired from the food you eat. Like familiar terrestrial balloons, 
the deeper a floater is carried, the stronger is the buoyant force 
returning it to the higher, cooler, safer regions of the atmosphere. 
A floater might eat preformed organic molecules, or make its 
own from sunlight and air, somewhat as plants do on Earth. Up 
to a point, the bigger a floater is, the more efficient it will be. 
Salpeter and I imagined floaters kilometers across, enormously 
larger than the greatest whale that ever was, beings the size of 
cities. 

The floaters may propel themselves through the planetary 
atmosphere with gusts of gas, like a ramjet or a rocket. We 
imagine them arranged in great lazy herds for as far as the eye can 
see, with patterns on their skin, an adaptive camouflage implying 
that they have problems, too. Because there is at least one other 
ecological niche in such an environment; hunting. Hunters are 
fast and maneuverable. They eat the floaters both for their or¬ 
ganic molecules and for their store of pure hydrogen. Hollow 
sinkers could have evolved into the first floaters, and self- 
propelled floaters into the first hunters. There cannot be very 
many hunters, because if they consume all the floaters, the hunt¬ 
ers themselves will perish. 

Physics and chemistry permit such lifeforms. Art endows 
them with a certain charm. Nature, however, is not obliged to 
follow our speculations. But if there are billions of inhabited 
worlds in the Milky Way Galaxy, perhaps there will be a few 
populated by the sinkers, floaters and hunters which our imagi¬ 
nations, tempered by the laws of physics and chemistry, have 
generated. 

Biology is more like history than it is like physics. You have to 
know the past to understand the present. And you have to know 
it in exquisite detail. There is as yet no predictive theory of 
biology, just as there is not yet a predictive theory of history. 
The reasons are the same: both subjects are still too complicated 
for us. But we can know ourselves better by understanding other 
cases. The study of a single instance of extraterrestrial life, no 
matter how humble, will deprovincialize biology. For the first 
time, the biologists will know what other kinds of life are possi¬ 
ble. When we say the search for life elsewhere is important, we 
are not guaranteeing that it will be easy to find—only that it is 
very much worth seeking. 

We have heard so far the voice of life on one small world 
only. But we have at last begun to listen for other voices in the 
cosmic fugue. 



ROBERTA. 

tlBINLBIIM 

RED PLANET 


ILL'J J 





A variety of standard science fiction 
aliens. 














42 — Cosmos 



Hunters and floaters, imaginary but possible lifeforms in the atmosphere of a Jupiter-like planet. The cloud patterns 
are mainly those discovered by Voyager on Jupiter. Ice crystals in the high atmosphere are responsible for the halo 
around the Sun. Details on facing page show (a) a herd of floaters in the updrafts over an atmospheric storm system; (b) 
floaters through a break in the clouds; (c) floaters high above ammonia cirrus clouds; (d and e) close-ups of floaters: 
note camouflage patterns, a protective coloration against hunters; (f) a hunter in attack configuration; (g) a herd of 
camouflaged hunters at high altitudes. Paintings by Adolf Schaller. 


One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue - 43 





i.-fc 




- && 








A decorative detail from a paper computer to determine the size of the Earth’s shadow on the Moon during a lunar 
eclipse. Printed in 1540, three years before the publication of Copernicus’ book, and thirtyone years before the birth 
of Johannes Kepler. From the Astronomicum Caesarium of Petrus Apianus, Ingolstadt, Germany. 









Chapter III 

THE HARMONY OF 
WORLDS 

Do you know the ordinances of the heavens? 

Can you establish their rule on Earth? 

—The Book of Job 


All welfare and adversity that come to man and other creatures come 
through the Seven and the Twelve. Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, as the 
Religion says, are the twelve commanders on the side of light; and the seven 
planets are said to be the seven commanders on the side of darkness. And 
the seven planets oppress all creation and deliver it over to death and all 
manner of evil: for the twelve signs of the Zodiac and the seven planets rule 
the fate of the world. 

—The late Zoroastrian book, the Menok i Xrat 


To tell us that every species of thing is endowed with an occult specific 
quality by which it acts and produces manifest effects, is to tell us nothing; 
but to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena, 
and afterwards to tell us how the properties and actions of all corporeal 
things follow from those manifest principles, would be a very great step. 

—Isaac Newton, Optics 


We do not ask for what useful purpose the birds do sing, for song is their 
pleasure since they were created for singing. Similarly, we ought not to ask 
why the human mind troubles to fathom the secrets of the heavens. . . . 
The diversity of the phenomena of Nature is so great, and the treasures 
hidden in the heavens so rich, precisely in order that the human mind shall 
never be lacking in fresh nourishment. 

—Johannes Kepler, Mysteriurn Cosmographicum 




46 — Cosmos 



The northern constellation called The Big 
Dipper in North America. In France it is 
called The Casserole. 



The same group of seven stars (connected 
by red lines) in England is called The 
Plough. 



In China, it was imagined to be the com 
stellation of The Celestial Bureaucrat, 
seated on a cloud and accompanied on his 
rounds about the north pole of the sky by 
his eternally hopeful petitioners. The 
above animated and photographed by 
Judy Kreijanovsky (Cartoon Kitchen). 


If we lived on a planet where nothing ever changed, 

there would be little to do. There would be nothing to figure out. 
There would be no impetus for science. And if we lived in an 
unpredictable world, where things changed in random or very 
complex ways, we would not be able to figure things out. Again, 
there would be no such thing as science. But we live in an 
imbetween universe, where things change, but according to pat- 
terns, rules, or, as we call them, laws of nature. If I throw a stick 
up in the air, it always falls down. If the sun sets in the west, it 
always rises again the next morning in the east. And so it be¬ 
comes possible to figure things out. We can do science, and with 
it we can improve our lives. 

Human beings are good at understanding the world. We 
always have been. We were able to hunt game or build fires only 
because we had figured something out. There was a time before 
television, before motion pictures, before radio, before books. 
The greatest part of human existence was spent in such a time. 
Over the dying embers of the campfire, on a moonless night, we 
watched the stars. 

The night sky is interesting. There are patterns there. Without 
even trying, you can imagine pictures. In the northern sky, for 
example, there is a pattern, or constellation, that looks a little 
ursine. Some cultures call it the Great Bear. Others see quite 
different images. These pictures are not, of course, really in the 
night sky; we put them there ourselves. We were hunter folk, 
and we saw hunters and dogs, bears and young women, all 
manner of things of interest to us. When seventeenth-century 
European sailors first saw the southern skies they put objects of 
seventeenth-century interest in the heavens—toucans and pea¬ 
cocks, telescopes and microscopes, compasses and the sterns of 
ships. If the constellations had been named in the twentieth 
century, I suppose we would see bicycles and refrigerators in the 
sky, rock-and-roll “stars” and perhaps even mushroom clouds—a 
new set of human hopes and fears placed among the stars. 

Occasionally our ancestors would see a very bright star with a 
tail, glimpsed for just a moment, hurtling across the sky. They 
called it a falling star, but it is not a good name: the old stars are 
still there after the falling star falls. In some seasons there are 
many falling stars; in others very few. There is a kind of regularity 
here as well. 

Like the Sun and the Moon, stars always rise in the east and set 
in the west, taking the whole night to cross the sky if they pass 
overhead. There are different constellations in different seasons. 
The same constellations always rise at the beginning of autumn, 
say. It never happens that a new constellation suddenly rises out 
of the east. There is an order, a predictability, a permanence 
about the stars. In a way, they are almost comforting. 

Certain stars rise just before or set just after the Sun—and at 
times and positions that vary with the seasons. If you made 






The Harmony of Worlds — 47 


careful observations of the stars and recorded them over many 
years, you could predict the seasons. You could also measure the 
time of year by noting where on the horizon the Sun rose each 
day. In the skies was a great calendar, available to anyone with 
dedication and ability and the means to keep records. 

Our ancestors built devices to measure the passing of the 
seasons. In Chaco Canyon, in New Mexico, there is a great 
roofless ceremonial kiva or temple, dating from the eleventh 
century. On June 21, the longest day of the year, a shaft of 

sunlight enters a window at dawn and slowly moves so that it 

covers a special niche. But this happens only around June 21. I 

imagine the proud Anasazi people, who described themselves as 

“The Ancient Ones,” gathered in their pews every June 21, 
dressed in feathers and rattles and turquoise to celebrate the 
power of the Sun. They also monitored the apparent motion of 
the Moon: the twenty-eight higher niches in the kiva may repre¬ 
sent the number of days for the Moon to return to the same 
position among the constellations. These people paid close at¬ 
tention to the Sun and the Moon and the stars. Other devices 
based on similar ideas are found at Angkor Wat in Cambodia; 
Stonehenge in England; Abu Simbel in Egypt; Chichen Itza in 
Mexico; and the Great Plains in North America. 

Some alleged calendrical devices may just possibly be due to 
chance—an accidental alignment of window and niche on June 
21, say. But there are other devices wonderfully different. At one 
locale in the American Southwest is a set of three upright slabs 
which were moved from their original position about 1,000 years 
ago. A spiral a little like a galaxy has been carved in the rock. On 
June 21, the first day of summer, a dagger of sunlight pouring 
through an opening between the slabs bisects the spiral; and on 
December 21, the first day of winter, there are two daggers of 
sunlight that flank the spiral, a unique application of the midday 
sun to read the calendar in the sky. 

Why did people all over the world make such an effort to 
learn astronomy? We hunted gazelles and antelope and buffalo 
whose migrations ebbed and flowed with the seasons. Fruits and 
nuts were ready to be picked in some times but not in others. 
When we invented agriculture, we had to take care to plant and 
harvest our crops in the right season. Annual meetings of far- 
flung nomadic tribes were set for prescribed times. The ability to 
read the calendar in the skies was literally a matter of life and 
death. The reappearance of the crescent moon after the new 
moon; the return of the Sun after a total eclipse; the rising of the 
Sun in the morning after its troublesome absence at night were 
noted by people around the world: these phenomena spoke to 
our ancestors of the possibility of surviving death. Up there in 
the skies was also a metaphor of immortality. 

The wind whips through the canyons in the American South¬ 
west, and there is no one to hear it but us—a reminder of the 



In medieval Europe, the same stars were 
seen as Charles’ Wain, or Wagon. 



The ancient Greeks and Native Ameri¬ 
cans saw these stars as the tail of The 
Great Bear—Ursa Major. 



This larger group of stars, containing The 
Big Dipper, was portrayed by the ancient 
Egyptians as a curious procession of a bull, 
a horizontal man or god, and a hippopot¬ 
amus with a crocodile on its back. The 
above animated and photographed by 
Judy Kreijanovsky (Cartoon Kitchen). 






48 — Cosmos 



Casa Bonita, an eleventh-century Anasazi 
apartment house of 800 rooms. 



Casa Rincanada, an Anasazi temple with a 
near perfect east-west alignment. 



Interior of Casa Rincanada, showing six 
higher and two lower niches. 


40,000 generations of thinking men and women who preceded 
us, about whom we know almost nothing, upon whom our 
civilization is based. 

As ages passed, people learned from their ancestors. The more 
accurately you knew the position and movements of the Sun and 
Moon and stars, the more reliably you could predict when to 
hunt, when to sow and reap, when to gather the tribes. As 
precision of measurement improved, records had to be kept, so 
astronomy encouraged observation and mathematics and the de¬ 
velopment of writing. 

But then, much later, another rather curious idea arose, an 
assault by mysticism and superstition into what had been largely 
an empirical science. The Sun and stars controlled the seasons, 
food, warmth. The Moon controlled the tides, the life cycles of 
many animals, and perhaps the human menstrual* period—of 
central importance for a passionate species devoted to having 
children. There was another kind ot object in the sky, the wan¬ 
dering or vagabond stars called planets. Our nomadic ancestors 
must have felt an affinity for the planets. Not counting the Sun 
and the Moon, you could see only five of them. They moved 
against the background of more distant stars. If you followed 
their apparent motion over many months, they would leave one 
constellation, enter another, occasionally even do a kind of slow 
loop-the-loop in the sky. Everything else in the sky had some real 
effect on human life. What must the influence of the planets be? 

In contemporary Western society, buying a magazine on as¬ 
trology—at a newsstand, say—is easy; it is much harder to find one 
on astronomy. Virtually every newspaper in America has a daily 
column on astrology; there are hardly any that have even a 
weekly column on astronomy. There are ten times more astrolo¬ 
gers in the United States than astronomers. At parties, when I 
meet people who do not know I am a scientist, I am sometimes 
asked, “Are you a Gemini?” (chances of success, one in twelve), or 
“What sign are you?” Much more rarely am I asked, “Have you 
heard that gold is made in supernova explosions?” or “When do 
you think Congress will approve a Mars Rover?” 

Astrology contends that which constellation the planets are in 
at the moment of your birth profoundly influences your future. 
A few thousand years ago, the idea developed that the motions 
of the planets determined the fates of kings, dynasties, empires. 
Astrologers studied the motions of the planets and asked them¬ 
selves what had happened the last time that, say, Venus was 
rising in the Constellation of the Goat; perhaps something similar 
would happen this time as well. It was a subtle and risky business. 
Astrologers came to be employed only by the State. In many 
countries it was a capital offense for anyone but the official 


The root of the word means “Moon. 






The Harmony of Worlds — 49 


astrologer to read the portents in the skies: a good way to over¬ 
throw a regime was to predict its downfall Chinese court astrol¬ 
ogers who made inaccurate predictions were executed. Others 
simply doctored the records so that afterwards they were in 
perfect conformity with events. Astrology developed into a 
strange combination of observations, mathematics and careful 
record-keeping with fuzzy thinking and pious fraud. 

But if the planets could determine the destinies of nations, 
how could they avoid influencing what will happen to me to¬ 
morrow? The notion of a personal astrology developed in Alex¬ 
andrian Egypt and spread through the Greek and Roman worlds 
about 2,000 years ago. We today can recognize the antiquity of 
astrology in words such as disaster , which is Greek for “bad star,” 
influenza , Italian for (astral) “influence”; mazeltov , Hebrew—and, 
ultimately, Babylonian—for “good constellation,” or the Yiddish 
word shlamazel , applied to someone plagued by relentless ill-for¬ 
tune, which again traces to the Babylonian astronomical lexicon. 
According to Pliny, there were Romans considered sideratio , 
“planet-struck.” Planets were widely thought to he a direct cause of 
death. Or consider consider : it means “with the planets,” evi¬ 
dently a prerequisite for serious reflection. The table on p. 51 
shows the mortality statistics in the City of London in 1632. 
Among the terrible losses from infant and childhood diseases 
and such exotic illnesses as “the rising of the lights” and “the 
King’s evil,” we find that, of 9,535 deaths, 13 people succumbed 
to “planet,” more than died of cancer. 1 wonder what the symp¬ 
toms were. 

And personal astrology is with us still: consider two different 
newspaper astrology columns published in the same city on the 
same day. For example, we can examine the New York Post and 
the New York Daily News on September 21, 1979. Suppose you 
are a Libra—that is, born between September 21 and October 22. 
According to the astrologer for the Post , “a compromise will help 
ease tension”; useful, perhaps, but somewhat vague. According to 
the Daily News's astrologer, you must “demand more of your¬ 
self,” an admonition that is also vague but also different. These 
“predictions” are not predictions; rather they are pieces of ad¬ 
vice—they tell what to do, not what will happen. Deliberately, 
they are phrased so generally that they could apply to anyone. 
And they display major mutual inconsistencies. Why are they 
published as unapologetically as sports statistics and stock market 
reports? 

Astrology can be tested by the lives of twins. There are many 
cases in which one twin is killed in childhood, in a riding acci¬ 
dent, say, or is struck by lightning, while the other lives to a 
prosperous old age. Each was born in precisely the same place 
and within minutes of the other. Exactly the same planets were 
rising at their births. It astrology were valid, how could two such 
twins have such profoundly different fates? It also turns out that 



Sunlight enters a window and illuminates 
a niche near dawn on June 21 at Casa 
Rincanada. 



A striking Anasazi solstice marker from 
around the year 1000. 



“Medicine Wheel” from Saskatchewan, 
built around 600 B.C.: the oldest astro¬ 
nomical observatory in the Americas. Its 
diameter is about eighty meters. The cairn 
at left is for sighting the sunrise at the 
summer solstice. Photo by Dr. John Eddy. 




50 — Cosmos 



The retrograde motion, over many 
months through the background consteb 
lations, of the planet Mars, shown in red. 



The apparent motion, over many months, 
through the same constellations of many 
planets. 


astrologers cannot even agree among themselves on what a given 
horoscope means. In careful tests, they are unable to predict the 
character and future of people they know nothing about except 
their time and place of birth.* 

There is something curious about the national flags of the 
planet Earth. The flag of the United States has fifty stars; the 
Soviet Union and Israel, one each; Burma, fourteen; Grenada and 
Venezuela, seven; China, five; Iraq, three; Sao Tome e Principe, 
two; Japan, Uruguay, Malawi, Bangladesh and Taiwan, the Sun; 
Brazil, a celestial sphere; Australia, Western Samoa, New Zea¬ 
land and Papua New Guinea, the constellation of the Southern 
Cross; Bhutan, the dragon pearl, symbol of the Earth; Cambodia, 
the Angkor Wat astronomical observatory; India, South Korea 
and the Mongolian Peoples’ Republic, cosmological symbols. 
Many socialist nations display stars. Many Islamic countries dis¬ 
play crescent moons. Almost half of our national flags exhibit 
astronomical symbols. The phenomenon is transcultural, non¬ 
sectarian, worldwide. It is also not restricted to our time: Su¬ 
merian cylinder seals from the third millennium B.C. and Taoist 
flags in prerevolutionary China displayed constellations. Nations, 
I do not doubt, wish to embrace something of the power and 
credibility of the heavens. We seek a connection with the 
Cosmos. We want to count in the grand scale of things. And it 
turns out we are connected—not in the personal, small-scale un¬ 
imaginative fashion that the astrologers pretend, but in the deepest 
ways, involving the origin of matter, the habitability of the 
Earth, the evolution and destiny of the human species, themes to 
which we will return. 


Modern popular astrology runs directly back to Claudius Pto- 
lemaeus, whom we call Ptolemy, although he was unrelated to 
the kings of the same name. He worked in the Library of Alex¬ 
andria in the second century. All that arcane business about 
planets ascendant in this or that solar or lunar “house” or the 
“Age of Aquarius” comes from Ptolemy, who codified the Babylonian 


*Skepticism about astrology and related doctrines is neither new nor 
exclusive to the West. For example, in the Essays on Idleness, written in 
1332 by Yoshida Kenko, we read: 

The Yin-Yang teachings [in Japan] have nothing to say on the 
subject of the Red Tongue Days. Formerly people did not avoid 
these days, but of late—I wonder who is responsible for starting 
this custom—people have taken to saying things such as, “An 
enterprise begun on a Red Tongue Day will never see an end,” or, 
“Anything you say or do on a Red Tongue Day is bound to come 
to naught: you lose what you’ve won, your plans are undone.” 
What nonsense! If one counted the projects begun on carefully 
selected “lucky days” which came to nothing in the end, they 
would probably be quite as many as the fruitless enterprises begun 
on the Red Tongue days. 





The Harmony of Worlds -51 


astrological tradition. Here is a typical horoscope from 
Ptolemy’s time, written in Greek on papyrus, for a little girl born 
in the year 150: “The birth of Philoe. The 10th year of Anton- 
inus Caesar the lord, Phamenoth 15 to 16, first hour of the night. 
Sun in Pisces, Jupiter and Mercury in Aries, Saturn in Cancer, 
Mars in Leo, Venus and the Moon in Aquarius, horoscopus 
Capricorn.” The method of enumerating the months and the 
years has changed much more over the intervening centuries 
than have the astrological niceties. A typical excerpt from Pto- 
lemy’s astrological book, the Tetrabiblos , reads: “Saturn, if he is in 
the orient, makes his subjects in appearance dark-skinned, robust, 
black-haired, curly-haired, hairy-chested, with eyes of moderate 
size, of middling stature, and in temperament having an excess of 
the moist and cold.” Ptolemy believed not only that behavior 
patterns were influenced by the planets and the stars but also that 
questions of stature, complexion, national character and even 
congenital physical abnormalities were determined by the stars. 
On this point modern astrologers seem to have adopted a more 
cautious position. 

But modern astrologers have forgotten about the precession of 
the equinoxes, which Ptolemy understood. They ignore atmo¬ 
spheric refraction, about which Ptolemy wrote. They pay almost 
no attention to all the moons and planets, asteroids and comets, 
quasars and pulsars, exploding galaxies, symbiotic stars, cataclys¬ 
mic variables and X-ray sources that have been discovered since 
Ptolemy’s time. Astronomy is a science—the study of the universe 
as it is. Astrology is a pseudoscience—a claim, in the absence of 
good evidence, that the other planets affect our everyday lives. 
In Ptolemy’s time the distinction between astronomy and astrol¬ 
ogy was not clear. Today it is. 

As an astronomer, Ptolemy named the stars, listed their 
brightnesses, gave good reasons for believing that the Earth is a 
sphere, set down rules for predicting eclipses and, perhaps most 
important, tried to understand why planets exhibit that strange, 
wandering motion against the background of distant 
constellations. He developed a predictive model to understand 
planetary motions and decode the message in the skies. The 
study of the heavens brought Ptolemy a kind of ecstasy. “Mortal 
as I am,” he wrote, “I know that I am born for a day. But when I 
follow at my pleasure the serried multitude of the stars in their 
circular course, my feet no longer touch the Earth ...” 

Ptolemy believed that the Earth was at the center of the 
universe; that the Sun, Moon, planets and stars went around the 
Earth. This is the most natural idea in the world. The Earth 
seems steady, solid, immobile, while we can see the heavenly 
bodies rising and setting each day. Every culture has leaped to the 
geocentric hypothesis. As Johannes Kepler wrote, “It is therefore 
impossible that reason not previously instructed should imagine 
anything other than that the Earth is a kind of vast house with 


Pfaturaland Political 

OBSERVATIONS 

Mentioned in a following Index, 

and made upon the 

Bills of Mortality. 


By fOHU^C gPAV^CT, 

Citizen of 

LONDON. 


With refercnce to the Government , fyHgton, Trade } 
Growth, Ayrt, Diftafes , and the feveral Changes of the 
faid City. 

' me ut miretur Turba, laboro. 

Contetpus pautir Lcfhnbut -— 


LONDON, 

Printed by The : Roycroft , for Job Martin, Jams AUeJby A 
and T bo: Dust, at the Sign of the Bell in St. Pouf s 
Church-yard, MDCLXIJ. 

The cover of John Graunt’s 1632 book on 
actuarial statistics. 


The Diseases, and Casttalties this year being 1632. 


A Bortive, and Stilborn .. 
2V Affrighted . 

Aired . 

445 

1 

628 

1 Grief. 

1 Jaundies. 

11 

43 

8 

Ague . 


43 

Impostume. 

74 

Apoplox, and Mcagrom 


17 

Kil’d by several accidents. . 

46 

Bit with a mad dog. .. 


1 

King's Evil. 

38 

Bleeding . 


3 

Lethargie . 

2 

Bloody flux, scowring. 

and 


Livcrgrown . 

87 

flux . 


348 

Luuatiquc . 

5 

Brused, Issues, sores. 

and 


Made away themselves. 

15 

ulcers,. 


28 

Measles . 

80 

Burnt, and Scalded. . .. 


5 

Murthered . 

7 

Burst, and Rupture.. .. 


9 ! 

Over-laid, and starved at 


Cancer, and Wolf. 


10 

nurse. 

7 

Canker . 


1 

Palsia. 

25 

Childbed. 


171 

Piles. 

1 

Chrisomes, and Infants. 


2268 

Plague. 

8 

Cold, and Cough. 


55 

Planet . 

13 

Colick, Stone, and Strangury 

56 

Pleurisie, and Spleen. 

36 

Consumption . 


1797 

Purples, and spotted Feaver 

38 

Convulsion . 


241 

Quinsie . 

7 

Cut of the Stone. 


5 

Rising of the Lights. 

98 

Dead in the street, 

and 


Sciatica . 

1 

starved . 


6 

Scurvcy, and Itch. 

9 

Dropsie, and Swelling. 


267 

Suddenly . 

62 

Drowned. 


34 

Surfet. 

86 

Executed, and prest to death 

18 

Swine Pox. 

6 

Falling Sickness. 


7 ! 

Teeth . 

470 

Fever . 


nos 

Thrush, and Sore mouth. .. 

40 

Fistula . 


13 

Tympany . 

13 

Flocks, and small Pox. 


531 

Tissick . 

34 

French Pox. 


12 

Vomiting . 

1 

Gangrene . 


5 

Worms . 

27 

Gout . 


4 j 




f Males .. . .4994"] f Males . . . .49321 Whereof, 

Christened ^ Females. . 4590 Buried -j Females. . 4603 of the 

(_In all.... 9584 j ^In all.... 9535 J Plague. 8 

Increased in the Burials in the 122 Parishes, and at the Pest- 

house this year. 993 

Decreased of the Plague in the 122 Parishes, and at the rest- 
house this year. 266 po] 

Causes of death in London, 1632. From 
Graunt. 





























































52 — Cosmos 



Nicholas Copernicus. Painting by Jean- 
Leon Huens, © National Geographic So- 
ciety. 

Johannes Kepler. Tycho Brahe hangs on 
his wall. Painting by Jean-Leon Huens, 
© National Geographic Society. 


the vault of the sky placed on top of it; it is motionless and within 
it the Sun being so small passes from one region to another, like a 
bird wandering through the air.” But how do we explain the 
apparent motion of the planets—Mars, for example, which had 
been known for thousands of years before Ptolemy’s time? (One 
of the epithets given Mars by the ancient Egyptians was sekded-ef 
em khetkhet, which means “who travels backwards,” a clear refen 
ence to its retrograde or loop-the-loop apparent motion.) 

Ptolemy’s model of planetary motion can be represented by a 
little machine, like those that, serving a similar purpose, existed 
in Ptolemy’s time.* The problem was to figure out a “real” motion 
of the planets, as seen from up there, on the “outside,” which 
would reproduce with great accuracy the apparent motion of the 
planets, as seen from down here, on the “inside.” 

The planets were imagined to go around the Earth affixed to 
perfect transparent spheres. But they were not attached directly 
to the spheres, but indirectly, through a kind of off-center wheel. 
The sphere turns, the little wheel rotates, and, as seen from the 


* Four centuries earlier, such a device was constructed by Archimedes 
and examined and described by Cicero in Rome, where it had been 
carried by the Roman general Marcellus, one of whose soldiers had, 
gratuitously and against orders, killed the septuagenarian scientist during 
the conquest of Syracuse. 





The Harmony of Worlds - 53 


Earth, Mars does its loop-the-loop. This model permitted rea- 
sonably accurate predictions of planetary motion, certainly good 
enough for the precision of measurement available in Ptolemy’s 
day, and even many centuries later. 

Ptolemy’s aetherial spheres, imagined in medieval times to be 
made of crystal, are why we still talk about the music of the 
spheres and a seventh heaven (there was a “heaven,” or sphere 
for the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Sa¬ 
turn, and one more for the stars). With the Earth the center of 
the Universe, with creation pivoted about terrestrial events, with 
the heavens imagined constructed on utterly unearthly principles, 
there was little motivation for astronomical observations. Sup¬ 
ported by the Church through the Dark Ages, Ptolemy’s model 
helped prevent the advance of astronomy for a millennium. Fi¬ 
nally, in 1543, a quite different hypothesis to explain the appar¬ 
ent motion of the planets was published by a Polish Catholic 
cleric named Nicholas Copernicus. Its most daring feature was 
the proposition that the Sun, not the Earth, was at the center of 
the universe. The Earth was demoted to just one of the planets, 
third from the Sun, moving in a perfect circular orbit. (Ptolemy 
had considered such a heliocentric model but rejected it imme¬ 
diately; from the physics of Aristotle, the implied violent rotation 
of the Earth seemed contrary to observation.) 

It worked at least as well as Ptolemy’s spheres in explaining the 
apparent motion of the planets. But it annoyed many people. In 
1616 the Catholic Church placed Copernicus’ work on its list of 
forbidden books “until corrected” by local ecclesiastical censors, 
where it remained until 1835.* Martin Luther described him as 
“an upstart astrologer . . . This fool wishes to reverse the entire 
science of astronomy. But Sacred Scripture tells us that Joshua 
commanded the Sun to stand still, and not the Earth.” Even some 
of Copernicus’ admirers argued that he had not really believed in 
a Sun-centered universe but had merely proposed it as a conve¬ 
nience for calculating the motions of the planets. 

The epochal confrontation between the two views of the 
Cosmos—Earth-centered and Sun-centered—reached a climax in 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in the person of a man 
who was, like Ptolemy, both astrologer and astronomer. He lived 
in a time when the human spirit was fettered and the mind 
chained; when the ecclesiastical pronouncements of a millennium 
or two earlier on scientific matters were considered more reliable 
than contemporary findings made with techniques unavailable to 
the ancients; when deviations, even on arcane theological mat¬ 
ters, from the prevailing doxological preferences, Catholic or 


* In a recent inventory of nearly every sixteenth-century copy of Coper¬ 
nicus’ book, Owen Gingerich has found the censorship to have been 
ineffective: only 60 percent of the copies in Italy were “corrected,” and 
not one in Iberia. 



54 — Cosmos 



Zl 

US & n 
US A A 

tfss $ 

S 9 9 
S i* la 

S n ur 

VSk? IS 
if&iA t? 


4 a*n?4r z* 

* ? 

W2i^ifT 

<i nii*>€ 

II £ 251 

53 f,f 8 


(ID I 


i atteffjr 


z JO 





Calendar page for November, showing Sagittarius the 
Archer. From a German astrological manuscript writ¬ 
ten about 1450. 


A medieval discussion of the relative lengths of the 
day and night. 



The geocentric pre-Copemican Universe in Christian 
Europe. At center, Earth is divided into Heaven (tan) 
and Hell (brown). The elements water (green), air 
(blue) and fire (red) surround the Earth. Moving out¬ 
ward, concentrically, are the spheres containing the 
seven planets, the Moon and the Sun, as well as the 
“Twelve Orders of the Blessed Spirits,” the Cherubim 
and the Seraphim. German manuscript, c. 1450. 



The signs of the Zodiac, with Sun and Moon at 
center. At the corners are the four winds. Colors 
refer to the four terrestrial “elements” of earth 
(brown), air (blue), water (green) and fire (red). Ger¬ 
man astrological manuscript, c. 1450. 











The Harmony of Worlds -55 




Paper computers with four movable disks for predicting solar and lunar eclipses. From the Astronomicum 
Caesarium of Petrus Apianus, 1540. 




Left: A paper computer for determining when the Moon 
reaches one of its aspects with respect to a planet. A pearl 
would be attached to the thread and used as an indicator. 

From the Astronomicum Caesarium. Right: A “planet page” for Mercury, which is shown as the deep'blue circular 
symbol. Various constellations surround Mercury (Cassiopeia seated just below, Orion slaying a beast to her right), 
and on the ground are the various human activities that astrologers believed to be ruled by the planets. German 
astrological manuscript, c. 1450. 
















56 — Cosmos 



In Ptolemy’s Earthcentered system, the 
little sphere called the epicycle containing 
the planet turns while attached to a larger 
rotating sphere, producing retrograde ap' 
parent motion against the background of 
distant stars. 



In Copernicus’ system, the Earth and 
other planets move in circular orbits about 
the Sun. As the Earth overtakes Mars, the 
latter exhibits its retrograde apparent mo- 
tion against the background of distant 
stars. 


Protestant, were punished by humiliation, taxation, exile, torture 
or death. The heavens were inhabited by angels, demons and the 
Hand of God, turning the planetary crystal spheres. Science was 
barren of the idea that underlying the phenomena of Nature 
might be the laws of physics. But the brave and lonely struggle of 
this man was to ignite the modern scientific revolution. 

Johannes Kepler was born in Germany in 1571 and sent as a 
boy to the Protestant seminary school in the provincial town of 
Maulbronn to be educated for the clergy. It was a kind of boot 
camp, training young minds in the use of theological weaponry 
against the fortress of Roman Catholicism. Kepler, stubborn, 
intelligent and fiercely independent, suffered two friendless years 
in bleak Maulbronn, becoming isolated and withdrawn, his 
thoughts devoted to his imagined unworthiness in the eyes of 
God. He repented a thousand sins no more wicked than another’s 
and despaired of ever attaining salvation. 

But God became for him more than a divine wrath craving 
propitiation. Kepler’s God was the creative power of the Cosmos. 
The boy’s curiosity conquered his fear. He wished to learn the 
eschatology of the world; he dared to contemplate the Mind of 
God. These dangerous visions, at first insubstantial as a memory, 
became a lifelong obsession. The hubristic longings of a child 
seminarian were to carry Europe out of the cloister of medieval 
thought. 

The sciences of classical antiquity had been silenced more than 
a thousand years before, but in the late Middle Ages some faint 
echoes of those voices, preserved by Arab scholars, began to 
insinuate themselves into the European educational curriculum. 
In Maulbronn, Kepler heard their reverberations, studying, be^ 
sides theology, Greek and Latin, music and mathematics. In the 
geometry of Euclid he thought he glimpsed an image of perfect 
tion and cosmic glory. He was later to write: “Geometry existed 
before the Creation. It is co^eternal with the mind of God . . . 
Geometry provided God with a model for the Creation . . . 
Geometry is God Himself.” 

In the midst of Kepler’s mathematical raptures, and despite his 
sequestered life, the imperfections of the outside world must also 
have molded his character. Superstition was a widely available 
nostrum for people powerless against the miseries of famine, 
pestilence and deadly doctrinal conflict. For many, the only cen 
tainty was the stars, and the ancient astrological conceit pros^ 
pered in the courtyards and taverns of feanhaunted Europe. 
Kepler, whose attitude toward astrology remained ambiguous all 
his life, wondered whether there might be hidden patterns um 
derlying the apparent chaos of daily life. If the world was crafted 
by God, should it not be examined closely? Was not all of 
creation an expression of the harmonies in the mind of God? The 
book of Nature had waited more than a millennium for a reader. 

In 1589, Kepler left Maulbronn to study for the clergy at the 




The Harmony of Worlds - 57 


great university in Tubingen and found it a liberation. Con- 
fronted by the most vital intellectual currents of the time, his 
genius was immediately recognized by his teachers—one of 
whom introduced the young man to the dangerous mysteries of 
the Copernican hypothesis. A heliocentric universe resonated 
with Kepler’s religious sense, and he embraced it with fervor. 
The Sun was a metaphor for God, around Whom all else re- 
volves. Before he was to be ordained, he was made an attractive 
offer of secular employment, which—perhaps because he felt 
himself indifferently suited to an ecclesiastical career—he found 
himself accepting. He was summoned to Graz, in Austria, to 
teach secondary school mathematics, and began a little later to 
prepare astronomical and meteorological almanacs and to cast 
horoscopes. “God provides for every animal his means of suste- 
nance,” he wrote. “For the astronomer, He has provided astroh 

ogy-” 

Kepler was a brilliant thinker and a lucid writer, but he was a 
disaster as a classroom teacher. He mumbled. He digressed. He 
was at times utterly incomprehensible. He drew only a handful of 
students his first year at Graz; the next year there were none. He 
was distracted by an incessant interior clamor of associations and 
speculations vying for his attention. And one pleasant summer 
afternoon, deep in the interstices of one of his interminable 
lectures, he was visited by a revelation that was to alter radically 
the future of astronomy. Perhaps he stopped in mid-sentence. His 
inattentive students, longing for the end of the day, took little 
notice, I suspect, of the historic moment. 

There were only six planets known in Kepler’s time: Mercury, 
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Kepler wondered why 
only six? Why not twenty, or a hundred? Why did they have the 
spacing between their orbits that Copernicus had deduced? No 
one had ever asked such questions before. There were known to 
be five regular or “platonic” solids, whose sides were regular 
polygons, as known to the ancient Greek mathematicians after 
the time of Pythagoras. Kepler thought the two numbers were 
connected, that the reason there were only six planets was be- 
cause there were only five regular solids, and that these solids, 
inscribed or nested one within another, would specify the dis¬ 
tances of the planets from the Sun. In these perfect forms, he 
believed he had recognized the invisible supporting structures for 
the spheres of the six planets. He called his revelation The 
Cosmic Mystery. The connection between the solids of Pytha- 
goras and the disposition of the planets could admit but one 
explanation: the Hand of God, Geometer. 

Kepler was amazed that he—immersed, so he thought, in sin- 
should have been divinely chosen to make this great discovery. 
He submitted a proposal for a research grant to the Duke of 
Wiirttemberg, offering to supervise the construction of his nested 
solids as a three-dimensional model so that others could glimpse 



58 - Cosmos 



The five perfect solids of Pythagoras and 
Plato. See Appendix 2. 


Kepler’s Cosmic Mystery, the spheres of 
the six planets nested in the five perfect 
solids of Pythagoras and Plato. The out' 
ermost perfect solid is the cube. 


the beauty of the holy geometry. It might, he added, be com 
trived of silver and precious stones and serve incidentally as a 
ducal chalice. The proposal was rejected with the kindly advice 
that he first construct a less expensive version out of paper, which 
he promptly attempted to do: “The intense pleasure I have re' 
ceived from this discovery can never be told in words ... I 
shunned no calculation no matter how difficult. Days and nights I 
spent in mathematical labors, until I could see whether my hy' 
pothesis would agree with the orbits of Copernicus or whether 
my joy was to vanish into thin air.” But no matter how hard he 
tried, the solids and the planetary orbits did not agree well. The 
elegance and grandeur of the theory, however, persuaded him 
that the observations must be in error, a conclusion drawn when 
the observations are unobliging by many other theorists in the 
history of science. There was then only one man in the world 
who had access to more accurate observations of apparent plam 
etary positions, a selfexiled Danish nobleman who had accepted 
the post of Imperial Mathematician in the Court of the Holy 
Roman Emperor, Rudolf II. That man was Tycho Brahe. By 
chance, at Rudolf s suggestion, he had just invited Kepler, whose 
mathematical fame was growing, to join him in Prague. 

A provincial schoolteacher of humble origins, unknown to all 
but a few mathematicians, Kepler was diffident about Tycho’s 
offer. But the decision was made for him. In 1598, one of the 





The Harmony of Worlds — 59 


many premonitory tremors of the coming Thirty Years’ War 
engulfed him. The local Catholic archduke, steadfast in dogmatic 
certainty, vowed he would rather “make a desert of the country 
than rule over heretics.”* Protestants were excluded from eco- 
nomic and political power, Kepler’s school was closed, and 
prayers, books and hymns deemed heretical were forbidden. Fi- 
nally the townspeople were summoned to individual examina- 
tions on the soundness of their private religious convictions, 
those refusing to profess the Roman Catholic faith being fined a 
tenth of their income and, upon pain of death, exiled forever 
from Graz. Kepler chose exile: “Hypocrisy I have never learned. I 
am in earnest about faith. 1 do not play with it.” 

Leaving Graz, Kepler, his wife and stepdaughter set out on the 
difficult journey to Prague. Theirs was not a happy marriage. 
Chronically ill, having recently lost two young children, his wife 
was described as “stupid, sulking, lonely, melancholy.” She had 
no understanding of her husband’s work and, having been raised 
among the minor rural gentry, she despised his impecunious 
profession. He for his part alternately admonished and ignored 
her, “for my studies sometimes made me thoughtless; but I 
learned my lesson, I learned to have patience with her. When 1 
saw that she took my words to heart, I would rather have bitten 
my own finger than to give her further offense.” But Kepler 
remained preoccupied with his work. 

He envisioned Tycho’s domain as a refuge from the evils of 
the time, as the place where his Cosmic Mystery would be com 
firmed. He aspired to become a colleague of the great Tycho 
Brahe, who for thirtyTive years had devoted himself, before the 
invention of the telescope, to the measurement of a clockwork 
universe, ordered and precise. Kepler’s expectations were to be 
unfulfilled. Tycho himself was a flamboyant figure, festooned 
with a golden nose, the original having been lost in a student 
duel fought over who was the superior mathematician. Around 
him was a raucous entourage of assistants, sycophants, distant 
relatives and assorted hangers-on. Their endless revelry, their 
innuendoes and intrigues, their cruel mockery of the pious and 
scholarly country bumpkin depressed and saddened Kepler: 
“Tycho ... is superlatively rich but knows not how to make use 
of it. Any single instrument of his costs more than my and my 
whole family’s fortunes put together.” 

Impatient to see Tycho’s astronomical data, Kepler would be 
thrown only a few scraps at a time: “Tycho gave me no opportu¬ 
nity to share in his experiences. He would only, in the course of a 


* By no means the most extreme such remark in medieval or Reforma¬ 
tion Europe. Upon being asked how to distinguish the faithful from the 
infidel in the siege of a largely Albigensian city, Domingo de Guzman, 
later known as Saint Dominic, allegedly replied: “Kill them all. God will 
know his own.” 



60 — Cosmos 


meal and, in between other matters, mention, as if in passing, 
today the figure of the apogee of one planet, tomorrow the nodes 
of another . . . Tycho possesses the best observations . . . He also 
has collaborators. He lacks only the architect who would put all 
this to use.” Tycho was the greatest observational genius of the 
age, and Kepler the greatest theoretician. Each knew that, alone, 
he would be unable to achieve the synthesis of an accurate and 
coherent world system, which they both felt to be imminent. But 
Tycho was not about to make a gift of his life’s work to a much 
younger potential rival. Joint authorship of the results, if any, of 
the collaboration was for some reason unacceptable. The birth of 
modern science—the offspring of theory and observation—tee^ 
tered on the precipice of their mutual mistrust. In the remaining 
eighteen months that Tycho was to live, the two quarreled and 
were reconciled repeatedly. At a dinner given by the Baron of 
Rosenberg, Tycho, having robustly drunk much wine, “placed 
civility ahead of health,” and resisted his body’s urgings to leave, 
even if briefly, before the baron. The consequent urinary infec^ 
tion worsened when Tycho resolutely rejected advice to temper 
his eating and drinking. On his deathbed, Tycho bequeathed his 
observations to Kepler, and “on the last night of his gentle de^ 
lirium, he repeated over and over again these words, like some- 
one composing a poem: ‘Let me not seem to have lived in vain 
. . . Let me not seem to have lived in vain.’ ” 

After Tycho’s death, Kepler, now the new Imperial Mathe^ 
matician, managed to extract the observations from Tycho’s re^ 
calcitrant family. His conjecture that the orbits of the planets are 
circumscribed by the five platonic solids was no more supported 
by Tycho’s data than by Copernicus’. His “Cosmic Mystery” was 
disproved entirely by the much later discoveries of the planets 
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto—there are no additional platonic 
solids* that would determine their distances from the sun. The 
nested Pythagorean solids also made no allowance for the exis^ 
tence of the Earth’s moon, and Galileo’s discovery of the four 
large moons of Jupiter was also discomfiting. But far from be^ 
coming morose, Kepler wished to find additional satellites and 
wondered how many satellites each planet should have. He 
wrote to Galileo: “I immediately began to think how there could 
be any addition to the number of the planets without overturn^ 
ing my Mysterium Cosmographicum, according to which Euclid’s 
five regular solids do not allow more than six planets around the 
Sun ... I am so far from disbelieving the existence of the four 
circumjovial planets that I long for a telescope, to anticipate you, 
if possible, in discovering two around Mars, as the proportion 
seems to require, six or eight round Saturn, and perhaps one each 
round Mercury and Venus.” Mars does have two small moons, 
and a major geological feature on the larger of them is today 

* The proof of this statement can be found in Appendix 2. 



The Harmony of Worlds - 61 


called the Kepler Ridge in honor of this guess. But he was em 
tirely mistaken about Saturn, Mercury and Venus, and Jupiter 
has many more moons than Galileo discovered. We still do not 
really know why there are only nine planets, more or less, and 
why they have the relative distances from the Sun that they do. 
(See Chapter 8.) 

Tycho’s observations of the apparent motion of Mars and 
other planets through the constellations were made over a period 
of many years. These data, from the last few decades before the 
telescope was invented, were the most accurate that had yet been 
obtained. Kepler worked with a passionate intensity to unden 
stand them: What real motion of the Earth and Mars about the 
Sun could explain, to the precision of measurement, the apparent 
motion of Mars in the sky, including its retrograde loops through 
the background constellations? Tycho had commended Mars to 
Kepler because its apparent motion seemed most anomalous, 
most difficult to reconcile with an orbit made of circles. (To the 
reader who might be bored by his many calculations, he later 
wrote: “If you are wearied by this tedious procedure, take pity on 
me who carried out at least seventy trials.”) 

Pythagoras, in the sixth century B.C., Plato, Ptolemy and all the 
Christian astronomers before Kepler had assumed that the 
planets moved in circular paths. The circle was thought to be a 
“perfect” geometrical shape and the planets, placed high in the 
heavens, away from earthly “corruption,” were also thought to be 
in some mystical sense “perfect.” Galileo, Tycho and Copernicus 
were all committed to uniform circular planetary motion, the 
latter asserting that “the mind shudders” at the alternative, be^ 
cause “it would be unworthy to suppose such a thing in a 
Creation constituted in the best possible way.” So at first Kepler 
tried to explain the observations by imagining that the Earth and 
Mars moved in circular orbits about the Sun. 

After three years of calculation, he believed he had found the 
correct values for a Martian circular orbit, which matched ten of 
Tycho’s observations within two minutes of arc. Now, there are 
60 minutes of arc in an angular degree, and 90 degrees, a right 
angle, from the horizon to the zenith. So a few minutes of arc is a 
very small quantity to measure—especially without a telescope. It 
is oneTifteenth the angular diameter of the full Moon as seen 
from Earth. But Kepler’s replenishable ecstasy soon crumbled 
into gloom—because two of Tycho’s further observations were 
inconsistent with Kepler’s orbit, by as much as eight minutes of 
arc: 

Divine Providence granted us such a diligent observer in 
Tycho Brahe that his observations convicted this . . . cah 
culation of an error of eight minutes; it is only right that we 
should accept God’s gift with a grateful mind ... If I had 
believed that we could ignore these eight minutes, I would 
have patched up my hypothesis accordingly. But, since it 



62 — Cosmos 



Kepler’s first law: A planet (P) moves in an 
ellipse with the Sun (S) at one of the two 
foci. 



Kepler’s second law: A planet sweeps out 
equal areas in equal times. It takes as long 
to travel from B to A as from F to E as 
from D to C; and the shaded areas BSA, 
FSE and DSC are all equal. 


was not permissible to ignore, those eight minutes pointed 

the road to a complete reformation in astronomy. 

The difference between a circular orbit and the true orbit 
could be distinguished only by precise measurement and a com 
rageous acceptance of the facts: “The universe is stamped with 
the adornment of harmonic proportions, but harmonies must 
accommodate experience.” Kepler was shaken at being compelled 
to abandon a circular orbit and to question his faith in the Divine 
Geometer. Having cleared the stable of astronomy of circles and 
spirals, he was left, he said, with “only a single cartful of dung,” a 
stretchedout circle something like an oval. 

Eventually, Kepler came to feel that his fascination with the 
circle had been a delusion. The Earth was a planet, as Copernicus 
had said, and it was entirely obvious to Kepler that the Earth, 
wracked by wars, pestilence, famine and unhappiness, fell short 
of perfection. Kepler was one of the first people since antiquity to 
propose that the planets were material objects made of imperfect 
stuff like the Earth. And if planets were “imperfect,” why not 
their orbits as well? He tried various ovaldike curves, calculated 
away, made some arithmetical mistakes (which caused him at 
first to reject the correct answer) and months later in some des- 
peration tried the formula for an ellipse, first codified in the 
Alexandrian Library by Apollonius of Perga. He found that it 
matched Tycho’s observations beautifully: “The truth of nature, 
which I had rejected and chased away, returned by stealth 
through the back door, disguising itself to be accepted . . . Ah, 
what a foolish bird I have been!” 

Kepler had found that Mars moves about the Sun not in a 
circle, but in an ellipse. The other planets have orbits much less 
elliptical than that of Mars, and if Tycho had urged him to study 
the motion of, say, Venus, Kepler might never have discovered 
the true orbits of the planets. In such an orbit the Sun is not at 
the center but is offset, at the focus of the ellipse. When a given 
planet is at its nearest to the Sun, it speeds up. When it is at its 
farthest, it slows down. Such motion is why we describe the 
planets as forever falling toward, but never reaching, the Sun. 
Kepler’s first law of planetary motion is simply this: A planet 
moves in an ellipse with the Sun at one focus. 

In uniform circular motion, an equal angle or fraction of the 
arc of a circle is covered in equal times. So, for example, it takes 
twice as long to go two-thirds of the way around a circle as it 
does to go one-third of the way around. Kepler found something 
different for elliptical orbits: As the planet moves along its orbit, 
it sweeps out a little wedge-shaped area within the ellipse. When 
it is close to the Sun, in a given period of time it traces out a large 
arc in its orbit, but the area represented by that arc is not very 
large because the planet is then near the Sun. When the planet is 
far from the Sun, it covers a much smaller arc in the same period 



The Harmony of Worlds — 63 


of time, but that arc corresponds to a bigger area because the Sun 
is now more distant. Kepler found that these two areas were 
precisely the same no matter how elliptical the orbit: the long 
skinny area, corresponding to the planet far from the Sun, and 
the shorter, squatter area, when the planet is close to the Sun, are 
exactly equal. This was Kepler’s second law of planetary motion: 
Planets sweep out equal areas in equal times. 

Kepler’s first two laws may seem a little remote and abstract: 
planets move in ellipses, and sweep out equal areas in equal 
dmes. Well, so what? Circular motion is easier to grasp. We 
might have a tendency to dismiss these laws as mere mathemati- 
cal tinkering, something removed from everyday life. But these 
are the laws our planet obeys as we ourselves, glued by gravity to 
the surface of the Earth, hurtle through interplanetary space. We 
move in accord with laws of nature that Kepler first discovered. 
When we send spacecraft to the planets, when we observe dou- 
ble stars, when we examine the motion of distant galaxies, we 
find that throughout the universe Kepler’s laws are obeyed. 

Many years later, Kepler came upon his third and last law of 
planetary motion, a law that relates the motion of various planets 
to one another, that lays out correctly the clockwork of the solar 
system. He described it in a book called The Harmonies of the 
World. Kepler understood many things by the word harmony: 
the order and beauty of planetary motion, the existence of 
mathematical laws explaining that motion—an idea that goes 
back to Pythagoras—and even harmony in the musical sense, the 
“harmony of the spheres.” Unlike the orbits of Mercury and 
Mars, the orbits of the other planets depart so little from cir¬ 
cularity that we cannot make out their true shapes even in an 
extremely accurate diagram. The Earth is our moving platform 
from which we observe the motion of the other planets against 
the backdrop of distant constellations. The inner planets move 
rapidly in their orbits—that is why Mercury has the name it does: 
Mercury was the messenger of the gods. Venus, Earth and Mars 
move progressively less rapidly about the Sun. The outer planets, 
such as Jupiter and Saturn, move stately and slow, as befits the 
kings of the gods. 

Kepler’s third or harmonic law states that the squares of the 
periods of the planets (the times for them to complete one orbit) 
are proportional to the cubes of their average distance from the 
Sun; the more distant the planet, the more slowly it moves, but 
according to a precise mathematical law: P 2 = a 3 where P repre¬ 
sents the period of revolution of the planet about the Sun, mea¬ 
sured in years, and a the distance of the planet from the Sun 
measured in “astronomical units.” An astronomical unit is the 
distance of the Earth from the Sun. Jupiter, for example, is five 
astronomical units from the Sun, and a 3 = 5 * 5 x 5 =125. 
What number times itself equals 125? Why, 11, close enough. 
And 11 years is the period for Jupiter to go once around the Sun. 


.2 

I « 

o 

.*s 

s 


Kepler’s third or harmonic law, a precise 
connection between the size of a planet’s 
orbit and the period for it to go once 
around the Sun. It clearly applies to 
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, planets dis¬ 
covered long after Kepler’s death. 





64 — Cosmos 


A similar argument applies for every planet and asteroid and 
comet 

Not content merely to have extracted from Nature the laws of 
planetary motion, Kepler endeavored to find some still more 
fundamental underlying cause, some influence of the Sun on the 
kinematics of worlds. The planets sped up on approaching the 
Sun and slowed down on retreating from it. Somehow the distant 
planets sensed the Sun’s presence. Magnetism also was an infhn 
ence felt at a distance, and in a stunning anticipation of the idea 
of universal gravitation, Kepler suggested that the underlying 
cause was akin to magnetism: 

My aim in this is to show that the celestial machine is to be 
likened not to a divine organism but rather to a clockwork 
. . . , insofar as nearly all the manifold movements are can 
ried out by means of a single, quite simple magnetic force, as 
in the case of a clockwork [where] all motions [are caused] 
by a simple weight. 

Magnetism is, of course, not the same as gravity, but Kepler’s 
fundamental innovation here is nothing short of breathtaking: he 
proposed that quantitative physical laws that apply to the Earth 
are also the underpinnings of quantitative physical laws that 
govern the heavens. It was the first nonmystical explanation of 
motion in the heavens; it made the Earth a province of the 
Cosmos. “Astronomy,” he said “is part of physics.” Kepler stood 
at a cusp in history; the last scientific astrologer was the first 
astrophysicist. 

Not given to quiet understatement, Kepler assessed his dis¬ 
coveries in these words: 

With this symphony of voices man can play through the 
eternity of time in less than an hour, and can taste in small 
measure the delight of God, the Supreme Artist. ... I yield 
freely to the sacred frenzy . . . the die is cast, and I am 
writing the book—to be read either now or by posterity, it 
matters not. It can wait a century for a reader, as God 
Himself has waited 6,000 years for a witness. 

Within the “symphony of voices,” Kepler believed that the speed 
of each planet corresponds to certain notes in the Latinate musk 
cal scale popular in his day—do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ti, do. He 
claimed that in the harmony of the spheres, the tones of Earth 
are fa and mi, that the Earth is forever humming fa and mi, and 
that they stand in a straightforward way for the Latin word for 
famine. He argued, not unsuccessfully, that the Earth was best 
described by that single doleful word. 

Exactly eight days after Kepler’s discovery of his third law, the 
incident that unleashed the Thirty Years’ War transpired in 
Prague. The war’s convulsions shattered the lives of millions, 
Kepler among them. He lost his wife and son to an epidemic 
carried by the soldiery, his royal patron was deposed, and he was 




The Harmony of Worlds — 65 


excommunicated by the Lutheran Church for his uncompromis- 
ing individualism on matters of doctrine. Kepler was a refugee 
once again. The conflict, portrayed by both the Catholics and 
the Protestants as a holy war, was more an exploitation of rein 
gious fanaticism by those hungry for land and power. In the past, 
wars had tended to be resolved when the belligerent princes had 
exhausted their resources. But now organized pillage was intro- 
duced as a means of keeping armies in the field. The savaged 
population of Europe stood helpless as plowshares and pruning 
hooks were literally beaten into swords and spears.* 

Waves of rumor and paranoia swept through the countryside, 
enveloping especially the powerless. Among the many scapegoats 
chosen were elderly women living alone, who were charged with 
witchcraft: Kepler’s mother was carried away in the middle of the 
night in a laundry chest. In Kepler’s little hometown of Weil der 
Stadt, roughly three women were tortured and killed as witches 
every year between 1615 and 1629. And Katharina Kepler was a 
cantankerous old woman. She engaged in disputes that annoyed 
the local nobility, and she sold soporific and perhaps hallucin¬ 
ogenic drugs as do contemporary Mexican curanderas. Poor 
Kepler believed that he himself had contributed to her arrest. 

It came about because Kepler wrote one of the first works of 
science fiction, intended to explain and popularize science. It was 
called the Somnium , “The Dream.” He imagined a journey to the 
Moon, the space travelers standing on the lunar surface and 
observing the lovely planet Earth rotating slowly in the sky 
above them. By changing our perspective we can figure out how 
worlds work. In Kepler’s time one of the chief objections to the 
idea that the Earth turns was the fact that people do not feel the 
motion. In the Somnium he tried to make the rotation of the 
Earth plausible, dramatic, comprehensible: “As long as the multi¬ 
tude does not err, ... I want to be on the side of the many. 
Therefore, I take great pains to explain to as many people as 
possible.” (On another occasion he wrote in a letter, “Do not 
sentence me completely to the treadmill of mathematical calcu¬ 
lations—leave me time for philosophical speculations, my sole 
delight. ” t ) 

* Some examples are still to be seen in the Graz armory. 

f Brahe, like Kepler, was far from hostile to astrology, although he 
carefully distinguished his own secret version of astrology from the more 
common variants of his time, which he thought conducive to supersti¬ 
tion. In his book Astronomiae Instauratae M echanica, published in 
1598, he argued that astrology is “really more reliable than one would 
think” if charts of the position of the stars were properly improved. 
Brahe wrote: “I have been occupied in alchemy, as much as by the 
celestial studies, from my 23rd year.” But both of these pseudosciences, 
he felt, had secrets far too dangerous for the general populace (although 
entirely safe, he thought, in the hands of those princes and kings from 
whom he sought support). Brahe continued the long and truly dangerous 



66 — Cosmos 



The Moon from the Earth: The view 
from just outside the atmosphere. 


With the invention of the telescope, what Kepler called “lunar 
geography” was becoming possible. In the Somnium, he described 
the Moon as filled with mountains and valleys and as “porous, as 
though dug through with hollows and continuous caves,” a ref¬ 
erence to the lunar craters Galileo had recently discovered with 
the first astronomical telescope. He also imagined that the Moon 
had its inhabitants, well adapted to the inclemencies of the local 
environment. He describes the slowly rotating Earth viewed 
from the lunar surface and imagines the continents and oceans of 
our planet to produce some associative image like the Man in the 
Moon. He pictures the near contact of southern Spain with 
North Africa at the Straits of Gibraltar as a young woman in a 
flowing dress about to kiss her lover—although rubbing noses 
looks more like it to me. 

Because of the length of the lunar day and night Kepler de¬ 
scribed “the great intemperateness of climate and the most vio¬ 
lent alternation of extreme heat and cold on the Moon,” which is 
entirely correct. Of course, he did not get everything right. He 
believed, for example, that there was a substantial lunar atmo¬ 
sphere and oceans and inhabitants. Most curious is his view of 
the origin of the lunar craters, which make the Moon, he says, 
“not dissimilar to the face of a boy disfigured with smallpox.” He 
argued correctly that the craters are depressions rather than 
mounds. From his own observations he noted the ramparts sur¬ 
rounding many craters and the existence of central peaks. But he 
thought that their regular circular shape implied such a degree of 
order that only intelligent life could explain them. He did not 
realize that great rocks falling out of the sky would produce a 
local explosion, perfectly symmetric in all directions, that would 
carve out a circular cavity—the origin of the bulk of the craters 
on the Moon and the other terrestrial planets. He deduced in¬ 
stead “the existence of some race rationally capable of construct¬ 
ing those hollows on the surface of the Moon. This race must 
have many individuals, so that one group puts one hollow to use 
while another group constructs another hollow.” Against the 
view that such great construction projects were unlikely, Kepler 
offered as counterexamples the pyramids of Egypt and the Great 
Wall of China, which can, in fact, be seen today from Earth 
orbit. The idea that geometrical order reveals an underlying 
intelligence was central to Kepler’s life. His argument on the lunar 


tradition of some scientists who believe that only they and the tem¬ 
poral and ecclesiastical powers can be trusted with arcane knowledge: “It 
serves no useful purpose and is unreasonable, to make such things gen¬ 
erally known.” Kepler, on the other hand, lectured on astronomy in 
schools, published extensively and often at his own expense, and wrote 
science fiction, which was certainly not intended primarily for his scien¬ 
tific peers. He may not have been a popular writer of science in the 
modern sense, but the transition in attitudes in the single generation that 
separated Tycho and Kepler is telling. 





The Harmony of Worlds — 67 


craters is a clear foreshadowing of the Martian canal controversy 
(Chapter 5). It is striking that the observational search for extra- 
terrestrial life began in the same generation as the invention of 
the telescope, and with the greatest theoretician of the age. 

Parts of the Somnium were clearly autobiographical The hero, 
for example, visits Tycho Brahe. He has parents who sell drugs. 
His mother consorts with spirits and daemons, one of whom 
eventually provides the means to travel to the moon. The Sorrv 
nium makes clear to us, although it did not to all of Kepler’s 
contemporaries, that “in a dream one must be allowed the liberty 
of imagining occasionally that which never existed in the world 
of sense perception.” Science fiction was a new idea at the time of 
the Thirty Years’ War, and Kepler’s book was used as evidence 
that his mother was a witch. 

In the midst of other grave personal problems, Kepler rushed 
to Wiirttemberg to find his seventy-four-year-old mother 
chained in a Protestant secular dungeon and threatened, like 
Galileo in a Catholic dungeon, with torture. He set about, as a 
scientist naturally would, to find natural explanations for the 
various events that had precipitated the accusations of witch- 
craft, including minor physical ailments that the burghers of 
Wiirttemberg had attributed to her spells. The research was 
successful, a triumph, as was much of the rest of his life, of reason 
over superstition. His mother was exiled, with a sentence of 
death passed on her should she ever return to Wiirttemberg; and 
Kepler’s spirited defense apparently led to a decree by the Duke 
forbidding further trials for witchcraft on such slender evidence. 

The upheavals of the war deprived Kepler of much of his 
financial support, and the end of his life was spent fitfully, pleading 
for money and sponsors. He cast horoscopes for the Duke of 
Wallenstein, as he had done for Rudolf II, and spent his final 
years in a Silesian town controlled by Wallenstein and called 
Sagan. His epitaph, which he himself composed, was: “I measured 
the skies, now the shadows I measure. Sky-bound was the mind, 
Earth-bound the body rests.” But the Thirty Years’ War obli¬ 
terated his grave. If a marker were to be erected today, it might 
read, in homage to his scientific courage: “He preferred the hard 
truth to his dearest illusions.” 

Johannes Kepler believed that there would one day be “celes¬ 
tial ships with sails adapted to the winds of heaven” navigating 
the sky, filled with explorers “who would not fear the vastness” of 
space. And today those explorers, human and robot, employ as 
unerring guides on their voyages through the vastness of space 
the three laws of planetary motion that Kepler uncovered during 
a lifetime of personal travail and ecstatic discovery. 



The Earth from the Moon: The view that 
Kepler dreamed of. 


The lifelong quest of Johannes Kepler, to understand the 
motions of the planets, to seek a harmony in the heavens, 
culmi-nated thirty-six years after his death, in the work of 


68 — Cosmos 


Newton. Newton was born on January 4, 1643, so tiny that, 
as his mother told him years later, he would have fit into a quart 
mug. Sickly, feeling abandoned by his parents, quarrelsome, um 
sociable, a virgin to the day he died, Isaac Newton was perhaps 
the greatest scientific genius who ever lived. 

Even as a young man, Newton was impatient with insubstam 
tial questions, such as whether light was “a substance or an accb 
dent,” or how gravitation could act over an intervening vacuum. 
He early decided that the conventional Christian belief in the 
Trinity was a misreading of Scripture. According to his biogra^ 
pher, John Maynard Keynes, 

He was rather a Judaic Monotheist of the school of Mab 
monides. He arrived at this conclusion, not on so^to^speak 
rational or sceptical grounds, but entirely on the interpreta^ 
tion of ancient authority. He was persuaded that the re^ 
vealed documents gave no support to the Trinitarian 
doctrines which were due to late falsifications. The re^ 
vealed God was one God. But this was a dreadful secret 
which Newton was at desperate pains to conceal all his life. 

Like Kepler, he was not immune to the superstitions of his day 
and had many encounters with mysticism. Indeed, much of 
Newton’s intellectual development can be attributed to this tern 
sion between rationalism and mysticism. At the Stourbridge Fair 
in 1663, at age twenty, he purchased a book on astrology, “out of 
a curiosity to see what there was in it.” He read it until he came to 
an illustration which he could not understand, because he was 
ignorant of trigonometry. So he purchased a book on trigononv 
etry but soon found himself unable to follow the geometrical 
arguments. So he found a copy of Euclid’s Elements of Geometry , 
and began to read. Two years later he invented the differential 
calculus. 

As a student, Newton was fascinated by light and transfixed by 
the Sun. He took to the dangerous practice of staring at the Sun’s 
image in a looking glass: 

In a few hours I had brought my eyes to such a pass that I 
could look upon no bright object with neither eye but I saw 
the Sun before me, so that I durst neither write nor read but 
to recover the use of my eyes shut my self up in my 
chamber made dark three days together (Sc used all means 
to divert my imagination from the Sun. For if I thought 
upon him I presently saw his picture though I was in the 
dark. 

In 1666, at the age of twenty-three, Newton was an undergrade 
ate at Cambridge University when an outbreak of plague forced 
him to spend a year in idleness in the isolated village of 
Woolsthorpe, where he had been born. He occupied himself by 
inventing the differential and integral calculus, making funda^ 
mental discoveries on the nature of light and laying the foundation 



The Harmony of Worlds — 69 


for the theory of universal gravitation* The only other year 
like it in the history of physics was Einstein’s “Miracle Year” of 
1905* When asked how he accomplished his astonishing discow 
eries, Newton replied unhelpfully, “By thinking upon them*” His 
work was so significant that his teacher at Cambridge, Isaac 
Barrow, resigned his chair of mathematics in favor of Newton 
five years after the young student returned to college* 

Newton, in his mid-forties, was described by his servant as 
follows: 

I never knew him to take any recreation or pastime either in 
riding out to take the air, walking, bowling, or any other 
exercise whatever, thinking all hours lost that were not 
spent in his studies, to which he kept so close that he 
seldom left his chamber unless [to lecture] at term time * * * 
where so few went to hear him, and fewer understood him, 
that ofttimes he did in a manner, for want of hearers, read 
to the walls* 

Students both of Kepler and of Newton never knew what they 
were missing* 

Newton discovered the law of inertia, the tendency of a mow 
ing object to continue moving in a straight line unless something 
influences it and moves it out of its path* The Moon, it seemed to 
Newton, would fly off in a straight line, tangential to its orbit, 
unless there were some other force constantly diverting the path 
into a near circle, pulling it in the direction of the Earth* This 
force Newton called gravity, and believed that it acted at a 
distance* There is nothing physically connecting the Earth and 
the Moon* And yet the Earth is constantly pulling the Moon 
toward us* Using Kepler’s third law, Newton mathematically 
deduced the nature of the gravitational force** He showed that 
the same force that pulls an apple down to Earth keeps the Moon 
in its orbit and accounts for the revolutions of the then recently 
discovered moons of Jupiter in their orbits about that distant 
planet* 

Things had been falling down since the beginning of time* 
That the Moon went around the Earth had been believed for all 
of human history* Newton was the first person ever to figure out 
that these two phenomena were due to the same force* This is 
the meaning of the word “universal” as applied to Newtonian 
gravitation* The same law of gravity applies everywhere in the 
universe* 

It is a law of the inverse square* The force declines inversely as 
the square of distance* If two objects are moved twice as far 
away, the gravity now pulling them together is only one-quarter 



Isaac Newton. Painting by Jean-Leon 
Huens, © National Geographic Society. 


* Sadly, Newton does not acknowledge his debt to Kepler in his master¬ 
piece the Principia. But in a 1686 letter to Edmund Halley, he says of his 
law of gravitation: “I can affirm that I gathered it from Kepler’s theorem 

about twenty years ago.” 



70 - Cosmos 


as strong. If they are moved ten times farther away, the gravity is 
ten squared, 10 2 = 100 times smaller. Clearly, the force must in 
some sense be inverse—that is, declining with distance. If the 
force were direct, increasing with distance, then the strongest 
force would work on the most distant objects, and I suppose all 
the matter in the universe would find itself careering together 
into a single cosmic lump. No, gravity must decrease with dis¬ 
tance, which is why a comet or a planet moves slowly when far 
from the Sun and faster when close to the Sun—the gravity it 
feels is weaker the farther from the Sun it is. 

All three of Kepler’s laws of planetary motion can be derived 
from Newtonian principles. Kepler’s laws were empirical, based 
upon the painstaking observations of Tycho Brahe. Newton’s 
laws were theoretical, rather simple mathematical abstractions 
from which all of Tycho’s measurements could ultimately be 
derived. From these laws, Newton wrote with undisguised pride 
in the Principia, “I now demonstrate the frame of the System of 
the World.” 

Later in his life, Newton presided over the Royal Society, a 
fellowship of scientists, and was Master of the Mint, where he 
devoted his energies to the suppression of counterfeit coinage. 
His natural moodiness and reclusivity grew; he resolved to abam 
don those scientific endeavors that brought him into quarrelsome 
disputes with other scientists, chiefly on issues of priority; and 
there were those who spread tales that he had experienced the 
seventeendvcentury equivalent of a “nervous breakdown.” 
However, Newton continued his lifelong experiments on the 
border between alchemy and chemistry, and some recent evi¬ 
dence suggests that what he was suffering from was not so much 
a psychogenic ailment as heavy metal poisoning, induced by 
systematic ingestion of small quantities of arsenic and mercury. It 
was a common practice for chemists of the time to use the sense 
of taste as an analytic tool. 

Nevertheless his prodigious intellectual powers persisted um 
abated. In 1696, the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli chaL 
lenged his colleagues to solve an unresolved issue called the 
brachistochrone problem, specifying the curve connecting two 
points displaced from each other laterally, along which a body, 
acted upon only by gravity, would fall in the shortest time. 
Bernoulli originally specified a deadline of six months, but ex^ 
tended it to a year and a half at the request of Leibniz, one of the 
leading scholars of the time, and the man who had, indepem 
dently of Newton, invented the differential and integral calculus. 
The challenge was delivered to Newton at four P.M. on January 
29, 1697. Before leaving for work the next morning, he had 
invented an entire new branch of mathematics called the calculus 
of variations, used it to solve the brachistochrone problem and 
sent off the solution, which was published, at Newton’s request, 
anonymously. But the brilliance and originality of the work 



The Harmony of Worlds — 71 


betrayed the identity of its author. When Bernoulli saw the solu¬ 
tion, he commented, “We recognize the lion by his claw.” 
Newton was then in his fifty-fifth year. 

The major intellectual pursuit of his last years was a concor- 
dance and calibration of the chronologies of ancient civilizations, 
very much in the tradition of the ancient historians Manetho, 
Strabo and Eratosthenes. In his last, posthumous work, “The 
Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended,” we find repeated 
astronomical calibrations of historical events; an architectural 
reconstruction of the Temple of Solomon; a provocative claim 
that all the Northern Hemisphere constellations are named after 
the personages, artifacts and events in the Greek story of Jason 
and the Argonauts; and the consistent assumption that the gods 
of all civilizations, with the single exception of Newton’s own, 
were merely ancient kings and heroes deified by later generations. 

Kepler and Newton represent a critical transition in human 
history, the discovery that fairly simple mathematical laws pen 
vade all of Nature; that the same rules apply on Earth as in the 
skies; and that there is a resonance between the way we think and 
the way the world works. They unflinchingly respected the ac- 
curacy of observational data, and their predictions of the motion 
of the planets to high precision provided compelling evidence 
that, at an unexpectedly deep level, humans can understand the 
Cosmos. Our modern global civilization, our view of the world 
and our present exploration of the Universe are profoundly in¬ 
debted to their insights. 

Newton was guarded about his discoveries and fiercely com¬ 
petitive with his scientific colleagues. He thought nothing of 
waiting a decade or two after its discovery to publish the inverse 
square law. But before the grandeur and intricacy of Nature, he 
was, like Ptolemy and Kepler, exhilarated as well as disarmingly 
modest. Just before his death he wrote: “I do not know what I 
may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only 
like a boy, playing on the seashore, and diverting myself, in now 
and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordi¬ 
nary, while the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before 


me. 




Comet West, photographed from Earth in February 1976 by Martin Grossman of Gromau, West Germany. The great 
tail is blown away from the icy nucleus of the comet by a wind of protons and electrons from the Sun, which has set 
below this horizon. 





Chapter IV 


HEAVEN AND HELL 


Nine worlds I remember. 

—The Icelandic Edda of Snorri Sturluson, 1200 


I am become death, the shatterer of worlds. 

—Bhagavad Gita 

The doors of heaven and hell are adjacent and identical. 

— Nikoss Kazantzakis, The Last Temptation of Christ 


The earth is a lovely and more or less placid place. 

Things change, but slowly. We can lead a full life and never 
personally encounter a natural disaster more violent than a 
storm. And so we become complacent, relaxed, unconcerned. 
But in the history of Nature, the record is clear. Worlds have 
been devastated. Even we humans have achieved the dubious 
technical distinction of being able to make our own disasters, 
both intentional and inadvertent. On the landscapes of other 
planets where the records of the past have been preserved, there 
is abundant evidence of major catastrophes. It is all a matter of 
time scale. An event that would be unthinkable in a hundred 
years may be inevitable in a hundred million. Even on the Earth, 
even in our own century, bizarre natural events have occurred. 

In the early morning hours of June 30, 1908, in Central Sb 
beria, a giant fireball was seen moving rapidly across the sky. 
Where it touched the horizon, an enormous explosion took 
place. It leveled some 2,000 square kilometers of forest and 
burned thousands of trees in a flash tire near the impact site. It 
produced an atmospheric shock wave that twice circled the 
Earth. For two days afterward, there was so much tine dust in the 
atmosphere that one could read a newspaper at night by scattered 
light in the streets of London, 10,000 kilometers away. 




74 — Cosmos 



Soviet geologist L. A. Kulik (right) and an 
assistant survey the site of the 1908 Tun- 
guska Event, in Central Siberia, Spring 
1930. Kulik is positioning a theodolite and 
wearing a mosquito net. Courtesy Sow 
foto. 


The government of Russia under the Czars could not be 
bothered to investigate so trivial an event, which, after all, had 
occurred far away, among the backward Tungus people of Si¬ 
beria. It was ten years after the Revolution before an expedition 
arrived to examine the ground and interview the witnesses. 
These are some of the accounts they brought back: 

Early in the morning when everyone was asleep in the tent, 
it was blown up into the air, together with the occupants. 
When they fell back to Earth, the whole family suffered 
slight bruises, but Akulina and Ivan actually lost conscious¬ 
ness. When they regained consciousness they heard a great 
deal of noise and saw the forest blazing round them and 
much of it devastated. 

I was sitting in the porch of the house at the trading station 
of Vanovara at breakfast time and looking towards the 
north. I had just raised my axe to hoop a cask, when sud¬ 
denly . . . the sky was split in two, and high above the forest 
the whole northern part of the sky appeared to be covered 
with fire. At that moment I felt a great heat as if my shirt 
had caught fire. ... I wanted to pull off my shirt and throw 
it away, but at that moment there was a bang in the sky, 
and a mighty crash was heard. I was thrown on the ground 
about three sajenes away from the porch and for a moment 
I lost consciousness. My wife ran out and carried me into 
the hut. The crash was followed by a noise like stones 
falling from the sky, or guns firing. The Earth trembled, and 
when I lay on the ground I covered my head because I was 
afraid that stones might hit it. At that moment when the 
sky opened, a hot wind, as from a cannon, blew past the 
huts from the north. It left its mark on the ground. . . . 


When I sat down to have my breakfast beside my plough, I 
heard sudden bangs, as if from gun-fire. My horse fell to its 
knees. From the north side above the forest a flame shot up. 

. . . Then I saw that the fir forest had been bent over by the 
wind and I thought of a hurricane. I seized hold of my 
plough with both hands, so that it would not be carried 
away. The wind was so strong that it carried off some of the 
soil from the surface of the ground, and then the hurricane 
drove a wall of water up the Angara. I saw it all quite 
clearly, because my land was on a hillside. 

The roar frightened the horses to such an extent that some 
galloped off in panic, dragging the ploughs in different di¬ 
rections, and others collapsed. 


The carpenters, after the first and second crashes, had 
crossed themselves in stupefaction, and when the third 
crash resounded they fell backwards from the building onto 
the chips of wood. Some of them were so stunned and 
utterly terrified that I had to calm them down and reassure 



Heaven and Hell — 75 


them. We all abandoned work and went into the village. 
There, whole crowds of local inhabitants were gathered in 
the streets in terror, talking about this phenomenon. 

I was in the fields . . . and had only just got one horse 
harnessed to the harrow and begun to attach another when 
suddenly I heard what sounded like a single loud shot to 
the right. I immediately turned round and saw an elongated 
flaming object flying through the sky. The front part was 
much broader than the tail end and its color was like fire in 
the day-time. It was many times bigger than the sun but 
much dimmer, so that it was possible to look at it with the 
naked eye. Behind the flames trailed what looked like dust. 
It was wreathed in little puffs, and blue streamers were left 
behind from the flames. ... As soon as the flame had dis¬ 
appeared, bangs louder than shots from a gun were heard, 
the ground could be felt to tremble, and the window panes 
in the cabin were shattered. 


. . . I was washing wool on the bank of the River Kan. 
Suddenly a noise like the fluttering of the wings of a frighn 
ened bird was heard . . . and a kind of swell came up the 
river. After this came a single sharp bang so loud that one 
of the workmen . . . fell into the water. 


This remarkable occurrence is called the Tunguska Event. 
Some scientists have suggested that it was caused by a piece of 
hurtling antimatter, annihilated on contact with the ordinary 
matter of the Earth, disappearing in a flash of gamma rays. But 
the absence of radioactivity at the impact site gives no support to 
this explanation. Others postulate that a mini black hole passed 
through the Earth in Siberia and out the other side. But the 
records of atmospheric shock waves show no hint of an object 
booming out of the North Atlantic later that day. Perhaps it was 
a spaceship of some unimaginably advanced extraterrestrial civk 
lization in desperate mechanical trouble, crashing in a remote 
region of an obscure planet. But at the site of the impact there is 
no trace of such a ship. Each of these ideas has been proposed, 
some of them more or less seriously. Not one of them is strongly 
supported by the evidence. The key point of the Tunguska 
Event is that there was a tremendous explosion, a great shock 
wave, an enormous forest fire, and yet there is no impact crater at 
the site. There seems to be only one explanation consistent with 
all the facts: In 1908 a piece of a comet hit the Earth. 

In the vast spaces between the planets there are many objects, 
some rocky, some metallic, some icy, some composed partly of 
organic molecules. They range from grains of dust to irregular 
blocks the size of Nicaragua or Bhutan. And sometimes, by 
accident, there is a planet in the way. The Tunguska Event was 
probably caused by an icy cometary fragment about a hundred 
meters across—the size of a football field—weighing a million 



Devastated taiga forest at Tunguska. The 
photograph was taken 5 kilometers from 
“ground zero” and 21 years after the event. 
The trees are all pointing away from the 
impact point. Courtesy Sovfoto. 



76 — Cosmos 


tons, moving at about 30 kilometers per second, 70,000 miles per 
hour. 

If such an impact occurred today it might be mistaken, espe¬ 
cially in the panic of the moment, for a nuclear explosion. The 
cometary impact and fireball would simulate all effects of a one- 
megaton nuclear burst, including the mushroom cloud, with two 
exceptions: there would be no gamma radiation or radioactive 
fallout. Could a rare but natural event, the impact of a sizable 
cometary fragment, trigger a nuclear war? A strange scenario: a 
small comet hits the Earth, as millions of them have, and the 
response of our civilization is promptly to self-destruct. It might 
be a good idea for us to understand comets and collisions and 
catastrophes a little better than we do. For example, an American 
Vela satellite detected an intense double flash of light from the 
vicinity of the South Atlantic and Western Indian Ocean on 
September 22, 1979. Early speculation held that it was a clandes¬ 
tine test of a low yield (two kilotons, about a sixth the energy of 
the Hiroshima bomb) nuclear weapon by South Africa or Israel. 
The political consequences were considered serious around the 
world. But what if the flashes were instead caused by the impact 
of a small asteroid or a piece of a comet? Since airborne over¬ 
flights in the vicinity of the flashes showed not a trace of unusual 
radioactivity in the air, this is a real possibility and underscores 
the dangers in an age of nuclear weapons of not monitoring 
impacts from space better than we do. 

A comet is made mostly of ice—water (H 2 0) ice, with a little 
methane (CH 4 ) ice, and some ammonia (NH 3 ) ice. Striking the 
Earth’s atmosphere, a modest cometary fragment would produce 
a great radiant fireball and a mighty blast wave, which would 
burn trees, level forests and be heard around the world. But it 
might not make much of a crater in the ground. The ices would 
all be melted during entry. There would be few recognizable 
pieces of the comet left—perhaps only a smattering of small grains 



T 



Detail from the eleventh-century Bayeux 
Tapestry, recording appearance of Halley’s 
Comet in April 1066. Latin inscription to 
left of the highly stylized comet reads: 
“These men wonder at the star.” A cour¬ 
tier hastens to report the event to Harold 
of England, whose defeat at the hands of 
William the Conqueror the comet was 
popularly believed to portend (see inva¬ 
sion ships at bottom). The tapestry was 
commissioned by Queen Matilde, wife of 
William. 








Heaven and Hell - 77 



Giotto’s Adoration of the Magi , c. 1304, 
depicting the Star of Bethlehem as a (pre- 
sumably) nonmiraculous comet. The ap' 
parition of Comet Halley in 1301 very 
likely served as Giotto’s model. Courtesy 
SCALA/Editorial Photocolor Archives. 



Aztec depiction of the observation of a 
bright comet by the Emperor Moctezuma, 
who accepted the popular superstition 
that comets presage catastrophes, with' 
drew in morose depression, and thus un¬ 
wittingly abetted the Spanish Conquest. It 
is an excellent example of a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. From Historia de las Indias de 
Nueva Espana by Diego Duran. 


from the nondcy parts of the cometary nucleus. Recently, the 
Soviet scientist E. Sobotovich has identified a large number of 
tiny diamonds strewn over the Tunguska site. Such diamonds are 
already known to exist in meteorites that have survived impact, 
and that may originate ultimately from comets. 

On many a clear night, if you look patiently up at the sky, you 
will see a solitary meteor blazing briefly overhead. On some 
nights you can see a shower of meteors, always on the same few 
days of every year—a natural fireworks display, an entertainment 
in the heavens. These meteors are made by tiny grains, smaller 
than a mustard seed. They are less shooting stars than falling 
fluff. Momentarily brilliant as they enter the Earth’s atmosphere, 
they are heated and destroyed by friction at a height of about 







78 — Cosmos 



Turkish representation of the Great 
Comet of 1577. (Compare with figure im- 
mediately below.) The excitement sun 
rounding the arrival of the comet led 
directly to the founding of the Istanbul 
Observatory. Courtesy University of 
Istanbul Library. 



Broadside printed in Prague by Peter Co- 
dicillus shows the Great Comet of 1577 
stretching above the Moon and Saturn 
while an artist sketches it by lantern light. 
Tycho Brahes determination that this 
comet was more distant than the moon 
led him to remove comets from the realm 
of terrestrial phenomena and place them 
correctly as celestial bodies. From the 
Wikiana Collection, Zentralbibliothek, 
Zurich. Photograph by Owen Gingerich. 


100 kilometers. Meteors are the remnants of comets.* Old 
comets, heated by repeated passages near the Sun, break up, 
evaporate and disintegrate. The debris spreads to till the full 
cometary orbit. Where that orbit intersects the orbit of the 
Earth, there is a swarm of meteors waiting for us. Some part of 
the swarm is always at the same position in the Earth’s orbit, so 
the meteor shower is always observed on the same day of every 
year. June 30, 1908 was the day of the Beta Taurid meteor 
shower, connected with the orbit of Comet Encke. The Turn 
guska Event seems to have been caused by a chunk of Comet 
Encke, a piece substantially larger than the tiny fragments that 
cause those glittering, harmless meteor showers. 

Comets have always evoked fear and awe and superstition. 
Their occasional apparitions disturbingly challenged the notion 
of an unalterable and divinely ordered Cosmos. It seemed in¬ 
conceivable that a spectacular streak of milk-white flame, rising 
and setting with the stars night after night, was not there for a 
reason, did not hold some portent for human affairs. So the idea 
arose that comets were harbingers of disaster, auguries of divine 
wrath—that they foretold the deaths of princes, the fall of king¬ 
doms. The Babylonians thought that comets were celestial 
beards. The Greeks thought of flowing hair, the Arabs of flam¬ 
ing swords. In Ptolemy’s time comets were elaborately classified 
as “beams,” “trumpets,” “jars” and so on, according to their shapes. 
Ptolemy thought that comets bring wars, hot weather and “dis¬ 
turbed conditions.” Some medieval depictions of comets resem¬ 
ble unidentified flying crucifixes. A Lutheran “Superintendent” or 
Bishop of Magdeburg named Andreas Celichius published in 
1578 a “Theological Reminder of the New Comet,” which of¬ 
fered the inspired view that a comet is “the thick smoke of 
human sins, rising every day, every hour, every moment, full of 
stench and horror before the face of God, and becoming gradu¬ 
ally so thick as to form a comet, with curled and plaited tresses, 
which at last is kindled by the hot and fiery anger of the Supreme 
Heavenly Judge.” But others countered that if comets were the 
smoke of sin, the skies would be continually ablaze with them. 

The most ancient record of an apparition of Halley’s (or any 
other) Comet appears in the Chinese Book of Prince Huai Nan , 
attendant to the march of King Wu against Zhou of Yin. The 
year was 1057 B.C. The approach to Earth of Halley’s Comet in 
the year 66 is the probable explanation of the account by Josephus 


* That meteors and meteorites are connected with the comets was first 
proposed by Alexander von Humboldt in his broad-gauge popularization 
of all of science, published in the years 1845 to 1862, a work called Kosmos . 
It was reading Humboldt’s earlier work that fired the young Charles 
Darwin to embark on a career combining geographical exploration and 
natural history. Shortly thereafter he accepted a position as naturalist 
aboard the ship H.M.S. Beagle, the event that led to The Origin of 
Species . 





Heaven and Hell - 79 


of a sword that hung over Jerusalem for a whole year. In 
1066 the Normans witnessed another return of Halley’s Comet. 
Since it must, they thought, presage the fall of some kingdom, the 
comet encouraged, in some sense precipitated, the invasion of 
England by William the Conqueror. The comet was duly noted 
in a newspaper of the time, the Bayeux Tapestry. In 1301, 
Giotto, one of the founders of modern realistic painting, wit¬ 
nessed another apparition of Comet Halley and inserted it into a 
nativity scene. The Great Comet of 1466—yet another return of 
Halley’s Comet—panicked Christian Europe; the Christians 
feared that God, who sends comets, might be on the side of the 
Turks, who had just captured Constantinople. 

The leading astronomers of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries were fascinated by comets, and even Newton became a 
little giddy over them. Kepler described comets as darting 
through space “as the fishes in the sea,” but being dissipated by 
sunlight, as the cometary tail always points away from the sun. 
David Hume, in many cases an uncompromising rationalist, at 
least toyed with the notion that comets were the reproductive 
cells—the eggs or sperm—of planetary systems, that planets are 
produced by a kind of interstellar sex. As an undergraduate, 
before his invention of the reflecting telescope, Newton spent 
many consecutive sleepless nights searching the sky for comets 
with his naked eye, pursuing them with such fervor that he felt ill 
from exhaustion. Following Tycho and Kepler, Newton con¬ 
cluded that the comets seen from Earth do not move within our 
atmosphere, as Aristotle and others had thought, but rather are 
more distant than the Moon, although closer than Saturn. 
Comets shine, as the planets do, by reflected sunlight, “and they 
are much mistaken who remove them almost as far as the fixed 
stars; for if it were so, the comets could receive no more light 
from our Sun than our planets do from the fixed stars.” He 
showed that comets, like planets, move in ellipses: “Comets are a 
sort of planets revolved in very eccentric orbits about the Sun.” 
This demystification, this prediction of regular cometary orbits, 
led his friend Edmund Halley in 1707 to calculate that the comets 
of 1531, 1607 and 1682 were apparitions at 76-year intervals of 
the same comet, and predicted its return in 1758. The comet duly 
arrived and was named for him posthumously. Comet Halley has 
played an interesting role in human history, and may be the 
target of the first space vehicle probe of a comet, during its return 
in 1986. 

Modern planetary scientists sometimes argue that the collision 
of a comet with a planet might make a significant contribution to 
the planetary atmosphere. For example, all the water in the 
atmosphere of Mars today could be accounted for by a recent 
impact of a small comet. Newton noted that the matter in the 
tails of comets is dissipated in interplanetary space, lost to the 
comet and little by little attracted gravitationally to nearby 



Highly stylized representation of the 
Comet of 1556 over a German town, 
probably Nuremberg. Wikiana Collec¬ 
tion. Photograph by Owen Gingerich. 




80 — Cosmos 



Comet Ikeya-Seki, discovered in 1965 by 
two dedicated Japanese amateur astron¬ 
omers. The tail is roughly fifty million ki- 
lometers long. Photographed at Kitt Peak 
National Observatory by Michael Belton. 


planets. He believed that the water on the Earth is gradually 
being lost, “spent upon vegetation and putrefaction, and com 
verted into dry earth. . . . The fluids, if they are not supplied 
from without, must be in a continual decrease, and quite fail at 
last.” Newton seems to have believed that the Earth’s oceans are 
of cometary origin, and that life is possible only because come- 
tary matter falls upon our planet. In a mystical reverie, he went 
still further: “I suspect, moreover, that it is chiefly from the 
comets that spirit comes, which is indeed the smallest but the 
most subtle and useful part of our air, and so much required to 
sustain the life of all things with us.” 

As early as 1868 the astronomer William Huggins found an 
identity between some features in the spectrum of a comet and 
the spectrum of natural or “olefiant” gas. Huggins had found 
organic matter in the comets; in subsequent years cyanogen, CN, 
consisting of a carbon and a nitrogen atom, the molecular frag¬ 
ment that makes cyanides, was identified in the tails of comets. 
When the Earth was about to pass through the tail of Halley’s 
Comet in 1910, many people panicked. They overlooked the fact 
that the tail of a comet is extravagantly diffuse: the actual danger 
from the poison in a comet’s tail is far less than the danger, even 
in 1910, from industrial pollution in large cities. 

But that reassured almost no one. For example, headlines in 
the San Francisco Chronicle for May 15, 1910, include “Comet 
Camera as Big as a House,” “Comet Comes and Husband Re¬ 
forms,” “Comet Parties Now Fad in New York.” The Los Angeles 
Examiner adopted a light mood: “Say! Has That Comet Cyan- 
ogened You Yet? . . . Entire Human Race Due for Free Gaseous 
Bath,” “Expect ‘High Jinks,” “Many Feel Cyanogen Tang,” “Vic¬ 
tim Climbs Trees, Tries to Phone Comet.” In 1910 there were 
parties, making merry before the world ended of cyanogen pol¬ 
lution. Entrepreneurs hawked anti-comet pills and gas masks, the 
latter an eerie premonition of the battlefields of World War I. 

Some confusion about comets continues to our own time. In 
1957, I was a graduate student at the University of Chicago’s 
Yerkes Observatory. Alone in the observatory late one night, I 
heard the telephone ring persistently. When I answered, a voice, 
betraying a well-advanced state of inebriation, said, “Lemme talk 
to a shtrominer.” “Can I help you?” “Well, see, we’re havin’ this 
garden party out here in Wilmette, and there’s somethin’ in the 
sky. The funny part is, though, if you look straight at it, it goes 
away. Rut if you don’t look at it, there it is.” The most sensitive 
part of the retina is not at the center of the field of view. You can 
see faint stars and other objects by averting your vision slightly. I 
knew that, barely visible in the sky at this time, was a newly 
discovered comet called Arend-Roland. So I told him that he 
was probably looking at a comet. There was a long pause, fol¬ 
lowed by the query: “Wash’ a comet?” “A comet,” I replied, “is a 
snowball one mile across.” There was a longer pause, after which 



Heaven and Hell — 81 



the caller requested, “Lemme talk to a real shtrominer.” When 
Halley’s Comet reappears in 1986, I wonder what political leaders 
will fear the apparition, what other silliness will then he upon us. 

While the planets move in elliptical orbits around the Sun, 
their orbits are not very elliptical At first glance they are, by and 
large, indistinguishable from circles. It is the comets—especially 
the long-period comets—that have dramatically elliptical orbits. 
The planets are the old-timers in the inner solar system; the 
comets are the newcomers. Why are the planetary orbits nearly 
circular and neatly separated one from the other? Because if 
planets had very elliptical orbits, so that their paths intersected, 
sooner or later there would be a collision. In the early history of 
the solar system, there were probably many planets in the process 
of formation. Those with elliptical crossing orbits tended to col¬ 
lide and destroy themselves. Those with circular orbits tended to 
grow and survive. The orbits of the present planets are the orbits 
of the survivors of this collisional natural selection, the stable 
middle age of a solar system dominated by early catastrophic 
impacts. 

In the outermost solar system, in the gloom far beyond the 


A rare 1910 photograph of Comet Halley 
with Venus, lower left. Courtesy Camera 
Press—Photo Trends. 










82 - Cosmos 



The head of Comet Halley, May 1910. 
Photographed at Helwan Observatory, 
Egypt, with a 30-inch reflecting telescope 
by H. Knox Shaw. 



Comet Humason, photographed with the 
48-inch Schmidt telescope of the Hale 
Observatories, 1961, and named after its 
discoverer, Milton Humason (Chapter 
10). In this time exposure, the streaks are 
distant stars. 


planets, there is a vast spherical cloud of a trillion cometary 
nuclei, orbiting the Sun no faster than a racing car at the Indian- 
apolis 500.* A fairly typical comet would look like a giant tum¬ 
bling snowball about 1 kilometer across. Most never penetrate 
the border marked by the orbit of Pluto. But occasionally a 
passing star makes a gravitational flurry and commotion in the 
cometary cloud, and a group of comets finds itself in highly 
elliptical orbits, plunging toward the Sun. After its path is further 
changed by gravitational encounters with Jupiter or Saturn, it 
tends to find itself, once every century or so, careering toward the 
inner solar system. Somewhere between the orbits of Jupiter and 
Mars it would begin heating and evaporating. Matter blown 
outwards from the Sun’s atmosphere, the solar wind, carries 
fragments of dust and ice back behind the comet, making an 
incipient tail. If Jupiter were a meter across, our comet would be 
smaller than a speck of dust, but when fully developed, its tail 
would be as great as the distances between the worlds. When 
within sight of the Earth on each of its orbits, it would stimulate 
outpourings of superstitious fervor among the Earthlings. But 
eventually they would understand that it lived not in their at¬ 
mosphere, but out among the planets. They would calculate its 
orbit. And perhaps one day soon they would launch a small 
space vehicle devoted to exploring this visitor from the realm of 
the stars. 

Sooner or later comets will collide with planets. The Earth and 
its companion the Moon must be bombarded by comets and 
small asteroids, debris left over from the formation of the solar 
system. Since there are more small objects than large ones, there 
should be more impacts by small objects than by large ones. An 
impact of a small cometary fragment with the Earth, as at Tun- 
guska, should occur about once every thousand years. But an 
impact with a large comet, such as Halley’s Comet, whose nu¬ 
cleus is perhaps twenty kilometers across, should occur only 
about once every billion years. 

When a small, icy object collides with a planet or a moon, it 
may not produce a very major scar. But if the impacting object is 
larger or made primarily of rock, there is an explosion on impact 

*The Earth is r = 1 astronomical unit = 150,000,000 kilometers from 
the Sun. Its roughly circular orbit then has a circumference of 27rr - 10 9 km. 
Our planet circulates once along this path every year. One year = 
3 x 10 7 seconds. So the Earth’s orbital speed is 10 9 km/3 x 10 7 sec * 
30 km/sec. Now consider the spherical shell of orbiting comets that 
many astronomers believe surrounds the solar system at a distance 
-100,000 astronomical units, almost halfway to the nearest star. From 
Kepler’s third law (p. 63) it immediately follows that the orbital period 
about the Sun of any one of them is about (10 5 ) 3/2 = 10 7 * 5 ~ 3 x 10 7 
or 30 million years. Once around the Sun is a long time if you live in the 
outer reaches of the solar system. The cometary orbit is 2tra = 2i r x 10 5 
x 1.5 x 10 8 km - 10 14 km around, and its speed is therefore only 
10 14 km/10 15 sec = 0.1 km/sec ~ 220 miles per hour. 





Heaven and Hell — 83 


that carves out a hemispherical howl called an impact crater. And 
if no process rubs out or fills in the crater, it may last for billions 
of years. Almost no erosion occurs on the Moon and when we 
examine its surface, we find it covered with impact craters, many 
more than can be accounted for by the rather sparse population 
of cometary and asteroidal debris that now fills the inner solar 
system. The lunar surface offers eloquent testimony of a previous 
age of the destruction of worlds, now billions of years gone. 

Impact craters are not restricted to the Moon. We find them 
throughout the inner solar system—from Mercury, closest to the 
Sun, to cloud-covered Venus to Mars and its tiny moons, Phobos 
and Deimos. These are the terrestrial planets, our family of 
worlds, the planets more or less like the Earth. They have solid 
surfaces, interiors made of rock and iron, and atmospheres rang' 
ing from near-vacuum to pressures ninety times higher than the 
Earth’s. They huddle around the Sun, the source of light and 
heat, like campers around a fire. The planets are all about 4-6 
billion years old. Like the Moon, they all bear witness to an age 
of impact catastrophism in the early history of the solar system. 

As we move out past Mars we enter a very different regime— 
the realm of Jupiter and the other giant or jovian planets. These 
are great worlds, composed largely of hydrogen and helium, with 
smaller amounts of hydrogen-rich gases such as methane, am¬ 
monia and water. We do not see solid surfaces here, only the 
atmosphere and the multicolored clouds. These are serious 
planets, not fragmentary worldlets like the Earth. A thousand 
Earths could fit inside Jupiter. If a comet or an asteroid dropped 
into the atmosphere of Jupiter, we would not expect a visible 
crater, only a momentary break in the clouds. Neverthe¬ 
less, we know there has been a many-billion-year history of 
collisions in the outer solar system as well—because Jupiter has a 
great system of more than a dozen moons, five of which were 
examined close up by the Voyager spacecraft. Here again we find 
evidence of past catastrophes. When the solar system is all ex¬ 
plored, we will probably have evidence for impact catastrophism 
on all nine worlds, from Mercury to Pluto, and on all the smaller 
moons, comets and asteroids. 

There are about 10,000 craters on the near side of the Moon, 
visible to telescopes on Earth. Most of them are in the ancient 
lunar highlands and date from the time of the final accretion of 
the Moon from interplanetary debris. There are about a thou¬ 
sand craters larger than a kilometer across in the maria (Latin for 
“seas”), the lowland regions that were flooded, perhaps by lava, 
shortly after the formation of the Moon, covering over the pre¬ 
existing craters. Thus, very roughly, craters on the Moon should 
be formed today at the rate of about 10 9 years/10 4 craters, = 10 5 
years/crater, a hundred thousand years between cratering events. 
Since there may have been more interplanetary debris a few 
billion years ago than there is today, we might have to wait even 



Break-up of Comet West (see fronti¬ 
spiece, this chapter) into four fragments. 
Photographed by C. F. Knuckles and A. S. 
Murrell, New Mexico State University 
Observatory. 



84 - Cosmos 



Meteor Crater, Arizona. This crater is 1.2 kilometers in 
diameter and was probably produced 15,000 to 40,000 
years ago when a lump of iron 25 meters across impacted 
the Earth at a speed of 15 kilometers per second. The 
energy released was equivalent to that of a 4'megaton 
nuclear explosion. 



Dawn at Crater Copernicus, just north of the lunar 
equator. It is 100 kilometers in diameter. Its ray system is 
prominent when, unlike this photograph, it is illuminated 
directly faceon. Apollo Orbiter photo. Courtesy NASA. 



Earthrise over rolling hills and complex overlapping craters on the Moon. Apollo Orbiter photo. Courtesy NASA. 












Heaven and Hell — 85 


longer than a hundred thousand years to see a crater form on the 
Moon. Because the Earth has a larger area than the Moon, we 
might have to wait something like ten thousand years between 
collisions that would make craters as big as a kilometer across on 
our planet. And since Meteor Crater, Arizona, an impact crater 
about a kilometer across, has been found to be twenty or thirty 
thousand years old, the observations on the Earth are in agree- 
ment with such crude calculations. 

The actual impact of a small comet or asteroid with the Moon 
might make a momentary explosion sufficiently bright to be visi¬ 
ble from the Earth. We can imagine our ancestors gazing idly up 
on some night a hundred thousand years ago and noting a 
strange cloud arising from the unilluminated part of the Moon, 
suddenly struck by the Sun’s rays. But we would not expect such 
an event to have happened in historical times. The odds against 
it must be something like a hundred to one. Nevertheless, there 
is an historical account which may in fact describe an impact on 
the Moon seen from Earth with the naked eye: On the evening of 
June 25, 1178, five British monks reported something extraordi¬ 
nary, which was later recorded in the chronicle of Gervase of 
Canterbury, generally considered a reliable reporter on the polit¬ 
ical and cultural events of his time, after he had interviewed the 
eyewitnesses who asserted, under oath, the truth of their story. 
The chronicle reads: 

There was a bright New Moon, and as usual in that phase 
its horns were tilted towards the east. Suddenly, the upper 
horn split in two. From the midpoint of the division, a 
flaming torch sprang up, spewing out fire, hot coals, and 
sparks. 

The astronomers Derral Mulholland and Odile Calame have 
calculated that a lunar impact would produce a dust cloud rising 
off the surface of the Moon with an appearance corresponding 
rather closely to the report of the Canterbury monks. 

If such an impact were made only 800 years ago, the crater 
should still be visible. Erosion on the Moon is so inefficient, 
because of the absence of air and water, that even small craters a 
few billion years old are still comparatively well preserved. From 
the description recorded by Gervase, it is possible to pinpoint the 
sector of the Moon to which the observations refer. Impacts 
produce rays, linear trails of fine powder spewed out during the 
explosion. Such rays are associated with the very youngest craters 
on the Moon—for example, those named after Aristarchus and 
Copernicus and Kepler. But while the craters may withstand 
erosion on the Moon, the rays, being exceptionally thin, do not. 
As time goes on, even the arrival of micrometeorites—fine dust 
from space—stirs up and covers over the rays, and they gradually 
disappear. Thus rays are a signature of a recent impact. 

The meteoriticist Jack Hartung has pointed out that a very 
recent, very fresh-looking small crater with a prominent ray system 



The rayed crater Bruno (top) on the Moon. 
Apollo Orbiter photo. Courtesy NASA. 



86 - Cosmos 


Apollo 16 astronaut sets up laser retrore- 
flector experiment on the Moon. Cour- 
tesy NASA. 




Laser beam directed at retroreflectors em- 
placed on the lunar surface. The telescope 
is the 82-inch reflector of McDonald Ob' 
servatory, University of Texas. 


lies exactly in the region of the Moon referred to by the 
Canterbury monks. It is called Giordano Bruno after the six¬ 
teenth-century Roman Catholic scholar who held that there are 
an infinity of worlds and that many are inhabited. For this and 
other crimes he was burned at the stake in the year 1600 . 

Another line of evidence consistent with this interpretation 
has been provided by Calame and Mulholland. When an object 
impacts the Moon at high speed, it sets the Moon slightly wob¬ 
bling. Eventually the vibrations die down but not in so short a 
period as eight hundred years. Such a quivering can be studied by 
laser reflection techniques. The Apollo astronauts emplaced in 
several locales on the Moon special mirrors called laser retro- 
reflectors. When a laser beam from Earth strikes the mirror and 
bounces back, the round-trip travel time can be measured with 
remarkable precision. This time multiplied by the speed of light 
gives us the distance to the Moon at that moment to equally 
remarkable precision. Such measurements, performed over a 
period of years, reveal the Moon to be librating, or quivering 
with a period (about three years) and amplitude (about three 
meters), consistent with the idea that the crater Giordano Bruno 
was gouged out less than a thousand years ago. 

All this evidence is inferential and indirect. The odds, as I 
have said, are against such an event happening in historical times. 
But the evidence is at least suggestive. As the Tunguska Event 
and Meteor Crater, Arizona, also remind us, not all impact ca¬ 
tastrophes occurred in the early history of the solar system. But 
the fact that only a few of the lunar craters have extensive ray 
systems also reminds us that, even on the Moon, some erosion 
occurs.* By noting which craters overlap which and other signs of 


* On Mars, where erosion is much more efficient, although there are 
many craters there are virtually no ray craters, as we would expect. 







Heaven and Hell —87 


lunar stratigraphy, we can reconstruct the sequence of impact and 
flooding events of which the production of crater Bruno is pen 
haps the most recent' example. On page 89 is an attempt to 
visualize the events that made the surface of the lunar hemb 
sphere we see from Earth. 

The Earth is very near the Moon. If the Moon is so severely 
cratered by impacts, how has the Earth avoided them? Why is 
Meteor Crater so rare? Do the comets and asteroids think it 
inadvisable to impact an inhabited planet? This is an unlikely 
forbearance. The only possible explanation is that impact craters 
are formed at very similar rates on both the Earth and the Moon, 
but that on the airless, waterless Moon they are preserved for 
immense periods of time, while on the Earth slow erosion wipes 
them out or fills them in. Running water, windblown sand and 
mountaimbuilding are very slow processes. But over millions or 
billions of years, they are capable of utterly erasing even very 
large impact scars. 

On the surface of any moon or planet, there will be external 
processes, such as impacts from space, and internal processes, 
such as earthquakes; there will be fast, catastrophic events, such 
as volcanic explosions, and processes of excruciating slowness, 
such as the pitting of a surface by tiny airborne sand grains. 
There is no general answer to the question of which processes 
dominate, the outside ones or the inside ones; the rare but vio 
lent events, or the common and inconspicuous occurrences. On 
the Moon, the outside, catastrophic events hold sway; on Earth, 
the inside, slow processes dominate. Mars is an intermediate case. 

Between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter are countless asteroids, 
tiny terrestrial planets. The largest are a few hundred kilometers 
across. Many have oblong shapes and are tumbling through 
space. In some cases there seem to be two or more asteroids in 
tight mutual orbits. Collisions among the asteroids happen fre^ 
quently, and occasionally a piece is chipped off and accidentally 
intercepts the Earth, falling to the ground as a meteorite. In the 
exhibits, on the shelves of our museums are the fragments of 
distant worlds. The asteroid belt is a great grinding mill, produce 
ing smaller and smaller pieces down to motes of dust. The bigger 
asteroidal pieces, along with the comets, are mainly responsible 
for the recent craters on planetary surfaces. The asteroid belt may 
be a place where a planet was once prevented from forming 
because of the gravitational tides of the giant nearby planet 
Jupiter; or it may be the shattered remains of a planet that blew 
itself up. This seems improbable because no scientist on Earth 
knows how a planet might blow itself up, which is probably just 
as well. 

The rings of Saturn bear some resemblance to the asteroid 
belt: trillions of tiny icy moonlets orbiting the planet. They may 
represent debris prevented by the gravity of Saturn from accren 
ing into a nearby moon, or they may be the remains of a moon 



The densely cratered surface, of the lunar 
farside. Until the advent of space vehicles 
this view was entirely unknown to the in¬ 
habitants of Earth. It was first observed by 
the Luna vehicles of the Soviet Union. 
The gravitational tides of our planet force 
the Moon to perform a rotation once a 
month, resulting in a hemisphere perma- 
nently facing the Earth and one perma- 
nently averted. The dark blotches at 
upper right are small maria. Maria are 
more prominent in the Earthdacing 
hemisphere and produce the “Man in the 
Moon.” Apollo Orbiter photo. Courtesy 
NASA. 




88 - Cosmos 












Heaven and Hell — 89 



f 





e 





The formation of the Moon, (a-d): The final stages of accretion, some 4.6 to 5 billion years ago. The energy released 
by the impact of the last generation of infalling debris to strike the Moon melts its surface. As most of the nearby 
debris is swept up by the Moon, it gradually cools, (ed): Impact of an asteroid 3.9 billion years ago, forming a cavity, 
spraying ejecta, generating an expanding shock wave and attendant reheating of the surface. The resulting basin (i) 
becomes flooded (pk), probably by molten basaltic rocks, perhaps 2.7 billion years ago. The prominent dark basin is 
now called Mare Imbrium, easily visible from the Earth with the naked eye. More recent impacts have produced the 
rayed craters Eratosthenes (1) and Copernicus (m). Slow erosion on the Moon has reduced the contrast between Mare 
Imbrium and its surroundings. Paintings by Don Davis, with the advice of the U.S. Geological Survey, Branch of 
Astrogeology. 















90 - Cosmos 


The Southern Hemisphere of the planet 
Mercury. Overlapping craters and promi- 
nent ray craters are evident in this Mariner 
10 image. The surfaces of Mercury and 
the Moon are so similar because they were 
both subject to major impact explosions 
billions of years ago, and have expert 
enced little surface erosion since. This is a 
photomosaic. The black cutouts at bot¬ 
tom are regions never photographed. 
Courtesy NASA. 




The outlying provinces, seen at left as 
concentric cracks and ridges, of the great 
Caloris Basin on the broiling surface of 
Mercury. Mariner 10 photomosaic. Cour¬ 
tesy NASA. 


that wandered too close and was torn apart by the gravitational 
tides. Alternatively, they may be the steady state equilibrium 
between material ejected from a moon of Saturn, such as Titan, 
and material falling into the atmosphere of the planet. Jupiter and 
Uranus also have ring systems, discovered only recently, and 
almost invisible from the Earth. Whether Neptune has a ring is a 
problem high on the agenda of planetary scientists. Rings may be 
a typical adornment of Jovian-type planets throughout the 
cosmos. 

Major recent collisions from Saturn to Venus were alleged in a 
popular book, Worlds in Collision , published in 1950 by a psy¬ 
chiatrist named Immanuel Velikovsky. He proposed that an ob¬ 
ject of planetary mass, which he called a comet, was somehow 
generated in the Jupiter system. Some 3,500 years ago, it careered 
in toward the inner solar system and made repeated encounters 
with the Earth and Mars, having as incidental consequences the 
parting of the Red Sea, allowing Moses and the Israelites to 
escape from Pharoah, and the stopping of the Earth from rotating 
on Joshua’s command. It also caused, he said, extensive vulcan- 
ism and floods.* Velikovsky imagined the comet, after a compli¬ 
cated game of interplanetary billiards, to settle down into a 
stable, nearly circular orbit, becoming the planet Venus—which 
he claimed never existed before then. 

As I have discussed at some length elsewhere, these ideas are 
almost certainly wrong. Astronomers do not object to the idea of 
major collisions, only to major recent collisions. In any model of 
the solar system it is impossible to show the sizes of the planets 
on the same scale as their orbits, because the planets would then 


* As far as I know, the first essentially nonmystical attempt to explain a 
historical event by cometary intervention was Edmund Halley’s proposal 
that the Noachic flood was “the casual Choc [shock] of a Comet.” 


Heaven and Hell — 91 


he almost too small to see. If the planets were really shown to 
scale, as grains of dust, we would easily note that the chance of 
collision of a particular comet with the Earth in a few thousand 
years is extraordinarily low. Moreover, Venus is a rocky and 
metallic, hydrogen-poor planet, whereas Jupiter—where Vein 
kovsky supposed it comes from—is made almost entirely of hy- 
drogen. There are no energy sources for comets or planets to be 
ejected by Jupiter. If one passed by the Earth, it could not “stop” 
the Earth’s rotation, much less start it up again at twenty-four 
hours a day. No geological evidence supports the idea of an 
unusual frequency of vulcanism or floods 3,500 years ago. There 
are Mesopotamian inscriptions referring to Venus that predate 
the time when Velikovsky says Venus changed from a comet 
into a planet.* It is very unlikely that an object in such a highly 
elliptical orbit could he rapidly moved into the nearly perfectly 
circular orbit of present-day Venus. And so on. 

Many hypotheses proposed by scientists as well as by non¬ 
scientists turn out to be wrong. But science is a self-correcting 
enterprise. To be accepted, all new ideas must survive rigorous 
standards of evidence. The worst aspect of the Velikovsky affair 
is not that his hypotheses were wrong or in contradiction to 
firmly established facts, but that some who called themselves 
scientists attempted to suppress Velikovsky’s work. Science is 
generated by and devoted to free inquiry: the idea that any 
hypothesis, no matter how strange, deserves to be considered on 
its merits. The suppression of uncomfortable ideas may be com¬ 
mon in religion and politics, but it is not the path to knowledge; it 
has no place in the endeavor of science. We do not know in 
advance who will discover fundamental new insights. 

Venus has almost the same mass,' 1 ' size, and density as the 
Earth. As the nearest planet, it has for centuries been thought of 
as the Earth’s sister. What is our sister planet really like? Might it 
he a balmy, summer planet, a little warmer than the Earth be¬ 
cause it is a little closer to the Sun? Does it have impact craters, or 
have they all eroded away? Are there volcanoes? Mountains? 
Oceans? Life? 

The first person to look at Venus through the telescope was 
Galileo in 1609. He saw an absolutely featureless disc. Galileo 
noted that it went through phases, like the Moon, from a thin 
crescent to a full disc, and for the same reason: we are sometimes 
looking mostly at the night side of Venus and sometimes mostly 
at the day side, a finding that incidentally reinforced the view 
that the Earth went around the Sun and not vice versa. As 
optical telescopes became larger and their resolution (or ability to 

* The Adda cylinder seal, dating from the middle of the third millenium 
B.C., prominently displays Inanna, the goddess of Venus, the morning 
star, and precursor of the Babylonian Ishtar. 



Crater Yuty at 22°N, 34°W on Mars. 
Surrounding it are several layers of surface 
material ejected in the impact that pro¬ 
duced the crater. The splash pattern sug¬ 
gests that the excavated material flowed 
outward on some lubricant, probably 
subsurface ice melted by the impact. A 
small earlier crater just below Yuty has not 
been buried by the ejecta, indicating that 
the ejecta layer is thin. Mariner 9 photo. 
Courtesy NASA. 



A crater on the northern escarpment of 
Capri Chasma, Mars. The slow enlarge¬ 
ment of the valley has begun to crack and 
erode the crater. Mariner 9 photomosaic. 
Courtesy NASA. 


t It is, incidentally, some 30 million times more massive than the most 
massive comet known. 




92 — Cosmos 


\ 


¥ 


Dark variable markings in and near craters 
in Memnonia on Mars. Drifting bright 
sand and dust covers and uncovers urn 
derlying dark material. Windblown fine 
particles also cover over and erode craters 
and other geological forms. Mariner 9 
photo. Courtesy NASA. 




Dark, possibly volcanic material blown by 
winds out of a crater in Mesogaea on 
Mars. Mariner 9 photo. Courtesy NASA. 


discriminate fine detail) improved, they were systematically 
turned toward Venus. But they did no better than Galileo’s. 
Venus was evidently covered by a dense layer of obscuring 
cloud. When we look at the planet in the morning or evening 
skies, we are seeing sunlight reflected off the clouds of Venus. 
But for centuries after their discovery, the composition of those 
clouds remained entirely unknown. 

The absence of anything to see on Venus led some scientists to 
the curious conclusion that the surface was a swamp, like the 
Earth in the Carboniferous Period. The argument—if we can 
dignify it by such a word—went something like this: 

“I can’t see a thing on Venus.” 

“Why not?” 

“Because it’s totally covered with clouds.” 

“What are clouds made of?” 

“Water, of course.” 

“Then why are the clouds of Venus thicker than the 
clouds on Earth?” 

“Because there’s more water there.” 

“But if there is more water in the clouds, there must be 
more water on the surface. What kind of surfaces are very- 
wet: 

bwamps. 

And if there are swamps, why not cycads and dragonflies and 
perhaps even dinosaurs on Venus? Observation: There was ab- 
solutely nothing to see on Venus. Conclusion: It must be covered 
with life. The featureless clouds of Venus reflected our own 
predispositions. We are alive, and we resonate with the idea of 
life elsewhere. But only careful accumulation and assessment of 
the evidence can tell us whether a given world is inhabited. 
Venus turns out not to oblige our predispositions. 

The first real clue to the nature of Venus came from work with 
a prism made of glass or a flat surface, called a diffraction grating, 
covered with fine, regularly spaced, ruled lines. When an intense 
beam of ordinary white light passes through a narrow slit and 
then through a prism or grating, it is spread into a rainbow of 
colors called a spectrum. The spectrum runs from high frequen¬ 
cies* of visible light to low ones—violet, blue, green, yellow, 
orange and red. Since we see these colors, it is called the spectrum 
of visible light. But there is far more light than the small segment 
of the spectrum we can see. At higher frequencies, beyond the 
violet, is a part of the spectrum called the ultraviolet: a perfectly 
real kind of light, carrying death to the microbes. It is invisible to 
us, but readily detectable by bumblebees and photoelectric cells. 
There is much more to the world than we can see. Beyond the 


* Light is a wave motion; its frequency is the number of wave crests, say, 
entering a detection instrument, such as a retina, in a given unit of time, 
such as a second. The higher the frequency, the more energetic the 
radiation. 


Heaven and Hell - 93 


ultraviolet is the X^ray part of the spectrum, and beyond the 
X-rays are the gamma rays. At lower frequencies, on the other 
side of red, is the infrared part of the spectrum. It was first 
discovered by placing a sensitive thermometer in what to our 
eyes is the dark beyond the red. The temperature rose. There 
was light falling on the thermometer even though it was invisible 
to our eyes. Rattlesnakes and doped semiconductors detect infra^ 
red radiation perfectly well. Beyond the infrared is the vast spec^ 
tral region of the radio waves. From gamma rays to radio waves, 
all are equally respectable brands of light. All are useful in as^ 
tronomy. But because of the limitations of our eyes, we have a 
prejudice, a bias, toward that tiny rainbow band we call the 
spectrum of visible light. 

In 1844, the philosopher Auguste Comte was searching for an 
example of a sort of knowledge that would be always hidden. He 
chose the composition of distant stars and planets. We would 
never physically visit them, he thought, and with no sample in 
hand it seemed we would forever be denied knowledge of their 
composition. But only three years after Comte’s death, it was 
discovered that a spectrum can be used to determine the chemis^ 
try of distant objects. Different molecules and chemical elements 
absorb different frequencies or colors of light, sometimes in the 
visible and sometimes elsewhere in the spectrum. In the spectrum 
of a planetary atmosphere, a single dark line represents an image 
of the slit in which light is missing, the absorption of sunlight 
during its brief passage through the air of another world. Each 
such line is made by a particular kind of molecule or atom. Every 
substance has its characteristic spectral signature. The gases on 
Venus can be identified from the Earth, 60 million kilometers 
away. We can divine the composition of the Sun (in which 
helium, named after the Greek sun god Helios, was first found); 
of magnetic A stars rich in europium; of distant galaxies analyzed 
through the collective light of a hundred billion constituent stars. 
Astronomical spectroscopy is an almost magical technique. It 
amazes me still. Auguste Comte picked a particularly unfortunate 
example. 


> a> 

& <D (5 O C 5 

o =3 35 = o -O 

'> -O 05 o 2? 


\ 


visible 


gamma rays 


0.1A 


\ 4000-7000A y 

\ / 


✓ 


X-rays 


ultraviolet 


infrared 



A spectrum produced when a bright light 
passes through a slit and then through a 
glass prism. If a gas that strongly absorbed 
visible light were in the light path, the 
rainbow pattern would be interrupted by 
a set of dark lines characteristic of the gas. 


Schematic diagram of the electromagnetic 
spectrum, ranging from the shortest 
wavelengths (gamma rays) to the longest 
(radio waves). The wavelength of light is 
measured in Angstroms (A), micrometers 
(^m), centimeters (cm) and meters (m). 


radio 


1A 


10A 


100A 1000A ym 10/um lO^xxm 1000/dm 1cm 10cm 

10 / 000A=1/Hm 10,000/xm =lcm 


lm 










94 - Cosmos 



Phobos, the innermost moon of Mars. 
Crater Stickney is shown at top. If the 
impacting object that produced this crater 
had been a little larger, Phobos might 
have been disintegrated. Viking 1 Orbiter 
photo. Courtesy NASA. 



Close-up of the system of grooves on 
Phobos, possibly caused by the gravita¬ 
tional tides of Mars. Phobos and its sister 
moon Deimos seem to have significant 
organic matter on their surfaces which ac¬ 
counts for their dark color. Both may be 
captured asteroids. The dimensions of this 
little moon are roughly 27 * 21 x ^ki¬ 
lometers, with the long axis pointing 
towards the center of Mars. Viking 1 Or- 
biter photo. Courtesy NASA. 


If Venus were soaking wet, it should be easy to see the water 
vapor lines in its spectrum. But the first spectroscopic searches, 
attempted at Mount Wilson Observatory around 1920, found 
not a hint, not a trace, of water vapor above the clouds of Venus, 
suggesting an arid, desert-like surface, surmounted by clouds of 
fine drifting silicate dust. Further study revealed enormous quan¬ 
tities of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, implying to some 
scientists that all the water on the planet had combined with 
hydrocarbons to form carbon dioxide, and that therefore the 
surface of Venus was a global oil field, a planet-wide sea of 
petroleum. Others concluded that there was no water vapor 
above the clouds because the clouds were very cold, that all the 
water had condensed out into water droplets, which do not have 
the same pattern of spectral lines as water vapor. They suggested 
that the planet was totally covered with water—except perhaps 
for an occasional limestone-encrusted island, like the cliffs of 
Dover. But because of the vast quantities of carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere, the sea could not be ordinary water; physical 
chemistry required carbonated water. Venus, they proposed, had 
a vast ocean of seltzer. 

The first hint of the true situation came not from spectroscopic 
studies in the visible or near-infrared parts of the spectrum, but 
rather from the radio region. A radio telescope works more like a 
light meter than a camera. You point it toward some fairly broad 
region of the sky, and it records how much energy, in a particular 
radio frequency, is coming down to Earth. We are used to radio 
signals transmitted by some varieties of intelligent life—namely, 
those who run radio and television stations. But there are many 
other reasons for natural objects to give off radio waves. One is 
that they are hot. And when, in 1956, an early radio telescope 
was turned toward Venus, it was discovered to be emitting radio 
waves as if it were at an extremely high temperature. But the real 
demonstration that the surface of Venus is astonishingly hot 
came when the Soviet spacecraft of the Venera series first pene¬ 
trated the obscuring clouds and landed on the mysterious and 
inaccessible surface of the nearest planet. Venus, it turns out, is 
broiling hot. There are no swamps, no oil fields, no seltzer 
oceans. With insufficient data, it is easy to go wrong. 

When I greet a friend, I am seeing her in reflected visible light, 
generated by the Sun, say, or by an incandescent lamp. The light 
rays bounce off my friend and into my eye. But the ancients, 
including no less a figure than Euclid, believed that we see by 
virtue of rays somehow emitted by the eye and tangibly, actively 
contacting the object observed. This is a natural notion and can 
still be encountered, although it does not account for the invis¬ 
ibility of objects in a darkened room. Today we combine a laser 
and a photocell, or a radar transmitter and a radio telescope, and 
in this way make active contact by light with distant objects. In 
radar astronomy, radio waves are transmitted by a telescope on 




Heaven and Hell — 95 


Earth, strike, say, that hemisphere of Venus that happens to he 
facing the Earth, and bounce hack. At many wavelengths the 
clouds and atmosphere of Venus are entirely transparent to radio 
waves. Some places on the surface will absorb them or, it they 
are very rough, will scatter them sideways and so will appear dark 
to radio waves. By following the surface features moving with 
Venus as it rotates, it was possible for the first time to determine 
reliably the length of its day—how long it takes Venus to spin 
once on its axis. It turns out that, with respect to the stars, Venus 
turns once every 245 Earth days, but backwards, in the opposite 
direction from all other planets in the inner solar system. As a 
result, the Sun rises in the west and sets in the east, taking 118 
Earth days from sunrise to sunrise. What is more, it presents 
almost exactly the same face to the Earth each time it is closest to 
our planet. However the Earth’s gravity has managed to nudge 
Venus into this Earthdocked rotation rate, it cannot have hap' 
pened rapidly. Venus could not be a mere few thousand years old 
but, rather, it must be as old as all the other objects in the inner 
solar system. 

Radar pictures of Venus have been obtained, some from 
ground-based radar telescopes, some from the Pioneer Venus 
vehicle in orbit around the planet. They show provocative evi¬ 
dence of impact craters. There are just as many craters that are 
not too big or too small on Venus as there are in the lunar 
highlands, so many that Venus is again telling us that it is very 
old. But the craters of Venus are remarkably shallow, almost as it 
the high surface temperatures have produced a kind of rock that 
flows over long periods of time, like taffy or putty, gradually 
softening the relief. There are great mesas here, twice as high as 
the Tibetan plateau, an immense rift valley, possibly giant vol¬ 
canoes and a mountain as high as Everest. We now see before us 
a world previously hidden entirely by clouds—its features first 
explored by radar and by space vehicles. 

The surface temperatures on Venus, as deduced from radio 
astronomy and confirmed by direct spacecraft measurements are 
around 480°C or 900°F, hotter than the hottest household oven. 
The corresponding surface pressure is 90 atmospheres, 90 times 
the pressure we feel from the Earth’s atmosphere, the equivalent 
of the weight of water 1 kilometer below the surface of the 
oceans. To survive tor long on Venus, a space vehicle would 
have to be refrigerated as well as built like a deep submersible. 

Something like a dozen space vehicles from the Soviet Union 
and United States have entered the dense Venus atmosphere, 
and penetrated the clouds; a few of them have actually survived 
for an hour or so on the surface.* Two spacecraft in the Soviet 
* Pioneer Venus was a successful U.S. mission in 1978-79, combining an 
Orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes, two of which briefly survived 
the inclemencies of the Venus surface. There are many unexpected 
developments in mustering spacecraft to explore the planets. This is one 



A radar map of equatorial latitudes on 
Venus. Bright regions reflect radio waves 
back to space efficiently. Circles show re¬ 
gions studied in greater detail, one of 
which is shown below. For a detailed glo¬ 
bal map of Venus see page 340. Goldstone 
Tracking Station, Jet Propulsion Labora¬ 
tory. 



Close-up of an equatorial region on Venus 
as seen by radar astronomy from Earth. 
The diagonal bar is a region from which 
no useful data were returned. Several 
craters are seen, the largest almost 200 ki¬ 
lometers across. Craters on Venus are very 
shallow compared with crater of similar 
diameters on other worlds, hinting at 
some special erosion mechanism. Gold- 
stone Tracking Station, Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 





96 — Cosmos 



Callisto, the outermost large moon of Ju¬ 
piter. Each circular bright spot is a large 
impact crater. Voyager 2 photo taken at a 
range of one million kilometers. Courtesy 
NASA. 



A region of Ganymede, largest moon of 
Jupiter. Bright ray craters and other im- 
pact scars are seen. Io and Europa, the 
other two large Jovian satellites, like the 
Earth, show few if any impact craters; 
erosion must he much more efficient there 
than on Ganymede and Callisto. Voyager 
2 photo. Courtesy NASA. 


Venera series have taken pictures down there. Let us follow in 
the footsteps of these pioneering missions, and visit another 
world. 

In ordinary visible light, the faintly yellowish clouds of Venus 
can be made out, but they show, as Galileo first noted, virtually 
no features at all. If the cameras look in the ultraviolet, however, 
we see a graceful, complex swirling weather system in the high 
atmosphere, where the winds are around 100 meters per second, 
some 220 miles per hour. The atmosphere of Venus is composed 
of 96 percent carbon dioxide. There are small traces of nitrogen, 
water vapor, argon, carbon monoxide and other gases, but the 
only hydrocarbons or carbohydrates present are there in less than 
0.1 parts per million. The clouds of Venus turn out to be chiefly 
a concentrated solution of sulfuric acid. Small quantities of hy- 
drochloric acid and hydrofluoric acid are also present. Even at its 
high, cool clouds, Venus turns out to be a thoroughly nasty 
place. 

High above the visible cloud deck, at about 70 kilometers 
altitude, there is a continuous haze of small particles. At 60 
kilometers, we plunge into the clouds, and find ourselves sur¬ 
rounded by droplets of concentrated sulfuric acid. As we go 
deeper, the cloud particles tend to get bigger. The pungent gas, 
sulfur dioxide, S0 2 , is present in trace amounts in the lower 
atmosphere. It is circulated up above the clouds, broken down by 
ultraviolet light from the Sun and recombined with water there 
to form sulfuric acid—which condenses into droplets, settles, and 
at lower altitudes is broken down by heat into S0 2 and water 
again, completing the cycle. It is always raining sulfuric acid on 
Venus, all over the planet, and not a drop ever reaches the 
surface. 

The sulfur-colored mist extends downwards to some 45 kilo¬ 
meters above the surface of Venus, where we emerge into a 
dense but crystal-clear atmosphere. The atmospheric pressure is 
so high, however, that we cannot see the surface. Sunlight is 
bounced about by atmospheric molecules until we lose all images 
from the surface. There is no dust here, no clouds, just an 
atmosphere getting palpably denser. Plenty of sunlight is trans¬ 
mitted by the overlying clouds, about as much as on an overcast 
day on the Earth. 

With searing heat, crushing pressures, noxious gases and 

of them: Among the instruments aboard one of the Pioneer Venus entry 
probes was a net flux radiometer, designed to measure simultaneously 
the amount of infrared energy flowing upwards and downwards at each 
position in the Venus atmosphere. The instrument required a sturdy 
window that was also transparent to infrared radiation. A 13.5-karat 
diamond was imported and milled into the desired window. However, 
the contractor was required to pay a $12,000 import duty. Eventually, 
the U.S. Customs service decided that after the diamond was launched 
to Venus it was unavailable for trade on Earth and refunded the money 
to the manufacturer. 




Heaven and Hell — 97 


everything suffused in an eerie, reddish glow, Venus seems less the 
goddess of love than the incarnation of hell As nearly as we can 
make out, at least some places on the surface are strewn fields of 
jumbled, softened irregular rocks, a hostile, barren landscape 
relieved only here and there by the eroded remnants of a derelict 
spacecraft from a distant planet, utterly invisible through the 
thick, cloudy, poisonous atmosphere.* 

Venus is a kind of planet-wide catastrophe. It now seems 
reasonably clear that the high surface temperature comes about 
through a massive greenhouse effect. Sunlight passes through the 
atmosphere and clouds of Venus, which are semi-transparent to 
visible light, and reaches the surface. The surface being heated 
endeavors to radiate back into space. But because Venus is much 
cooler than the Sun, it emits radiation chiefly in the infrared 
rather than the visible region of the spectrum. However, the 
carbon dioxide and water vapoV in the Venus atmosphere are 
almost perfectly opaque to infrared radiation, the heat of the Sun 
is efficiently trapped, and the surface temperature rises—until the 
little amount of infrared radiation that trickles out of this massive 
atmosphere just balances the sunlight absorbed in the lower 
atmosphere and surface. 


* In this stifling landscape, there is not likely to be anything alive, even 
creatures very different from us. Organic and other conceivable biologi¬ 
cal molecules would simply fall to pieces. But, as an indulgence, let us 
imagine that intelligent life once evolved on such a planet. Would it 
then invent science? The development of science on Earth was spurred 
fundamentally by observations of the regularities of the stars and planets. 
But Venus is completely cloud-covered. The night is pleasingly long— 
about 59 Earth days long—but nothing of the astronomical universe 
would be visible if you looked up into the night sky of Venus. Even the 
Sun would be invisible in the daytime; its light would he scattered and 
diffused over the whole sky—just as scuba divers see only a uniform 
enveloping radiance beneath the sea. If a radio telescope were built on 
Venus, it could detect the Sun, the Earth and other distant objects. If 
astrophysics developed, the existence of stars could eventually he de¬ 
duced from the principles of physics, but they would be theoretical 
constructs only. I sometimes wonder what their reaction would be if 
intelligent beings on Venus one day learned to fly, to sail in the dense air, 
to penetrate the mysterious cloud veil 45 kilometers above them and 
eventually to emerge out the top of the clouds, to look up and for the 
first time witness that glorious universe of Sun and planets and stars. 


+ At the present time there is still a little uncertainty about the abun¬ 
dance of water vapor on Venus. The gas chromatograph on the Pioneer 
Venus entry probes gave an abundance of water in the lower atmosphere 
of a few tenths of a percent. On the other hand, infrared measurements 
by the Soviet entry vehicles, Veneras 11 and 12, gave an abundance of 
about a hundredth of a percent. If the former value applies, then carbon 
dioxide and water vapor alone are adequate to seal in almost all the heat 
radiation from the surface and keep the Venus ground temperature at 
about 480°C. If the latter number applies—and my guess is that it is the 
more reliable estimate—then carbon dioxide and water vapor alone are 
adequate to keep the surface temperature only at about 380°C, and 



Plastic construction helmet before (top) 
and after ( bottom) brief exposure to Venus 
surface temperatures. Photographed at 
Southwest Research Institute, San An¬ 
tonio, Texas. 



98 — Cosmos 



Venera 9 and 10 panoramic images of two 
different sites on the surface of the planet 
Venus. In both pictures the horizon is 
toward top right. Note the eroded form of 
the surface rocks. Courtesy Institute for 
Cosmic Research, Soviet Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow. 


Our neighboring world turns out to be a dismally unpleasant 
place. But we will go back to Venus. It is fascinating in its own 
right. Many mythic heroes in Greek and Norse mythology, after 
all, made celebrated efforts to visit Hell. There is also much to be 
learned about our planet, a comparative Heaven, by comparing it 
with Hell. 

The Sphinx, half human, half lion, was constructed more than 
5,500 years ago. Its face was once crisp and cleanly rendered. It is 
now softened and blurred by thousands of years of Egyptian 
desert sandblasting and by occasional rains. In New York City 
there is an obelisk called Cleopatra’s Needle, which came from 
Egypt. In only about a hundred years in that city’s Central Park, 
its inscriptions have been almost totally obliterated, because of 
smog and industrial pollution—chemical erosion like that in the 
atmosphere of Venus. Erosion on Earth slowly wipes out infon 
mation, but because they are gradual—the patter of a raindrop, 
the sting of a sand grain—those processes can be missed. Big 
structures, such as mountain ranges, survive tens of millions of 
years; smaller impact craters, perhaps a hundred thousand*; and 


some other atmospheric constituent is necessary to close the remaining 
infrared frequency windows in the atmospheric greenhouse. However, 
the small quantities of S0 2 , CO and HC1, all of which have been 
detected in the Venus atmosphere, seem adequate for this purpose. 
Thus recent American and Soviet missions to Venus seem to have 
provided verification that the greenhouse effect is indeed the reason for 
the high surface temperature. 

* More precisely, an impact crater 10 kilometers in diameter is produced 
on the Earth about once every 500,000 years; it would survive erosion 
for about 300 million years in areas that are geologically stable, such as 
Europe and North America. Smaller craters are produced more fre- 
quently and destroyed more rapidly, especially in geologically active 
regions. 


Heaven and Hell - 99 



Full-disk view of Venus in ultraviolet light, 
printed in the hues of the visible spectrum. 
The patterns are due to clouds, rotating right 
to left, high in the Venus atmosphere. Pio¬ 
neer Venus Orbiter photo. Courtesy NASA. 




Two model reconstructions of the surface of Venus, the bottom image 
displaying a Venera spacecraft, its electronics long since fried, slowly 
eroding in the hostile environment of our sister planet. 


Crescent Venus in visible light. We see only 
the unbroken clouds of sulfuric acid solution. 
The yellow color may be due to small quan¬ 
tities of elemental sulfur. Pioneer Venus Or¬ 
biter photo. Courtesy NASA. 


large-scale human artifacts only some thousands. In addition to 
such slow and uniform erosion, destruction also occurs through 
catastrophes large and small. The Sphinx is missing a nose. 
Someone shot it off in a moment of idle desecration—some say it 
was Mameluke Turks, others, Napoleonic soldiers. 

On Venus, on Earth and elsewhere in the solar system, there is 
evidence for catastrophic destruction, tempered or overwhelmed 
by slower, more uniform processes: on the Earth, for example, 
rainfall, coursing into rivulets, streams and rivers of running 
water, creating huge alluvial basins; on Mars, the remnants of 







100 - Cosmos 



\\ 



Heaven and Hell - 101 



Natural processes altering the landscape on a small habit' 
able world: The Earth from space, as seen by Apollo and 
Landsat spacecraft at an altitude of a few hundred kilome' 
ters. (a) The Near East, Africa and, visible through the 
clouds, the Antarctic polar cap. (b and c): Tropical storm 
systems over Florida and the Gulf of Mexico: weather on a 
planet with a modest atmosphere, (d) The Rocky Mourn 
tains, partly snow covered, just west of Denver, (e) A vob 
canic mountain on Earth: the island of Hawaii, (f) 
Geological fault systems in southern Swaziland, (g) The 
delta of the river Nile, (h) Frozen water is less dense than 
liquid water: pack ice in the St. Lawrence Seaway, (i) Ice 
glaciers among rivers in the Brooks Range of Alaska, (j) 
The patterns made by liquid water, flowing downhill over 
topography: the Jurua, Embira and Tarauca tributaries of 
the Amazon River, (k) The patterns of windblown sand: 
seif dunes in the southern Arabian peninsula. (I) The delta 
of the Chu Chiang. Essentially undetected in this image are 
Canton (center) and Hong Kong (lower right), (m) The 
Caribbean coast of Venezuela, showing silt being carried 
out to sea. Courtesy NASA. 



m 




102 — Cosmos 


ancient rivers, perhaps arising from beneath the ground; on Io, a 
moon of Jupiter, what seem to be broad channels made by flow- 
ing liquid sulfur. There are mighty weather systems on the 
Earth—and in the high atmosphere of Venus and on Jupiter. 
There are sandstorms on the Earth and on Mars; lightning on 
Jupiter and Venus and Earth. Volcanoes inject debris into the 
atmospheres of the Earth and Io. Internal geological processes 
slowly deform the surfaces of Venus, Mars, Ganymede and 
Europa, as well as Earth. Glaciers, proverbial for their slowness, 
produce major reworkings of landscapes on the Earth and prot> 
ably also on Mars. These processes need not be constant in time. 
Most of Europe was once covered with ice. A few million years 
ago, the present site of the city of Chicago was buried under 
three kilometers of frost. On Mars, and elsewhere in the solar 
system, we see features that could not be produced today, land' 
scapes carved hundreds of millions or billions of years ago when 
the planetary climate was probably very different. 

There is an additional factor that can alter the landscape and 
the climate of Earth: intelligent life, able to make major environ- 
mental changes. Like Venus, the Earth also has a greenhouse 
effect due to its carbon dioxide and water vapor. The global 
temperature of the Earth would be below the freezing point of 
water if not for the greenhouse effect. It keeps the oceans liquid 
and life possible. A little greenhouse is a good thing. Like Venus, 
the Earth also has about 90 atmospheres of carbon dioxide; but it 
resides in the crust as limestone and other carbonates, not in the 
atmosphere. If the Earth were moved only a little closer to the 
Sun, the temperature would increase slightly. This would drive 
some of the C0 2 out of the surface rocks, generating a stronger 
greenhouse effect, which would in turn incrementally heat the 
surface further. A hotter surface would vaporize still more can 
bonates into C0 2 , and there would be the possibility of a rum 
away greenhouse effect to very high temperatures. This is just 
what we think happened in the early history of Venus, because 
of Venus’ proximity to the Sun. The surface environment of 
Venus is a warning: something disastrous can happen to a planet 
rather like our own. 

The principal energy sources of our present industrial civiliza¬ 
tion are the so-called fossil fuels. We burn wood and oil, coal and 
natural gas, and, in the process, release waste gases, principally 
C0 2 , into the air. Consequently, the carbon dioxide content of 
the Earth’s atmosphere is increasing dramatically. The possibility 
of a runaway greenhouse effect suggests that we have to be 
careful: Even a one- or two-degree rise in the global temperature 
can have catastrophic consequences. In the burning of coal and oil 
and gasoline, we are also putting sulfuric acid into the atmos¬ 
phere. Like Venus, our stratosphere even now has a substantial 
mist of tiny sulfuric acid droplets. Our major cities are polluted 
with noxious molecules. We do not understand the long-term 



Heaven and Hell - 103 


effects of our course of action. 

But we have also been perturbing the climate in the opposite 
sense. For hundreds of thousands of years human beings have 
been burning and cutting down forests and encouraging domestic 
animals to graze on and destroy grasslands. Slash-and-burn agri¬ 
culture, industrial tropical deforestation and overgrazing are 
rampant today. But forests are darker than grasslands, and grass¬ 
lands are darker than deserts. As a consequence, the amount of 
sunlight that is absorbed by the ground has been declining, and 
by changes in the land use we are lowering the surface tempera¬ 
ture of our planet. Might this cooling increase the size of the 
polar ice cap, which, because it is bright, will reflect still more 
sunlight from the Earth, further cooling the planet, driving a 
runaway albedo* effect? 

Our lovely blue planet, the Earth, is the only home we know. 
Venus is too hot. Mars is too cold. But the Earth is just right, a 
heaven for humans. After all, we evolved here. But our conge¬ 
nial climate may be unstable. We are perturbing our poor planet 
in serious and contradictory ways. Is there any danger of driving 
the environment of the Earth toward the planetary Hell of Venus 
or the global ice age of Mars? The simple answer is that nobody 
knows. The study of the global climate, the comparison of the 
Earth with other worlds, are subjects in their earliest stages of 
development. They are fields that are poorly and grudgingly 
funded. In our ignorance, we continue to push and pull, to 
pollute the atmosphere and brighten the land, oblivious of the 
fact that the long-term consequences are largely unknown. 

A few million years ago, when human beings first evolved on 
Earth, it was already a middle-aged world, 4.6 billion years along 
from the catastrophes and impetuosities of its youth. But we 
humans now represent a new and perhaps decisive factor. Our 
intelligence and our technology have given us the power to affect 
the climate. How will we use this power? Are we willing to 
tolerate ignorance and complacency in matters that affect the 
entire human family? Do we value short-term advantages above 
the welfare of the Earth? Or will we think on longer time scales, 
with concern for our children and our grandchildren, to under¬ 
stand and protect the complex life-support systems of our planet? 
The Earth is a tiny and fragile world. It needs to be cherished. 



The head of the Sphinx, from the De¬ 
scription de L’Egypt , published in 1809. 
The paws of the Sphinx were then en¬ 
tirely buried in the sand and protected 
from erosion. Excavated in more recent 
times, they are much better preserved 
than the face. 


* The albedo is the fraction of the sunlight striking a planet that is 
reflected back to space. The albedo of the Earth is some 30 to 35 
percent. The rest of the sunlight is absorbed by the ground and is 
responsible for the average surface temperature. 




Frost in Utopia. A thin layer of water frost 
covers the ground at 44° North latitude on 
Mars, in October 1977, at the beginning of 
northern winter. The vertical structure supports 
the high-gain antenna for direct communication 
of Viking 2 with Earth. Colored squares and 
black strips are calibration targets for the cam- 
eras. The black square with white border, bot¬ 
tom left, is a microdot on which are 
written—very small—the signatures of ten thou¬ 
sand human beings responsible for the design, 
fabrication, testing, launch and mission opera¬ 
tions of the Viking spacecraft. Humans are be¬ 
coming, almost without noticing it, a 
multi-planet species. Courtesy NASA. 













































Chapter V 


BLUBS FOR 
A BED PLANET 

In the orchards of the gods, he watches the canals . . . 

—Enuma Elish , Sumer, c. 2500 B.C. 


A man that is of Copernicus’ Opinion, that this Earth of ours is a Planet, 
carry’d round and enlightn’d by the Sun, like the rest of them, cannot but 
sometimes have a fancy . . . that the rest of the Planets have their Dress and 
Furniture, nay and their Inhabitants too as well as this Earth of ours. . . . But 
we were always apt to conclude, that ’twas in vain to enquire after what 
Nature had been pleased to do there, seeing there was no likelihood of ever 
coming to an end of the Enquiry . . . but a while ago, thinking somewhat 
seriously on this matter (not that I count my self quicker sighted than those 
great Men [of the past], but that I had the happiness to live after most of 
them) me thoughts the Enquiry was not so impracticable nor the way so 
stopt up with Difficulties, but that there was very good room left for 
probable Conjectures. 

—Christiaan Huygens, New Conjectures Concerning the Planetary Worlds, 

Their Inhabitants and Productions , c. 1690 


A time would come when Men should be able to stretch out their Eyes . . . 
they should see the Planets like our Earth. 

—Christopher Wren, Inauguration Speech, Gresham College, 1657 




106 - Cosmos 


£ <£ # 


Three photographs of the same face of 
Mars, showing a polar cap and bright and 
dark markings, but no classical canals. At 
left, in local winter, the cap is prominent 
and the contrast between light and dark 
features subdued. At center, in local 
spring, the cap has retreated, and the com 
trast between bright and dark features is 
marked. These seasonal changes were at- 
tributed by Percival Lowell to the prolif¬ 
eration and decay of Martian vegetation. 
At right, in early summer, a great yellow- 
white dust cloud obscures surface fea¬ 
tures, and provides a hint of the answer to 
the mystery of seasonal changes on Mars. 
Courtesy New Mexico State University 
Observatory. 


MANY YEARS AGO, so the story goes, a celebrated newspaper 
publisher sent a telegram to a noted astronomer: WIRE COLLECT 
IMMEDIATELY FIVE HUNDRED WORDS ON WHETHER THERE IS LIFE 
ON MARS. The astronomer dutifully replied: NOBODY KNOWS, 
NOBODY KNOWS, NOBODY KNOWS ... 250 times. But despite this 
confession of ignorance, asserted with dogged persistence by an 
expert, no one paid any heed, and from that time to this, we hear 
authoritative pronouncements by those who think they have de¬ 
duced life on Mars, and by those who think they have excluded 
it. Some people very much want there to be life on Mars; others 
very much want there to be no life on Mars. There have been 
excesses in both camps. These strong passions have somewhat 
frayed the tolerance for ambiguity that is essential to science. 
There seem to be many people who simply wish to be told an 
answer, any answer, and thereby avoid the burden of keeping 
two mutually exclusive possibilities in their heads at the same 
time. Some scientists have believed that Mars is inhabited on 
what has later proved to be the flimsiest evidence. Others have 
concluded the planet is lifeless because a preliminary search for a 
particular manifestation of life has been unsuccessful or 
ambiguous. The blues have been played more than once for 
the red planet. 

Why Martians? Why so many eager speculations and ardent 
fantasies about Martians, rather than, say, Saturnians or Pluton- 
ians? Because Mars seems, at first glance, very Earthlike. It is the 
nearest planet whose surface we can see. There are polar ice caps, 
drifting white clouds, raging dust storms, seasonally changing 
patterns on its red surface, even a twenty-four-hour day. It is 
tempting to think of it as an inhabited world. Mars has become a 
kind of mythic arena onto which we have projected our earthly 
hopes and fears. But our psychological predispositions pro or con 
must not mislead us. All that matters is the evidence, and the 
evidence is not yet in. The real Mars is a world of wonders. Its 
future prospects are far more intriguing than our past apprehen¬ 
sions about it. In our time we have sifted the sands of Mars, we 
have established a presence there, we have fulfilled a century of 
dreams! 

No one would have believed in the last years of the nine¬ 
teenth century that this world was being watched keenly 
and closely by intelligences greater than man’s and yet as 
mortal as his own; that as men busied themselves about 
their various concerns, they were scrutinised and studied, 
perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope 
might scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and 
multiply in a drop of water. With infinite complacency, 
men went to and fro over this globe about their little affairs, 
serene in their assurances of their empire over matter. It is 
possible that the infusoria under the microscope do the 



Blues for a Red Planet - 107 


same. No one gave a thought to the older worlds of space as 
sources of human danger, or thought of them only to dis¬ 
miss the idea of life upon them as impossible or improbable. 

It is curious to recall some of the mental habits of those 
departed days. At most, terrestrial men fancied there might 
be other men upon Mars, perhaps inferior to themselves 
and ready to welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet across 
the gulf of space, minds that are to our minds as ours are to 
those of the beasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and 
unsympathetic, regarded this Earth with envious eyes, and 
slowly and surely drew their plans against us. 

These opening lines of H. G. Wells’ 1897 science fiction classic 
The War of the Worlds maintain their haunting power to this 
day.* For all of our history, there has been the fear, or hope, that 
there might be life beyond the Earth. In the last hundred years, 
that premonition has focused on a bright red point of light in the 
night sky. Three years before The War of the Worlds was pub¬ 
lished, a Bostonian named Percival Lowell founded a major ob¬ 
servatory where the most elaborate claims in support of life on 
Mars were developed. Lowell dabbled in astronomy as a young 
man, went to Harvard, secured a semi-official diplomatic ap¬ 
pointment to Korea, and otherwise engaged in the usual pursuits 
of the wealthy. Before he died in 1916, he had made major 
contributions to our knowledge of the nature and evolution of 
the planets, to the deduction of the expanding universe and, in a 
decisive way, to the discovery of the planet Pluto, which is 
named after him. The first two letters of the name Pluto are the 



Percival Lowell, aged fifty-nine, in Flag¬ 
staff. Lowell Observatory photograph. 


initials of Percival Lowell. Its symbol is EL , a planetary mono¬ 
gram. 

But Lowell’s lifelong love was the planet Mars. He was elec¬ 
trified by the announcement in 1877 by an Italian astronomer, 
Giovanni Schiaparelli, of canali on Mars. Schiaparelli had re¬ 
ported during a close approach of Mars to Earth an intricate 
network of single and double straight lines crisscrossing the 
bright areas of the planet. Canali in Italian means channels or 
grooves, but was promptly translated into English as canals , a 
word that implies intelligent design. A Mars mania coursed 
through Europe and America, and Lowell found himself swept 
up with it. 

In 1892, his eyesight failing, Schiaparelli announced he was 
giving up observing Mars. Lowell resolved to continue the work. 
He wanted a first-rate observing site, undisturbed by clouds or 
city lights and marked by good “seeing,” the astronomer’s term for 
a steady atmosphere through which the shimmering of an 



A map of Mars, after that of Schiaparelli. 
The straight and curved lines are the 
“canals.” Schiaparelli named many features 
and locales after classical and mythical 
places, and laid the basis for modern Mar¬ 
tian nomenclature, including Chryse and 
Utopia, landing sites of Vikings 1 and 2. 


* In 1938, a radio version, produced by Orson Welles, transposed the 
Martian invasion from England to the eastern United States, and fright¬ 
ened millions in war-jittery America into believing that the Martians 
were in fact attacking. 



108 — Cosmos 



Lowell seated at his observatory’s 24'inch 
refracting telescope in 1900. Lowell Ob' 
servatory photograph. 


astronomical image in the telescope is minimized. Bad seeing is pn> 
duced by smalLscale turbulence in the atmosphere above the 
telescope and is the reason the stars twinkle. Lowell built his 
observatory far away from home, on Mars Hill in Flagstaff, ArL 
zona.* He sketched the surface features of Mars, particularly the 
canals, which mesmerized him. Observations of this sort are not 
easy. You put in long hours at the telescope in the chill of the 
early morning. Often the seeing is poor and the image of Mars 
blurs and distorts. Then you must ignore what you have seen. 
Occasionally the image steadies and the features of the planet 
flash out momentarily, marvelously. You must then remember 
what has been vouchsafed to you and accurately commit it to 
paper. You must put your preconceptions aside and with an open 
mind set down the wonders of Mars. 

Percival Lowell’s notebooks are full of what he thought he 
saw: bright and dark areas, a hint of polar cap, and canals, a 
planet festooned with canals. Lowell believed he was seeing a 
globe'girdling network of great irrigation ditches, carrying water 
from the melting polar caps to the thirsty inhabitants of the 
equatorial cities. He believed the planet to be inhabited by an 
older and wiser race, perhaps very different from us. He believed 
that the seasonal changes in the dark areas were due to the 
growth and decay of vegetation. He believed that Mars was, very 
closely, Earthdike. All in all, he believed too much. 

Lowell conjured up a Mars that was ancient, arid, withered, a 
desert world. Still, it was an Earthdike desert. Lowell’s Mars had 
many features in common with the American Southwest, where 
the Lowell Observatory was located. He imagined the Martian 
temperatures a little on the chilly side but still as comfortable as 
“the South of England.” The air was thin, but there was enough 
oxygen to be breathable. Water was rare, but the elegant net' 
work of canals carried the life'giving fluid all over the planet. 

What was in retrospect the most serious contemporary chaL 
lenge to Lowell’s ideas came from an unlikely source. In 1907, 
Alfred Russel Wallace, co'discoverer of evolution by natural 
selection, was asked to review one of Lowell’s books. He had 
been an engineer in his youth and, while somewhat credulous on 
such issues as extrasensory perception, was admirably skeptical 
on the habitability of Mars. Wallace showed that Lowell had 
erred in his calculation of the average temperatures on Mars; 
instead of being as temperate as the South of England, they were, 
with few exceptions, everywhere below the freezing point of 
water. There should be permafrost, a perpetually frozen subsurface. 


* Isaac Newton had written “If the Theory of making Telescopes could 
at length he fully brought into practice, yet there would be certain 
Bounds beyond which Telescopes could not perform. For the Air 
through which we look upon the Stars, is in perpetual tremor. . . . The 
only remedy is the most serene and quiet Air, such as may perhaps be 
found on the tops of the highest mountains above the grosser Clouds.” 



Blues for a Red Planet - 109 


The air was much thinner than Lowell had calculated. 
Craters should be as abundant as on the Moon. And as for the 
water in the canals: 

Any attempt to make that scanty surplus [of water], by 
means of overflowing canals, travel across the equator into 
the opposite hemisphere, through such terrible desert re- 
gions and exposed to such a cloudless sky as Mr. Lowell 
describes, would be the work of a body of madmen rather 
than of intelligent beings. It may be safely asserted that not 
one drop of water would escape evaporation or insoak at 
even a hundred miles from its source. 

This devastating and largely correct physical analysis was written 
in Wallace’s eighty-fourth year. His conclusion was that life on 
Mars—by this he meant civil engineers with an interest in hy¬ 
draulics—was impossible. He offered no opinion on microorgan¬ 
isms. 

Despite Wallace’s critique, despite the fact that other astron¬ 
omers with telescopes and observing sites as good as Lowell’s 
could find no sign of the fabled canals, Lowell’s vision of Mars 
gained popular acceptance. It had a mythic quality as old as 
Genesis. Part of its appeal was the fact that the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury was an age of engineering marvels, including the construc¬ 
tion of enormous canals: the Suez Canal, completed in 1869; the 
Corinth Canal, in 1893; the Panama Canal, in 1914; and, closer 
to home, the Great Lake locks, the barge canals of upper New 
York State, and the irrigation canals of the American Southwest. 
If Europeans and Americans could perform such feats, why not 
Martians? Might there not be an even more elaborate effort by an 
older and wiser species, courageously battling the advance of 
desiccation on the red planet? 

We have now sent reconnaissance satellites into orbit around 
Mars. The entire planet has been mapped. We have landed two 
automated laboratories on its surface. The mysteries of Mars 
have, if anything, deepened since Lowell’s day. However, with 
pictures far more detailed than any view of Mars that Lowell 
could have glimpsed, we have found not a tributary of the 
vaunted canal network, not one lock. Lowell and Schiaparelli 
and others, doing visual observations under difficult seeing con¬ 
ditions, were misled—in part perhaps because of a predisposition 
to believe in life on Mars. 

The observing notebooks of Percival Lowell reflect a sustained 
effort at the telescope over many years. They show Lowell to 
have been well aware of the skepticism expressed by other as¬ 
tronomers about the reality of the canals. They reveal a man 
convinced that he has made an important discovery and dis¬ 
tressed that others have not yet understood its significance. In his 
notebook for 1905, for example, there is an entry on January 21: 
“Double canals came out by flashes, convincing of reality.” In 
reading LowelPs notebooks I have the distinct but uncomfortable 



One of the globes of Mars, showing 
prominent named canals, prepared by 
Lowell. Courtesy Lowell Observatory. 



Drawing of Mars made in 1909 by E.-M. 
Antoniadi in France. The polar cap and 
limb haze are apparent, but under excel¬ 
lent “seeing” conditions virtually no canals 
could be discerned. 




110 — Cosmos 



A modern illustration of the Mars in the 
John Carter novels of Edgar Rice Bun 
roughs. Courtesy Ballantine Books. 



Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky 
(18574935), Russian rocket and space 
pioneer. A deaf, largely self-educated 
provincial schoolteacher, he made funda¬ 
mental contributions to astronautics. He 
envisioned a time when humans would be 
able to re-engineer the environments of 
other worlds, and in 1896 wrote on com¬ 
munication with extraterrestrial intelli¬ 
gence. In 1903 he described in detail how 
a multi-stage liquid-fuel rocket could 
transport humans beyond the atmosphere 
of the Earth. Courtesy Sovfoto. 


feeling that he was really seeing something. But what? 

When Paul Fox of Cornell and I compared Lowell’s maps of 
Mars with the Mariner 9 orbital imagery—sometimes with a res¬ 
olution a thousand times superior to that of Lowell’s Earth- 
bound twenty-four-inch refracting telescope—we found virtually 
no correlation at all. It was not that Lowell’s eye had strung up 
disconnected fine detail on the Martian surface into illusory 
straight lines. There was no dark mottling or crater chains in the 
position of most of his canals. There were no features there at all. 
Then how could he have drawn the same canals year after year? 
How could other astronomers—some of whom said they had not 
examined Lowell’s maps closely until after their own observa¬ 
tions—have drawn the same canals? One of the great findings of 
the Mariner 9 mission to Mars was that there are time-variable 
streaks and splotches on the Martian surface—many connected 
with the ramparts of impact craters—which change with the sea¬ 
sons. They are due to windblown dust, the patterns varying with 
the seasonal winds. But the streaks do not have the character of 
the canals, they are not in the position of the canals, and none of 
them is large enough individually to be seen from the Earth in 
the first place. It is unlikely that there were real features on Mars 
even slightly resembling Lowell’s canals in the first few decades of 
this century that have disappeared without a trace as soon as 
close-up spacecraft investigations became possible. 

The canals of Mars seem to be some malfunction, under diffi¬ 
cult seeing conditions, of the human hand/eye/brain combina¬ 
tion (or at least for some humans; many other astronomers, 
observing with equally good instruments in Lowell’s time and 
after, claimed there were no canals whatever). But this is hardly a 
comprehensive explanation, and I have the nagging suspicion 
that some essential feature of the Martian canal problem still 
remains undiscovered. Lowell always said that the regularity of 
the canals was an unmistakable sign that they were of intelligent 
origin. This is certainly true. The only unresolved question was 
which side of the telescope the intelligence was on. 

Lowell’s Martians were benign and hopeful, even a little god¬ 
like, very different from the malevolent menace posed by Wells 
and Welles in The War of the Worlds . Both sets of ideas passed 
into the public imagination through Sunday supplements and 
science fiction. I can remember as a child reading with breathless 
fascination the Mars novels of Edgar Rice Burroughs. I journeyed 
with John Carter, gentleman adventurer from Virginia, to “Bar- 
soom,” as Mars was known to its inhabitants. I followed herds of 
eight-legged beasts of burden, the thoats. I won the hand of the 
lovely Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium. I befriended a four- 
meter-high green fighting man named Tars Tarkas. I wandered 
within the spired cities and domed pumping stations of Barsoom, 
and along the verdant banks of the Nilosyrtis and Nepenthes 
canals. 



Blues for a Red Planet —111 


Might it really be possible—in fact and not in fancy—to venture 
with John Carter to the Kingdom of Helium on the planet Mars? 
Could we venture out on a summer evening, our way illuminated 
by the two hurtling moons of Barsoom, for a journey of high 
scientific adventure? Even if all Lowell’s conclusions about Mars, 
including the existence of the fabled canals, turned out to be 
bankrupt, his depiction of the planet had at least this virtue: it 
aroused generations of eight-year-olds, myself among them, to 
consider the exploration of the planets as a real possibility, to 
wonder if we ourselves might one day voyage to Mars. John 
Carter got there by standing in an open field, spreading his hands 
and wishing. I can remember spending many an hour in my 
boyhood, arms resolutely outstretched in an empty field, implor- 
ing what I believed to be Mars to transport me there. It never 
worked. There had to be some other way. 

Like organisms, machines also have their evolutions. The 
rocket began, like the gunpowder that first powered it, in China 
where it was used for ceremonial and aesthetic purposes. Im- 
ported to Europe around the fourteenth century, it was applied 
to warfare, discussed in the late nineteenth century as a means of 
transportation to the planets by the Russian schoolteacher Kon- 
stantin Tsiolkovsky, and first developed seriously for high alti¬ 
tude flight by the American scientist Robert Goddard. The 
German V-2 military rocket of World War II employed virtually 
all of Goddard’s innovations and culminated in 1948 in the two- 
stage launching of the V-2/WAC Corporal combination to the 
then-unprecedented altitude of 400 kilometers. In the 1950’s, 
engineering advances organized by Sergei Korolov in the Soviet 
Union and Wernher von Braun in the United States, funded as 
delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction, led to the first 
artificial satellites. The pace of progress has continued to be brisk: 
manned orbital flight; humans orbiting, then landing on the 
moon; and unmanned spacecraft outward bound throughout the 
solar system. Many other nations have now launched spacecraft, 
including Britain, Erance, Canada, Japan and China, the society 
that invented the rocket in the first place. 

Among the early applications of the space rocket, as Tsiol¬ 
kovsky and Goddard (who as a young man had read Wells and 
had been stimulated by the lectures of Percival Lowell) delighted 
in imagining, were an orbiting scientific station to monitor the 
Earth from a great height and a probe to search for life on Mars. 
Both these dreams have now been fulfilled. 

Imagine yourself a visitor from some other and quite alien 
planet, approaching Earth with no preconceptions. Your view of 
the planet improves as you come closer and more and more fine 
detail stands out. Is the planet inhabited? At what point can you 
decide? If there are intelligent beings, perhaps they have created 
engineering structures that have high-contrast components on a 
scale of a few kilometers, structures detectable when our optical 



Robert Hutchings Goddard (1882-1945) 
at age eleven. Five years later his imagina¬ 
tion was fired by reading a serialization of 
Wells’ War of the Worlds . The following 
year, before anyone had ever flown in an 
airplane or listened to a radio set, while in 
a cherry tree, he envisioned a device that 
would travel to Mars. He dedicated the 
rest of his life to building it. Courtesy 
Goddard Library, Clark University. 



Goddard at age thirty-three, fitting a steel 
combustion chamber for a small solid-fuel 
rocket to a test bed. Courtesy Goddard 
Library, Clark University. 


112 — Cosmos 



The first liquichpropellant rocket ever to 
fly. Launched by Robert Goddard on 
March 16, 1926, from the farm of his 
Aunt Effie in Auburn, Massachusetts, its 
flight lasted 2Vi seconds. Courtesy God' 
dard Library, Clark University. 


systems and distance from the Earth provide kilometer resolm 
tion. Yet at this level of detail, the Earth seems utterly barren. 
There is no sign of life, intelligent or otherwise, in places we call 
Washington, New York, Boston, Moscow, London, Paris, Berlin, 
Tokyo and Peking. If there are intelligent beings on Earth, they 
have not much modified the landscape into regular geometrical 
patterns at kilometer resolution. 

But when we improve the resolution tenfold, when we begin 
to see detail as small as a hundred meters across, the situation 
changes. Many places on Earth seem suddenly to crystallize out, 
revealing an intricate pattern of squares and rectangles, straight 
lines and circles. These are, in fact, the engineering artifacts of 
intelligent beings: roads, highways, canals, farmland, city 
streets—a pattern disclosing the twin human passions for Euclid' 
ean geometry and territoriality. On this scale, intelligent life can 
be discerned in Boston and Washington and New York. And at 
temmeter resolution, the degree to which the landscape has been 
reworked first really becomes evident. Humans have been very 
busy. These photos have been taken in daylight. But at twilight 
or during the night, other things are visible: oiLwell fires in Libya 
and the Persian Gulf; deepwater illumination by the Japanese 
squid fishing fleet; the bright lights of large cities. And if, in 
daylight, we improve our resolution so we can make out things 
that are a meter across, then we begin to detect for the first time 
individual organisms—whales, cows, flamingos, people. 

Intelligent life on Earth first reveals itself through the geomet' 
ric regularity of its constructions. If Lowell’s canal network really 
existed, the conclusion that intelligent beings inhabit Mars might 
be similarly compelling. For life to be detected on Mars photo' 
graphically, even from Mars orbit, it must likewise have accont' 
plished a major reworking of the surface. Technical civilizations, 
canal builders, might be easy to detect. But except for one or two 
enigmatic features, nothing of the sort is apparent in the exquisite 
profusion of Martian surface detail uncovered by unmanned 
spacecraft. However, there are many other possibilities, ranging 
from large plants and animals to microorganisms, to extinct 
forms, to a planet that is now and was always lifeless. Because 
Mars is farther from the Sun than is the Earth, its temperatures 
are considerably lower. Its air is thin, containing mostly carbon 
dioxide but also some molecular nitrogen and argon and very 
small quantities of water vapor, oxygen and ozone. Open bodies 
of liquid water are impossible today because the atmospheric 
pressure on Mars is too low to keep even cold water from rapidly 
boiling. There may be minute quantities of liquid water in pores 
and capillaries in the soil. The amount of oxygen is far too little 
for a human being to breathe. The ozone abundance is so small 
that germicidal ultraviolet radiation from the Sun strikes the 
Martian surface unimpeded. Could any organism survive in such 
an environment? 






Blues for a Red Planet - 113 


To test this question, many years ago my colleagues and I 
prepared chambers that simulated the Martian environment as it 
was then known, inoculated them with terrestrial microorgan- 
isms and waited to see if anybody survived. Such chambers are 
called, of course, Mars Jars. The Mars Jars cycled the tempera- 
tures within a typical Martian range from a little above the 
freezing point around noon to about —80°C just before dawn, 
in an anoxic atmosphere composed chiefly of C0 2 and N 2 . Ul¬ 
traviolet lamps reproduced the fierce solar flux. No liquid water 
was present except for very thin films wetting individual sand 
grains. Some microbes froze to death after the first night and 
were never heard from again. Others gasped and perished from 
lack of oxygen. Some died of thirst, and some were fried by the 
ultraviolet light. But there were always a fair number of varieties 
of terrestrial microbes that did not need oxygen; that temporarily 
closed up shop when the temperatures dropped too low; that hid 
from the ultraviolet light under pebbles or thin layers of sand. In 
other experiments, when small quantities of liquid water were 
present, the microbes actually grew. If terrestrial microbes can 
survive the Martian environment, how much better Martian 
microbes, if they exist, must do on Mars. But first we must get 
there. 

The Soviet Union maintains an active program of unmanned 
planetary exploration. Every year or two the relative positions of 
the planets and the physics of Kepler and Newton permit the 
launch of a spacecraft to Mars or Venus with a minimum ex¬ 
penditure of energy. Since the early 1960’s the U.S.S.R. has 
missed few such opportunities. Soviet persistence and engineer¬ 
ing skills have eventually paid off handsomely. Five Soviet 
spacecraft—Veneras 8 through 12—have landed on Venus and 
successfully returned data from the surface, no insignificant feat 
in so hot, dense and corrosive a planetary atmosphere. Yet de¬ 
spite many attempts, the Soviet Union has never landed success¬ 
fully on Mars—a place that, at least at first sight, seems more 
hospitable, with chilly temperatures, a much thinner atmosphere 
and more benign gases; with polar ice caps, clear pink skies, great 
sand dunes, ancient river beds, a vast rift valley, the largest 
volcanic construct, so far as we know, in the solar system, and 
balmy equatorial summer afternoons. It is a far more Earth-like 
world than Venus. 

In 1971, the Soviet Mars 3 spacecraft entered the Martian 
atmosphere. According to the information automatically radioed 
back, it successfully deployed its landing systems during entry, 
correctly oriented its ablation shield downward, properly un¬ 
furled its great parachute and fired its retro-rockets near the end 
of its descent path. According to the data returned by Mars 3, it 
should have landed successfully on the red planet. But after 
landing, the spacecraft returned a twenty-second fragment of a 
featureless television picture to Earth and then mysteriously 



A later multi-stage liquid-fuel rocket, the 
lineal descendant of Goddard’s early ef¬ 
forts. Apollo 11, commanded by Neil 
Armstrong, lifts off on July 16, 1969, from 
Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a three-day 
flight to the Moon. Courtesy NASA. 



114- Cosmos 





Blues for a Red Planet - 115 




f 


g 


The search for life on Earth in reflected sun- 
light; the views that Goddard dreamed of: 
Crescent Earth (a) at hundreds of kilometers 
resolution shows West Africa through 
clouds, but not a trace of life. Oblique view 
depicts the Near East in the vicinity of the 
Red Sea (b) as apparently lifeless at tens of 
kilometers resolution. The Eastern Seaboard 
of the United States (c), in infrared false 
color, shows no hint of life in New York or 
Washington at about ten kilometers resolu- 
tion. Berry Island (d) in the Bahamas: Coral 
reefs are made by colonial animals, but this is 
not apparent from aloft. At tens of meters 
resolution, intelligent life on Earth becomes 
evident. The red squares (e) are farmland 
serviced by irrigation projects around Yuma, 
Arizona, near the Colorado River delta. The 
Coachella Sand Hills, top center, are tra- 
versed by the AlbAmerican Canal. The Co- 
lumbia River (f,g), separating the states of 
Washington and Oregon, at two different 
resolutions. The circles are wheat fields, in 
rigated by rotating sprinkler booms. At reso¬ 
lutions of tens of meters, the presence of 
urban intelligence is revealed, as in Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana (h), and Washington, D.C. 
(i). Apollo, Landsat and RB-57 photos. 
Courtesy NASA. 




1 








116 - Cosmos 



Metropolitan New York City. Vertical view from Landsat in near infrared light at top has an effective resolution of 
about 100 meters. The horizontal geometry of streets, bridges and highways is striking. Kennedy International Airport 
is visible at lower right. In this false color image, parks and wooded areas appear red. In the blue-black bodies of water, 
the wakes of ships can be seen. At lower left is an oblique view of New York in visible light from an RB'57 
reconnaissance aircraft with a best effective resolution in Brooklyn ( foreground ) of some tens of meters. Here the 
vertical geometry of skyscrapers in midtown and lower Manhattan is apparent, especially the twin buildings, casting 
long shadows, of the World Trade Center. The Statue of Liberty can be made out at center left. New Jersey lies in the 
distance. Courtesy NASA. When the resolution improves to a meter or better, and the contrast is high, the dominant 
lifeform on the planet becomes detectable. Here, several dozen dominant lifeforms can be seen, skiing downhill. 
Courtesy Photo Researchers. Photograph by Georg Gerster. 




Blues for a Red Planet — 117 


failed. In 1973, a quite similar sequence of events occurred with 
the Mars 6 lander, in that case the failure occurring within one 
second of touchdown. What went wrong? 

The first illustration I ever saw of Mars 3 was on a Soviet 
postage stamp (denomination, 16 kopecks), which depicted the 
spacecraft descending through a kind of purple muck. The artist 
was trying, I think, to illustrate dust and high winds: Mars 3 had 
entered the Martian atmosphere during an enormous global dust 
storm. We have evidence from the U.S. Mariner 9 mission that 
near-surface winds of more than 140 meters per second—faster 
than half the speed of sound on Mars—arose in that storm. Both 
our Soviet colleagues and we think it likely that these high winds 
caught the Mars 3 spacecraft with parachute unfurled, so that it 
landed gently in the vertical direction but with breakneck speed 
in the horizontal direction. A spacecraft descending on the 
shrouds of a large parachute is particularly vulnerable to horn 
zontal winds. After landing, Mars 3 may have made a few 
bounces, hit a boulder or other example of Martian relief, tipped 
over, lost the radio link with its carrier “bus” and failed. 

But why did Mars 3 enter in the midst of a great dust storm? 
The Mars 3 mission was rigidly organized before launch. Every 
step it was to perform was loaded into the on-board computer 
before it left Earth. There was no opportunity to change the 
computer program, even as the extent of the great 1971 dust 
storm became clear. In the jargon of space exploration, the Mars 
3 mission was preprogrammed, not adaptive. The failure of Mars 
6 is more mysterious. There was no planet-wide storm when this 
spacecraft entered the Martian atmosphere, and no reason to 
suspect a local storm, as sometimes happens, at the landing site. 
Perhaps there was an engineering failure just at the moment of 
touchdown. Or perhaps there is something particularly danger¬ 
ous about the Martian surface. 

The combination of Soviet successes in landing on Venus and 
Soviet failures in landing on Mars naturally caused us some con¬ 
cern about the U.S. Viking mission, which had been informally 
scheduled to set one of its two descent craft gently down on the 
Martian surface on the Bicentennial of the United States, July 4, 
1976. Like its Soviet predecessors, the Viking landing maneuver 
involved an ablation shield, a parachute and retro-rockets. Be¬ 
cause the Martian atmosphere is only 1 percent as dense as the 
Earth’s, a very large parachute, eighteen meters in diameter, was 
deployed to slow the spacecraft as it entered the thin air of Mars. 
The atmosphere is so thin that if Viking had landed at a high 
elevation there would not have been enough atmosphere to 
brake the descent adequately: it would have crashed. One re¬ 
quirement, therefore, was for a landing site in a low-lying region. 
From Mariner 9 results and ground-based radar studies, we knew 
many such areas. 



North America at night, its configuration 
outlined by the lights of large cities. Even 
the shape of Lake Michigan is discernible 
through the lights of Greater Chicago. 
This image is presumptive evidence for 
life on Earth. But the brightest lights, the 
crescent over Canada, are not due to biol¬ 
ogy, but rather to the Aurora Borealis. 
Courtesy Defense Meteorological Satellite 
Program. 



The Western Mediterranean at night. 
Italy and Sicily are clearly outlined by city 
lights at right center. The brightest lights 
are caused by the burning of natural gas in 
Algerian oil fields, which clearly would be 
adequate to illuminate much of urban 
Europe. Courtesy Defense Meteorological 
Satellite Program. 


118 - Cosmos 



Nocturnal image of the Sea of Japan. The 
brightest lights are from some 1,300 ves¬ 
sels of the Japanese and Korean squid 
fishing fleets, used to attract the squid. 
Courtesy Defense Meteorological Satellite 
Program. 



ammm 

WMKAX UOCAMM 
HA rijlAHCTy 
2 - 12*71 mx 


IIOHTA CCCP 


A Soviet postage stamp illustrating the 
descent of the Mars 3 spacecraft, still in its 
ablation shield, through a raging dust 
storm on December 2, 1971. 


To avoid the probable fate of Mars 3, we wanted Viking to 
land in a place and time at which the winds were low. Winds 
that would make the lander crash were probably strong enough 
to lift dust off the surface. If we could check that the candidate 
landing site was not covered with shifting, drifting dust, we 
would have at least a fair chance of guaranteeing that the winds 
were not intolerably high. This was one reason that each Viking 
lander was carried into Mars orbit with its Orbiter, and descent 
delayed until the Orbiter surveyed the landing site. We had 
discovered with Mariner 9 that characteristic changes in the 
bright and dark patterns on the Martian surface occur during 
times of high winds. We certainly would not have certified a 
Viking landing site as safe if orbital photographs had shown such 
shifting patterns. But our guarantees could not be 100 percent 
reliable. For example, we could imagine a landing site at which 
the winds were so strong that all mobile dust had already been 
blown away. We would then have had no indication of the high 
winds that might have been there. Detailed weather predictions 
for Mars were, of course, much less reliable than for Earth. 
(Indeed one of the many objectives of the Viking mission was to 
improve our understanding of the weather on both planets.) 

Because of communication and temperature constraints, Vi¬ 
king could not land at high Martian latitudes. Farther poleward 
than about 45 or 50 degrees in both hemispheres, either the time 
of useful communication of the spacecraft with the Earth or the 
period during which the spacecraft would avoid dangerously low 
temperatures would have been awkwardly short. 

We did not wish to land in too rough a place. The spacecraft 
might have tipped over and crashed, or at the least its mechanical 
arm, intended to acquire Martian soil samples, might have be¬ 
come wedged or been left waving helplessly a meter too high 
above the surface. Likewise, we did not want to land in places 
that were too soft. If the spacecraft’s three landing pods had sunk 
deeply into a loosely packed soil, various undesirable conse¬ 
quences would have followed, including immobilization of the 
sample arm. But we did not want to land in a place that was too 
hard either—had we landed in a vitreous lava field, for example, 
with no powdery surface material, the mechanical arm would 
have been unable to acquire the samples vital to the projected 
chemistry and biology experiments. 

The best photographs then available of Mars—from the Mari¬ 
ner 9 Orbiter—showed features no smaller than 90 meters (100 
yards) across. The Viking Orbiter pictures improved this figure 
only slightly. Boulders one meter (three feet) in size were entirely 
invisible in such photographs, and could have had disastrous 
consequences for the Viking lander. Likewise, a deep, soft 
powder might have been undetectable photographically. Fortu¬ 
nately, there was a technique that enabled us to determine the 
roughness or softness of a candidate landing site: radar. A very 


Blues for a Red Planet - 119 


rough place would scatter radar from Earth off to the sides of the 
beam and therefore appear poorly reflective, or radar-dark. A 
very soft place would also appear poorly reflective because of the 
many interstices between individual sand grains. While we were 
unable to distinguish between rough places and soft places, we 
did not need to make such distinctions for landing-site selection. 
Both, we knew, were dangerous. Preliminary radar surveys sug¬ 
gested that as much as a quarter to a third of the surface area of 
Mars might be radar-dark, and therefore dangerous for Viking. 
But not all of Mars can be viewed by Earth-based radar—only a 
swath between about 25°N and about 25°S. The Viking Orbiter 
carried no radar system of its own to map the surface. 

There were many constraints—perhaps, we feared, too many. 
Our landing sites had to be not too high, too windy, too hard, 
too soft, too rough or too close to the pole. It was remarkable 
that there were any places at all on Mars that simultaneously 
satisfied all our safety criteria. But it was also clear that our search 
for safe harbors had led us to landing sites that were, by and 
large, dull. 

When each of the two Viking orbiter-lander combinations 
was inserted into Martian orbit, it was unalterably committed to 
landing at a certain latitude on Mars. If the low point in the orbit 
was at 21° Martian north latitude, the lander would touch down 
at 21°N, although, by waiting for the planet to turn beneath it, it 
could land at any longitude whatever. Thus the Viking science 
teams selected candidate latitudes for which there was more than 
one promising site. Viking 1 was targeted for 21°N. The prime 
site was in a region called Chryse (Greek for “the land of gold”), 
near the confluence of four sinuous channels thought to have 
been carved in previous epochs of Martian history by running 
water. The Chryse site seemed to satisfy all safety criteria. But 
the radar observations had been made nearby, not in the Chryse 
landing site itself. Radar observations of Chryse were made for 
the first time—because of the geometry of Earth and Mars—only a 
few weeks before the nominal landing date. 

The candidate landing latitude for Viking 2 was 44°N; the 
prime site, a locale called Cydonia, chosen because, according to 
some theoretical arguments, there was a significant chance of 
small quantities of liquid water there, at least at some time during 
the Martian year. Since the Viking biology experiments were 
strongly oriented toward organisms that are comfortable in liquid 
water, some scientists held that the chance of Viking finding life 
would be substantially improved in Cydonia. On the other hand, 
it was argued that, on so windy a planet as Mars, microorganisms 
should be everywhere if they are anywhere. There seemed to be 
merit to both positions, and it was difficult to decide between 
them. What was quite clear, however, was that 44°N was 
completely inaccessible to radar site-certification; we had to ac¬ 
cept a significant risk of failure with Viking 2 if it was committed 




Portions of the great Mariner Valley, 
Vallis Marineris. Discovered in 1971-72 
by Mariner 9, it is 5,000 kilometers long 
and roughly 100 kilometers wide. In 
model (top) are seen tributary valleys pos¬ 
sibly caused by running water and wind¬ 
blown streaks associated with impact 
craters. Mariner 9 photos (middle and bot¬ 
tom) show avalanches that have collapsed 
walls and widened the valley and a giant 
dark sand dune field on the floor of Vallis 
Marineris. Courtesy NASA. Model by 
Don Davis. 



120 - Cosmos 





Top: Viking Orbiter color mosaic of three 
of the four great volcanoes in Tharsis on 
Mars and the western provinces of Vallis 
Marineris. Mariner 9 image ( middle) and 
model (bottom) of Olympus Mons, Mount 
Olympus, the largest volcanic construct 
definitively identified in the solar system 
to date. Its area is about the size of Ari- 
zona and it is almost three times the 
height of Mount Everest. It was com 
structed at a time of great geological ac¬ 
tivity on Mars about a billion years ago. 
Courtesy NASA. Model by Don Davis. 


to high northern latitudes. It was sometimes argued that if Viking 
1 was down and working well we could afford to accept a greater 
risk with Viking 2. I found myself making very conservative 
recommendations on the fate of a billiomdollar mission. I could 
imagine, for example, a key instrument failure in Chryse just after 
an unfortunate crash landing in Cydonia. To improve the Viking 
options, additional landing sites, geologically very different from 
Chryse and Cydonia, were selected in the radar-certified region 
near 4° S latitude. A decision on whether Viking 2 would set 
down at high or at low latitude was not made until virtually the 
last minute, when a place with the hopeful name of Utopia, at 
the same latitude as Cydonia, was chosen. 

For Viking 1, the original landing site seemed, after we exam¬ 
ined Orbiter photographs and late-breaking Earth-based radar 
data, unacceptably risky. For a while I worried that Viking 1 had 
been condemned, like the legendary Flying Dutchman, to wan¬ 
der the skies of Mars forever, never to find safe haven. Eventu¬ 
ally we found a suitable spot, still in Chryse but far from the 
confluence of the four ancient channels. The delay prevented us 
from setting down on July 4, 1976, but it was generally agreed 
that a crash landing on that date would have been an unsatisfac¬ 
tory two hundredth birthday present for the United States. We 
deboosted from orbit and entered the Martian atmosphere six¬ 
teen days later. 

After an interplanetary voyage of a year and a half, covering a 
hundred million kilometers the long way round the Sun, each 
Orbiter/lander combination was inserted into its proper orbit 
about Mars; the orbiters surveyed candidate landing sites; the 
landers entered the Martian atmosphere on radio command and 










Blues for a Red Planet - 121 


correctly oriented ablation shields, deployed parachutes, divested 
coverings, and fired retro-rockets. In Chryse and Utopia, for the 
first time in human history, spacecraft had touched down, gently 
and safely, on the red planet. These triumphant landings were 
due in considerable part to the great skill invested in their design, 
fabrication and testing, and to the abilities of the spacecraft com 
trollers. But for so dangerous and mysterious a planet as Mars, 
there was also at least an element of luck. 

Immediately after landing, the first pictures were to be re¬ 
turned. We knew we had chosen dull places. But we could hope. 
The first picture taken by the Viking 1 lander was of one of its 
own footpads—in case it were to sink into Martian quicksand, we 
wanted to know about it before the spacecraft disappeared. The 
picture built up, line by line, until with enormous relief we saw 
the footpad sitting high and dry above the Martian surface. Soon 
other pictures came into being, each picture element radioed 
individually back to Earth. 

I remember being transfixed by the first lander image to show 
the horizon of Mars. This was not an alien world, I thought. I 
knew places like it in Colorado and Arizona and Nevada. There 
were rocks and sand drifts and a distant eminence, as natural and 
unselfconscious as any landscape on Earth. Mars was a place . I 
would, of course, have been surprised to see a grizzled prospector 
emerge from behind a dune leading his mule, but at the same 
time the idea seemed appropriate. Nothing remotely like it ever 
entered my mind in all the hours I spent examining the Venera 9 
and 10 images of the Venus surface. One way or another, I knew, 
this was a world to which we would return. 

The landscape is stark and red and lovely: boulders thrown out 
in the creation of a crater somewhere over the horizon, small 
sand dunes, rocks that have been repeatedly covered and uncov¬ 
ered by drifting dust, plumes of fine-grained material blown 
about by the winds. Where did the rocks come from? How much 
sand has been blown by wind? What must the previous history 
of the planet have been to create sheared rocks, buried boulders, 
polygonal gouges in the ground? What are the rocks made of? 
The same materials as the sand? Is the sand merely pulverized 
rock or something else? Why is the sky pink? What is the air 
made of? How fast does the wind blow? Are there marsquakes? 
How does the atmospheric pressure and the appearance of the 
landscape change with the seasons? 

For every one of these questions Viking has provided defini¬ 
tive or at least plausible answers. The Mars revealed by the 
Viking mission is of enormous interest—particularly when we 
remember that the landing sites were chosen for their dullness. 
But the cameras revealed no sign of canal builders, no Barsoo- 
mian aircars or short swords, no princesses or fighting men, no 
thoats, no footprints, not even a cactus or a kangaroo rat. For as 



Morning haze and frost in the heavily 
eroded terrain of Noctis Labyrinthus, the 
Labyrinth of Night. Viking Orb iter 
photo, courtesy NASA. 



A portion of Kasei Vallis, an ancient river 
valley on Mars. Kasei is Japanese for Mars. 
The impact craters in the channel floor are 
evidence of its great age. Abundant sur¬ 
face liquid water earlier in Martian history 
suggests that conditions for life were once 
more favorable. Viking Orbiter photo, 
courtesy NASA. 



Cratered terrain near the Chryse Basin, 
flooded long ago with torrents of liquid 
water. This is one reason that Chryse was 
chosen as the Viking 1 landing site, but 
safety considerations moved the landing 
from the basin itself. Courtesy NASA. 


122 - Cosmos 



A Viking Lander, wrapped in its aeroshell 
ablation shield (bottom), detaches from the 
Orbiter and enters the thin Martian at' 
mosphere. Both are in orbit about Mars, 
thousands of kilometers below, its polar 
cap prominent. Painting by Don Davis. 



The Viking 1 Lander, still in its aeroshell, 
as its parachute begins to deploy. This 
painting by Don Davis, made before the 
landing, shows a descent over the original 
Chryse landing site. From data obtained 
after landing, we now know that the 
Martian sky is not blue, but rather a kind 
of yellow'pink, due to suspended fine 
rusty particles. 


far as we could see, there was not a sign of life.* 

Perhaps there are large lifeforms on Mars, but not in our two 
landing sites. Perhaps there are smaller forms in every rock and 
sand grain. For most of its history, those regions of the Earth not 
covered by water looked rather like Mars today—with an atmo' 
sphere rich in carbon dioxide, with ultraviolet light shining 
fiercely down on the surface through an atmosphere devoid of 
ozone. Large plants and animals did not colonize the land until 
the last 10 percent of Earth history. And yet for three billion 
years there were microorganisms everywhere on Earth. To look 
for life on Mars, we must look for microbes. 

The Viking lander extends human capabilities to other and 
alien landscapes. By some standards, it is about as smart as a 
grasshopper; by others, only as intelligent as a bacterium. There 
is nothing demeaning in these comparisons. It took nature hum 
dreds of millions of years to evolve a bacterium, and billions to 
make a grasshopper. With only a little experience in this sort of 
business, we are becoming fairly skillful at it. Viking has two eyes 
as we do, but they also work in the infrared, as ours do not; a 
sample arm that can push rocks, dig and acquire soil samples; a 
kind of finger that it puts up to measure wind speed and direction; 
a nose and taste buds, of a sort, with which it senses, to a much 
higher precision than we can, the presence of trace molecules; an 
interior ear with which it can detect the rumbling of marsquakes 
and the gentler wind-driven jiggling of the spacecraft; and a 
means of detecting microbes. The spacecraft has its own self- 
contained radioactive power source. It radios all the scientific 
information it acquires back to Earth. It receives instructions 
from Earth, so human beings can ponder the significance of the 
Viking results and tell the spacecraft to do something new. 

Rut what is the optimum way, given severe constraints on size, 
cost and power requirements, to search for microbes on Mars? 
We cannot—at least as yet—send microbiologists there. I once 
had a friend, an extraordinary microbiologist named Wolf Vish¬ 
niac, of the University of Rochester, in New York. In the late 
1950’s, when we were just beginning to think seriously about 
looking for life on Mars, he found himself at a scientific meeting 
where an astronomer expressed amazement that the biologists 
had no simple, reliable, automated instrument capable of looking 
for microorganisms. Vishniac decided he would do something 
about the matter. 

Fie developed a small device to be sent to the planets. His 

* There was a brief flurry when the uppercase letter B, a putative Martian 
graffito, seemed to be visible on a small boulder in Chryse. But later 
analysis showed it to be a trick of light and shadow and the human talent 
for pattern recognition. It also seems remarkable that the Martians 
should have tumbled independently to the Latin alphabet. But there was 
just a moment when resounding in my head was the distant echo of a 
word from my boyhood—Barsoom. 






Blues for a Red Planet — 123 


friends called it the Wolf Trap. It would carry a little vial of 
nutrient organic matter to Mars, arrange for a sample of Martian 
soil to be mixed in with it, and observe the changing turbidity or 
cloudiness of the liquid as the Martian bugs (if there were any) 
grew (if they would). The Wolf Trap was selected along with 
three other microbiology experiments to go aboard the Viking 
landers. Two of the other three experiments also chose to send 
food to the Martians. The success of the Wolf Trap required 
that Martian bugs like liquid water. There were those who 
thought that Vishniac would only drown the little Martians. But 
the advantage of the Wolf Trap was that it laid no requirements 
on what the Martian microbes must do with their food. They 
had only to grow. All the other experiments made specific as- 
sumptions about gases that would be given off or taken in by 
the microbes, assumptions that were little more than guesses. 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which 
runs the United States planetary space program, is subject to 
frequent and unpredictable budget cuts. Only rarely are there 
unanticipated budget increases. NASA scientific activities have 
very little effective support in the government, and so science is 
most often the target when money needs to be taken away from 
NASA. In 1971 it was decided that one of the four microbiology 
experiments must be removed, and the Wolf Trap was off¬ 
loaded. It was a crushing disappointment for Vishniac, who had 
invested twelve years in its development. 

Many others in his place might have stalked off the Viking 
Biology Team. But Vishniac was a gentle and dedicated man. He 
decided instead that he could best serve the search for life on 
Mars by voyaging to the most Mars-like environment on Earth— 
the dry valleys of Antarctica. Some previous investigators had 
examined Antarctic soil and decided that the few microbes they 
were able to find were not really natives of the dry valleys, but 
had been blown there from other, more clement environments. 
Recalling the Mars Jars experiments, Vishniac believed that life 
was tenacious and that Antarctica was perfectly consistent with 
microbiology. If terrestrial bugs could live on Mars, he thought, 
why not in Antarctica—which was by and large warmer, wetter, 
and had more oxygen and much less ultraviolet light. Con¬ 
versely, finding life in Antarctic dry valleys would correspond¬ 
ingly improve, he thought, the chances of life on Mars. Vishniac 
believed that the experimental techniques previously used to 
deduce no indigenous microbes in Antarctica were flawed. The 
nutrients, while suitable for the comfortable environment of a 
university microbiology laboratory, were not designed for the 
arid polar wasteland. 

So on November 8, 1973, Vishniac, his new microbiology 
equipment and a geologist companion were transported by heli¬ 
copter from McMurdo Station to an area near Mount Balder, a 
dry valley in the Asgard range. His practice was to implant the 



The bland terrain on Chryse Planitia on 
which Viking 1 landed. Touchdown oc¬ 
curred within a few kilometers of the tar¬ 
get area, marked by the cross, after an 
interplanetary voyage of some hundred 
million kilometers. Courtesy NASA. 



A simulated landing, in Death Valley, 
California, of Viking on Mars. The termi¬ 
nal stages of descent are braked by the 
firing of retrorockets. 


124 - Cosmos 



Wolf Vladimir Vishniac, microbiologist 
(19224973). Photographed in Antarctica, 
1973. Courtesy Zeddie Bowen. 



The Viking 1 sample arm, on Mars, re- 
trieves soil samples for the microbiology 
experiments, leaving (right) a shallow 
trench. Courtesy NASA. 


little microbiology stations in the Antarctic soil and return about 
a month later to retrieve them. On December 10, 1973, he left to 
gather samples on Mount Balder; his departure was photo- 
graphed from about three kilometers away. It was the last time 
anyone saw him alive. Eighteen hours later, his body was dis¬ 
covered at the base of a cliff of ice. He had wandered into an area 
not previously explored, had apparently slipped on the ice and 
tumbled and bounced for a distance of 150 meters. Perhaps 
something had caught his eye, a likely habitat for microbes, say, 
or a patch of green where none should be. We will never know. 
In the small brown notebook he was carrying that day, the last 
entry reads, “Station 202 retrieved. 10 December, 1973. 2230 
hours. Soil temperature, —10°. Air temperature —16°.” It had 
been a typical summer temperature for Mars. 

Many of Vishniac’s microbiology stations are still sitting in 
Antarctica. But the samples that were returned were examined, 
using his methods, by his professional colleagues and friends. A 
wide variety of microbes, which would have been undetectable 
with conventional scoring techniques, was found in essentially 
every site examined. A new species of yeast, apparently unique to 
Antarctica, was discovered in his samples by his widow, Helen 
Simpson Vishniac. Large rocks returned from Antarctica in that 
expedition, examined by Imre Friedmann, turn out to have a 
fascinating microbiology—one or two millimeters inside the rock, 
algae have colonized a tiny world in which small quantities of 
water are trapped and made liquid. On Mars such a place would 
be even more interesting, because while the visible light neces- 
sary for photosynthesis would penetrate to that depth, the gen 
micidal ultraviolet light would be at least partially attenuated. 

Because the design of space missions is finalized many years 
before launch, and because of Vishniac’s death, the results of his 
Antarctic experiments did not influence the Viking design for 
seeking Martian life. In general, the microbiology experiments 
were not carried out at the low ambient Martian temperatures, 
and most did not provide long incubation times. They all made 
fairly strong assumptions about what Martian metabolism had to 
be like. There was no way to look for life inside the rocks. 

Each Viking lander was equipped with a sample arm to acquire 
material from the surface and then slowly withdraw it into the 
innards of the spacecraft, transporting the particles on little hop¬ 
pers like an electric train to five different experiments: one on the 
inorganic chemistry of the soil, another to look for organic mol¬ 
ecules in the sand and dust, and three to look for microbial life. 
When we look for life on a planet, we are making certain as¬ 
sumptions. We try, as well as we can, not to assume that life 
elsewhere will be just like life here. But there are limits to what 
we can do. We know in detail only about life here. While the 
Viking biology experiments are a pioneering first effort, they 
hardly represent a definitive search for life on Mars. The results 



Blues for a Red Planet — 125 


have been tantalizing, annoying, provocative, stimulating, and, at 
least until recently, substantially inconclusive. 

Each of the three microbiology experiments asked a different 
kind of question, but in all cases a question about Martian me¬ 
tabolism. If there are microorganisms in the Martian soil, they 
must take in food and give off waste gases; or they must take in 
gases from the atmosphere and, perhaps with the aid of sunlight, 
convert them into useful materials. So we bring food to Mars and 
hope that the Martians, if there are any, will find it tasty. Then 
we see if any interesting new gases come out of the soil. Or we 
provide our own radioactively labeled gases and see if they are 
converted into organic matter, in which case small Martians are 
inferred. 

By criteria established before launch, two of the three Viking 
microbiology experiments seem to have yielded positive results. 
First, when Martian soil was mixed with a sterile organic soup 
from Earth, something in the soil chemically broke down the 
soup—almost as if there were respiring microbes metabolizing a 
food package from Earth. Second, when gases from Earth were 
introduced into the Martian soil sample, the gases became chem¬ 
ically combined with the soil—almost as if there were photo- 
synthesizing microbes, generating organic matter from 
atmospheric gases. Positive results in Martian microbiology were 
achieved in seven different samplings in two locales on Mars 
separated by 5,000 kilometers. 

But the situation is complex, and the criteria of experimental 
success may have been inadequate. Enormous efforts were made 
to build the Viking microbiology experiments and test them with 
a variety of microbes. Very little effort was made to calibrate the 
experiments with plausible inorganic Martian surface materials. 
Mars is not the Earth. As the legacy of Percival Lowell reminds 
us, we can be fooled. Perhaps there is an exotic inorganic chem¬ 
istry in the Martian soil that is able by itself, in the absence of 
Martian microbes, to oxidize foodstuffs. Perhaps there is some 
special inorganic, nonliving catalyst in the soil that is able to fix 
atmospheric gases and convert them into organic molecules. 

Recent experiments suggest that this may indeed be the case. 
In the great Martian dust storm of 1971, spectral features of the 
dust were obtained by the Mariner 9 infrared spectrometer. In 
analyzing these spectra, O. B. Toon, J. B. Pollack and I found 
that certain features seem best accounted for by montmorillonite 
and other kinds of clay. Subsequent observations by the Viking 
lander support the identification of windblown clays on Mars. 
Now, A. Banin and J. Rishpon have found that they can repro¬ 
duce some of the key features—those resembling photosynthesis 
as well as those resembling respiration—of the “successful” Viking 
microbiology experiments if in laboratory experiments they sub¬ 
stitute such clays for the Martian soil. The clays have a complex 
active surface, given to adsorbing and releasing gases and to 



Windblown sand and dust in the lee of 
impact craters in Sinus Meridiani. Cour¬ 
tesy NASA. 



Windblown sand and dust in the lee of 
small rocks in the Viking 1 landing site. 
Courtesy NASA. 



126 — Cosmos 



The sand-topped boulder known as “Big 
Joe” in Chryse. Had Viking 1 landed on it, 
the spacecraft would have crashed. Coup 
tesy NASA. 



J 


Minor movement of sand, perhaps by 
wind, at the base of “Big Joe.” Courtesy 
NASA. 


catalyzing chemical reactions. It is too soon to say that all the 
Viking microbiology results can be explained by inorganic 
chemistry, but such a result would no longer be surprising. The 
clay hypothesis hardly excludes life on Mars, but it certainly 
carries us far enough to say that there is no compelling evidence 
for microbiology on Mars. 

Even so, the results of Banin and Rishpon are of great biologi- 
cal importance because they show that in the absence of life 
there can be a kind of soil chemistry that does some of the same 
things life does. On the Earth before life, there may already have 
been chemical processes resembling respiration and photosyn- 
thesis cycling in the soil, perhaps to be incorporated by life once 
it arose. In addition, we know that montmorillonite clays are a 
potent catalyst for combining amino acids into longer chain moh 
ecules resembling proteins. The clays of the primitive Earth may 
have been the forge of life, and the chemistry of contemporary 
Mars may provide essential clues to the origin and early history 
of life on our planet. 

The Martian surface exhibits many impact craters, each named 
after a person, usually a scientist. Crater Vishniac lies appropri- 
ately in the Antarctic region of Mars. Vishniac did not claim that 
there had to be life on Mars, merely that it was possible, and that 
it was extraordinarily important to know if it was there. If life on 
Mars exists, we will have a unique opportunity to test the gener- 
ality of our form of life. And if there is no life on Mars, a planet 
rather like the Earth, we must understand why—because in that 
case, as Vishniac stressed, we have the classic scientific confron- 
tation of the experiment and the control. 

The finding that the Viking microbiology results can be ex- 
plained by clays, that they need not imply life, helps to resolve 
another mystery: the Viking organic chemistry experiment 
showed not a hint of organic matter in the Martian soil. If there is 
life on Mars, where are the dead bodies? No organic molecules 
could be found—no building blocks of proteins and nucleic acids, 
no simple hydrocarbons, nothing of the stuff of life on Earth. 
This is not necessarily a contradiction, because the Viking mi¬ 
crobiology experiments are a thousand times more sensitive (per 
equivalent carbon atom) than the Viking chemistry experiments, 
and seem to detect organic matter synthesized in the Martian soil. 
But this does not leave much margin. Terrestrial soil is loaded 
with the organic remains of once-living organisms; Martian soil 
has less organic matter than the surface of the Moon. If we held 
to the life hypothesis, we might suppose that the dead bodies 
have been destroyed by the chemically reactive, oxidizing surface 
of Mars—like a germ in a bottle of hydrogen peroxide; or that 
there is life, but of a kind in which organic chemistry plays a less 
central role than it does in life on Earth. 

But this last alternative seems to me to be special pleading: I 
am, reluctantly, a self-confessed carbon chauvinist. Carbon is 


Blues for a Red Planet — 127 



The Viking Lander, in simulation in 
Death Valley, California. Between the 
two turrets containing the television cam' 
eras is the magazine holding the still- 
unfurled sample arm. 


< 

oc 


abundant in the Cosmos. It makes marvelously complex mole¬ 
cules, good for life. I am also a water chauvinist. Water makes an 
ideal solvent system for organic chemistry to work in and stays 
liquid over a wide range of temperatures. But sometimes I won¬ 
der. Could my fondness for these materials have something to do 
with the fact that I am made chiefly of them? Are we carbon- and 
water-based because those materials were abundant on the Earth 
at the time of the origin of life? Could life elsewhere—on Mars, 
say—be built of different stuff? 

I am a collection of water, calcium and organic molecules 
called Carl Sagan. You are a collection of almost identical mole¬ 
cules with a different collective label. But is that all? Is there 
nothing in here but molecules? Some people find this idea some¬ 
how demeaning to human dignity. For myself, I find it elevating 
that our universe permits the evolution of molecular machines as 
intricate and subtle as we. 

But the essence of life is not so much the atoms and simple 
molecules that make us up as the way in which they are put 
together. Every now and then we read that the chemicals which 
constitute the human body cost ninety-seven cents or ten dollars 
or some such figure; it is a little depressing to find our bodies 
valued so little. However, these estimates are for human beings 
reduced to our simplest possible components. We are made 


128 — Cosmos 



The North Polar Cap of Mars, sur- 
rounded by dark sand dune fields. This 
cap is made primarily of water ice; the 
South Polar Cap, mainly of frozen carbon 
dioxide. To darken the caps it would be 
cheaper to move the circumjacent sand 
than to carry material from Earth. But the 
winds would still scour the caps. Mariner 9 
photo. Courtesy NASA. 


« 



Great ice cliffs, a kilometer high in the 
terraces, arranged like stacked plates, in 
the Martian North Polar Cap. The regu¬ 
larly spaced dots are fiducial markers in 
the Mariner 9 imaging system. Courtesy 
NASA. 


mostly of water, which costs almost nothing; the carbon is costed 
in the form of coal; the calcium in our bones as chalk; the 
nitrogen in our proteins as air (cheap also); the iron in our blood 
as rusty nails. If we did not know better, we might be tempted to 
take all the atoms that make us up, mix them together in a big 
container and stir. We can do this as much as we want. But in the 
end all we have is a tedious mixture of atoms. How could we 
have expected anything else? 

Harold Morowitz has calculated what it would cost to put 
together the correct molecular constituents that make up a 
human being by buying the molecules from chemical supply 
houses. The answer turns out to be about ten million dollars, 
which should make us all feel a little better. But even then we 
could not mix those chemicals together and have a human being 
emerge from the jar. That is far beyond our capability and will 
probably be so for a very long period of time. Fortunately, there 
are other less expensive but still highly reliable methods of mak¬ 
ing human beings. 

I think the lifeforms on many worlds will consist, by and large, 
of the same atoms we have here, perhaps even many of the same 
basic molecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids—but put to¬ 
gether in unfamiliar ways. Perhaps organisms that float in dense 
planetary atmospheres will be very much like us in their atomic 
composition, except they might not have bones and therefore 
not need much calcium. Perhaps elsewhere some solvent other 
than water is used. Hydrofluoric acid might serve rather well, 
although there is not a great deal of fluorine in the Cosmos; 
hydrofluoric acid would do a great deal of damage to the kind of 
molecules that make us up, but other organic molecules, paraffin 
waxes, for example, are perfectly stable in its presence. Liquid 
ammonia would make an even better solvent system, because 
ammonia is very abundant in the Cosmos. But it is liquid only on 
worlds much colder than the Earth or Mars. Ammonia is ordi¬ 
narily a gas on Earth, as water is on Venus. Or perhaps there are 
living things that do not have a solvent system at all—solid-state 
life, where there are electrical signals propagating rather than 
molecules floating about. 

But these ideas do not rescue the notion that the Viking lander 
experiments indicate life on Mars. On that rather Earth-like 
world, with abundant carbon and water, life, if it exists, should 
be based on organic chemistry. The organic chemistry results, 
like the imaging and microbiology results, are all consistent with 
no life in the fine particles of Chryse and Utopia in the late 
1970’s. Perhaps some millimeters beneath the rocks (as in the 
Antarctic dry valleys), or elsewhere on the planet, or in some 
earlier, more clement time. But not where and when we looked. 

The Viking exploration of Mars is a mission of major historical 
importance, the first serious search for what other kinds of life 
may be, the first survival of a functioning spacecraft for more 


Blues for a Red Planet - 129 


than an hour or so on any other planet (Viking 1 has survived for 
years), the source of a rich harvest of data on the geology, 
seismology, mineralogy, meteorology and half a dozen other sci¬ 
ences of another world. How should we follow up on these 
spectacular advances? Some scientists want to send an automatic 
device that would land, acquire soil samples, and return them to 
Earth, where they could be examined in great detail in the large 
sophisticated laboratories of Earth rather than in the limited 
microminiaturized laboratories that we are able to send to Mars. 
In this way most of the ambiguities of the Viking microbiology 
experiments could be resolved. The chemistry and mineralogy of 
the soil could be determined; rocks could be broken open to 
search for subsurface life; hundreds of tests for organic chemistry 
and life could be performed, including direct microscopic exami¬ 
nation, under a wide range of conditions. We could even use 
Vishniac’s scoring techniques. Although it would be fairly ex¬ 
pensive, such a mission is probably within our technological 
capability. 

However, it carries with it a novel danger: back-contamina¬ 
tion. If we wish on Earth to examine samples of Martian soil for 
microbes, we must, of course, not sterilize the samples before¬ 
hand. The point of the expedition is to bring them back alive. 
But what then? Might Martian microorganisms returned to Earth 
pose a public health hazard? The Martians of H. G. Wells and 
Orson Welles, preoccupied with the suppression of Bourne¬ 
mouth and Jersey City, never noticed until too late that their 
immunological defenses were unavailing against the microbes of 
Earth. Is the converse possible? This is a serious and difficult 
issue. There may be no micromartians. If they exist, perhaps we 
can eat a kilogram of them with no ill effects. But we are not sure, 
and the stakes are high. If we wish to return unsterilized Martian 
samples to Earth, we must have a containment procedure that is 
stupefyingly reliable. There are nations that develop and stock¬ 
pile bacteriological weapons. They seem to have an occasional 
accident, but they have not yet, so far as I know, produced global 
pandemics. Perhaps Martian samples can be safely returned to 
Earth. But I would want to be very sure before considering a 
retumed-sample mission. 

There is another way to investigate Mars and the full range of 
delights and discoveries this heterogeneous planet holds for us. 
My most persistent emotion in working with the Viking lander 
pictures was frustration at our immobility. I found myself uncon¬ 
sciously urging the spacecraft at least to stand on its tiptoes, as if 
this laboratory, designed for immobility, were perversely refusing 
to manage even a little hop. How we longed to poke that dune 
with the sample arm, look for life beneath that rock, see if that 
distant ridge was a crater rampart. And not so very far to the 
southeast, I knew, were the four sinuous channels of Chryse. For 
all the tantalizing and provocative character of the Viking results, 



Unexplained linear markings on the 
Tharsis plateau. Mariner 9 photo, cour¬ 
tesy NASA. 



The pyramids of Elysium. Mariner 9 
photo. Courtesy NASA. 



130 — Cosmos 



A portrait of another world: strewn boul- 
ders and gently rolling sand dunes at the 
Viking 1 landing site in Chryse. Courtesy 
NASA. 



Viking far-encounter photograph of cres¬ 
cent Mars, showing crater in North Polar 
Cap, and orogenic clouds in the lee of the 
great Martian volcano, Olympus Mons. 
Courtesy NASA. 


I know a hundred places on Mars which are far more interesting 
than our landing sites. The ideal tool is a roving vehicle carrying 
on advanced experiments, particularly in imaging, chemistry and 
biology. Prototypes of such rovers are under development by 
NASA. They know on their own how to go over rocks, how not 
to fall down ravines, how to get out of tight spots. It is within our 
capability to land a rover on Mars that could scan its surround¬ 
ings, see the most interesting place in its field of view and, by the 
same time tomorrow, be there. Every day a new place, a com¬ 
plex, winding traverse over the varied topography of this ap¬ 
pealing planet. 

Such a mission would reap enormous scientific benefits, even if 
there is no life on Mars. We could wander down the ancient 
river valleys, up the slopes of one of the great volcanic moun¬ 
tains, along the strange stepped terrain of the icy polar terraces, or 
muster a close approach to the beckoning pyramids of Mars.* 
Public interest in such a mission would be sizable. Every day a 
new set of vistas would arrive on our home television screens. 
We could trace the route, ponder the findings, suggest new des¬ 
tinations. The journey would be long, the rover obedient to 
radio commands from Earth. There would be plenty of time for 
good new ideas to be incorporated into the mission plan. A 
billion people could participate in the exploration of another 
world. 

The surface area of Mars is exactly as large as the land area of 
the Earth. A thorough reconnaissance will clearly occupy us for 
centuries. But there will be a time when Mars is all explored; a 
time after robot aircraft have mapped it from aloft, a time after 
rovers have combed the surface, a time after samples have been 
returned safely to Earth, a time after human beings have walked 
the sands of Mars. What then? What shall we do with Mars? 

There are so many examples of human misuse of the Earth 
that even phrasing this question chills me. If there is life on Mars, 
I believe we should do nothing with Mars. Mars then belongs to 
the Martians, even if the Martians are only microbes. The exis¬ 
tence of an independent biology on a nearby planet is a treasure 
beyond assessing, and the preservation of that life must, I think, 
supersede any other possible use of Mars. However, suppose 
Mars is lifeless. It is not a plausible source of raw materials: the 
freightage from Mars to Earth would be too expensive for many 
centuries to come. But might we be able to live on Mars? Could 
we in some sense make Mars habitable? 

A lovely world, surely, but there is—from our parochial point 
of view—much wrong with Mars, chiefly the low oxygen abun¬ 
dance, the absence of liquid water, and the high ultraviolet flux. 

* The largest are 3 kilometers across at the base, and 1 kilometer high- 
much larger than the pyramids of Sumer, Egypt or Mexico on Earth. 
They seem eroded and ancient, and are, perhaps, only small mountains, 
sandblasted for ages. But they warrant, I think, a careful look. 




Blues for a Red Planet -131 




(The low temperatures do not pose an insuperable obstacle, as 
the yeanround scientific stations in Antarctica demonstrate.) All 
of these problems could be solved if we could make more air. 
With higher atmospheric pressures, liquid water would be possk 
ble. With more oxygen we might breathe the atmosphere, and 
ozone would form to shield the surface from solar ultraviolet 
radiation. The sinuous channels, stacked polar plates and other 
evidence suggest that Mars once had such a denser atmosphere. 
Those gases are unlikely to have escaped from Mars. They are, 


Top: The first picture ever returned from 
the surface of Mars, radioed back to Earth 
on July 20, 1976. At right is a portion of 
landing pod 2, resting safely on the sun 
face. Another landing pod was later found 
to be buried in sand. The vesicular rock at 
center is some ten centimeters across. Bot- 
tom: The landscape of Utopia, as viewed 
by Viking 2. The surface sampler arm is 
extending at left. Its metal shroud is the 
ejected canister on the ground at right. 
Nothing resembling a living organism or 
an artifact of intelligence was found at ek 
ther Viking landing site. 



132 — Cosmos 




Three solar system locales: At left, in 
Chryse, on Mars. At upper right, on the 
slopes of Mauna Kea, Hawaii. At lower 
right, in Utopia, on Mars, with frost cov¬ 
ering the ground. Mars and Earth are sim¬ 
ilar worlds. Courtesy NASA and Richard 
Wells. 



therefore, on the planet somewhere. Some are chemically com¬ 
bined with the surface rocks. Some are in subsurface ice. But 
most may be in the present polar ice caps. 

To vaporize the caps, we must heat them; perhaps we could 
dust them with a dark powder, heating them by absorbing more 
sunlight, the opposite of what we do to the Earth when we 
destroy forests and grasslands. But the surface area of the caps is 
very large. The necessary dust would require 1,200 Saturn 5 
rocket boosters to be transported from Earth to Mars; even then, 
the winds might blow the dust off the polar caps. A better way 
would be to devise some dark material able to make copies of 
itself, a little dusky machine which we deliver to Mars and which 
then goes about reproducing itself from indigenous materials all 
over the polar caps. There is a category of such machines. We 
call them plants. Some are very hardy and resilient. We know 
that at least some terrestrial microbes can survive on Mars. What 
is necessary is a program of artificial selection and genetic engi¬ 
neering of dark plants—perhaps lichens—that could survive the 
much more severe Martian environment. If such plants could be 
bred, we might imagine them being seeded on the vast expanse 
of the Martian polar ice caps, taking root, spreading, blackening 
the ice caps, absorbing sunlight, heating the ice, and releasing the 



Blues for a Red Planet - 133 




ancient Martian atmosphere from its long captivity. We might 
even imagine a kind of Martian Johnny Appleseed, robot or 
human, roaming the frozen polar wastes in an endeavor that 
benefits only the generations of humans to come. 

This general concept is called terraforming: the changing of an 
alien landscape into one more suitable for human beings. In 
thousands of years humans have managed to perturb the global 
temperature of the Earth by only about one degree through 
greenhouse and albedo changes, although at the present rate of 
burning fossil fuels and destroying forests and grasslands we can 
now charge the global temperature by another degree in only a 
century or two. These and other considerations suggest that a 
time scale for a significant terraforming of Mars is probably hundreds 


Trenches dug in Chryse in the search for 
life on Mars (top). Close-up of a trench dug 
across windblown sand ridges (bottom). On 
a very small scale, we have begun to 
rework the surface of another world. 
Courtesy NASA. 


134 - Cosmos 



Sand and small stones deposited by the 
Viking 2 surface sampler in the inlet to the 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (out of 
focus, bottom center), a device to determine 
the inorganic chemistry of Martian soil 
Inlets nearby lead to the organic chemistry 
and microbiology experiments. Courtesy 
NASA. 



Two prototypes of future Mars rovers: a smart obstacle-avoiding ma¬ 
chine, constructed at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and a Viking 
Lander mounted on tractor treads. The actual Mars rovers of the 
future are likely to include elements of both designs. 

to thousands of years. In a future time of greatly advanced 
technology we might wish not only to increase the total atmo¬ 
spheric pressure and make liquid water possible but also to carry 
liquid water from the melting polar caps to the warmer equatorial 
regions. There is, of course, a way to do it. We would build 
canals. 

The melting surface and subsurface ice would be transported 
by a great canal network. But this is precisely what Percival 
Lowell, not a hundred years ago, mistakenly proposed was in fact 
happening on Mars. Lowell and Wallace both understood that 
the comparative inhospitability of Mars was due to the scarcity of 
water. If only a network of canals existed, the lack would be 
remedied, the habitability of Mars would become plausible. 
Lowell’s observations were made under extremely difficult seeing 


BILL RAY 













Blues for a Red Planet - 135 


conditions. Others, like Schiaparelli, had already observed 
something like the canals; they were called canali before Lowell 
began his lifelong love affair with Mars. Human beings have a 
demonstrated talent for selbdeception when their emotions are 
stirred, and there are few notions more stirring than the idea of a 
neighboring planet inhabited by intelligent beings. 

The power of Lowell’s idea may, just possibly, make it a kind 
of premonition. His canal network was built by Martians. Even 
this may be an accurate prophecy: If the planet ever is terra^ 
formed, it will be done by human beings whose permanent resk 
dence and planetary affiliation is Mars. The Martians will be us. 




The Great Red Spot of Jupiter, a giant storm system 40,000 kilometers long and 11,000 kilometers wide rising above 
the adjacent clouds. It was first observed in 1664 by Robert Hooke and later confirmed by Christiaan Huygens. The 
material in the Red Spot rotates once every six Earth days; the white oval, lower right, rotates in the opposite sense. At 
top left are clouds overtaking the Red Spot from right to left. The reason the spot is red is unknown, as is the reason 
that there is only one Red Spot of this size. Voyager 2 image, courtesy NASA. 




Chapter VI 

TRAVELERS' TALES 


Do there exist many worlds, or is there but a single world? This is one of the 
most noble and exalted questions in the study of Nature. 

—Albertus Magnus, thirteenth century 


In the first ages of the world, the islanders either thought themselves to be 
the only dwellers upon the earth, or else if there were any other, yet they 
could not possibly conceive how they might have any commerce with them, 
being severed by the deep and broad sea, but the aftertimes found out the 
invention of ships . . . So, perhaps, there may be some other means invented 
for a conveyance to the Moone . . . We have not now any Drake or 
Columbus to undertake this voyage, or any Daedalus to invent a convey^ 
ance through the aire. However I doubt not but that time who is still the 
father of new truths, and hath revealed unto us many things which our 
ancestors were ignorant of, will also manifest to our posterity that which we 
now desire but cannot know. 

—John Wilkins, The Discovery of a World in the Moone, 1638 


We may mount from this dull Earth, and viewing it from on high, consider 
whether Nature has laid out all her cost and finery upon this small speck of 
Dirt. So, like Travellers into other distant countries, we shall be better able 
to judge of what’s done at home, know how to make a true estimate of, and 
set its own value upon every thing. We shall be less apt to admire what this 
World calls great, shall nobly despise those Trifles the generality of Men set 
their Affections on, when we know that there are a multitude of such 
Earths inhabited and adorn’d as well as our own. 

—Christiaan Huygens, The Celestial Worlds Discovered , c. 1690 




138 — Cosmos 



The Voyager spacecraft on exhibit at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. On the boom 
at left are the nuclear power generators. 
Within the central, hexagonal electronics 
bay are the on-board computers; the gold 
disk on the exterior is the Voyager Inter- 
stellar Record (Chapter II). On the boom 
at right is the scan platform from which 
various instruments can be pointed, in¬ 
cluding the high-resolution camera, lower 
right. Courtesy NASA. 


THIS IS THE TIME WHEN HUMANS have begun to sail the sea 
of space. The modern ships that ply the Keplerian trajectories to 
the planets are unmanned. They are beautifully constructed, 
semi-intelligent robots exploring unknown worlds. Voyages to 
the outer solar system are controlled from a single place on the 
planet Earth, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration in Pasadena, California. 

On July 9, 1979, a spacecraft called Voyager 2 encountered the 
Jupiter system. It had been almost two years sailing through 
interplanetary space. The ship is made of millions of separate 
parts assembled redundantly, so that if some component fails, 
others will take over its responsibilities. The spacecraft weighs 
0.9 tons and would fill a large living room. Its mission takes it so 
far from the Sun that it cannot be powered by solar energy, as 
other spacecraft are. Instead, Voyager relies on a small nuclear 
power plant, drawing hundreds of watts from the radioactive 
decay of a pellet of plutonium. Its three integrated computers and 
most of its housekeeping functions—for example, its tempera¬ 
ture-control system—are localized in its middle. It receives com¬ 
mands from Earth and radios its findings back to Earth through a 
large antenna, 3.7 meters in diameter. Most of its scientific in¬ 
struments are on a scan platform, which tracks Jupiter or one of 
its moons as the spacecraft hurtles past. There are many scientific 
instruments—ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers, devices to 
measure charged particles and magnetic fields and the radio 
emission from Jupiter—but the most productive have been the 
two television cameras, designed to take tens of thousands of 
pictures of the planetary islands in the outer solar system. 

Jupiter is surrounded by a shell of invisible but extremely 
dangerous high-energy charged particles. The spacecraft must 
pass through the outer edge of this radiation belt to examine 




Travelers’ Tales - 139 


Jupiter and its moons close up, and to continue its mission to 
Saturn and beyond. But the charged particles can damage the 
delicate instruments and fry the electronics. Jupiter is also sun 
rounded by a ring of solid debris, discovered four months earlier 
by Voyager 1, which Voyager 2 had to traverse. A collision with 
a small boulder could have sent the spacecraft tumbling wildly 
out of control, its antenna unable to lock on the Earth, its data 
lost forever. Just before Encounter, the mission controllers were 
restive. There were some alarms and emergencies, but the com¬ 
bined intelligence of the humans on Earth and the robot in space 
circumvented disaster. 

Launched on August 20, 1977, it moved on an arcing trajec¬ 
tory past the orbit of Mars, through the asteroid belt, to approach 
the Jupiter system and thread its way past the planet and among 
its fourteen or so moons. Voyagers passage by Jupiter accelerated 
it toward a close encounter with Saturn. Saturn’s gravity will 
propel it on to Uranus. After Uranus it will plunge on past 
Neptune, leaving the solar system, becoming an interstellar 
spacecraft, fated to roam forever the great ocean between the 
stars. 

These voyages of exploration and discovery are the latest in a 
long series that have characterized and distinguished human his¬ 
tory. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries you could travel 
from Spain to the Azores in a few days, the same time it takes us 
now to cross the channel from the Earth to the Moon. It took 
then a few months to traverse the Atlantic Ocean and reach 
what was called the New World, the Americas. Today it takes a 
few months to cross the ocean of the inner solar system and make 
planet-fall on Mars or Venus, which are truly and literally new 
worlds awaiting us. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries 
you could travel from Holland to China in a year or two, the 
time it has taken Voyager to travel from Earth to Jupiter.* The 
annual costs were, relatively, more then than now, but in both 
cases less than 1 percent of the appropriate Gross National Prod¬ 
uct. Our present spaceships, with their robot crews, are the har¬ 
bingers, the vanguards of future human expeditions to the 
planets. We have traveled this way before. 

The fifteenth through seventeenth centuries represent a major 
turning point in our history. It then became clear that we could 
venture to all parts of our planet. Plucky sailing vessels from half 
a dozen European nations dispersed to every ocean. There were 
many motivations for these journeys: ambition, greed, national 
pride, religious fanaticism, prison pardons, scientific curiosity, the 



Mission Control at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, NASA. 


* Or, to make a different comparison, a fertilized egg takes as long to 
wander from the fallopian tubes and implant itself in the uterus as 
Apollo 11 took to journey to the Moon; and as long to develop into a 
full-term infant as Viking took on its trip to Mars. The normal human 
lifetime is longer than Voyager will take to venture beyond the orbit of 
Pluto. 




BILL RAY 


140 - Cosmos 


The harbor at Middelburg, Holland, in 
the early seventeenth century. Painting by 
Adriaen van de Venne. Courtesy Rijks- 
museum, Amsterdam. 




Atlas, supporting the starry heavens. A 
sculpture from the Amsterdam Town 
Hall. 


thirst for adventure and the unavailability of suitable employ- 
ment in Estremadura. These voyages worked much evil as well as 
much good. But the net result has been to bind the Earth to- 
gether, to decrease provincialism, to unify the human species and 
to advance powerfully our knowledge of our planet and our- 
selves. 

Emblematic of the epoch of sailing-ship exploration and dis¬ 
covery is the revolutionary Dutch Republic of the seventeenth 
century. Having recently declared its independence from the 
powerful Spanish Empire, it embraced more fully than any other 
nation of its time the European Enlightenment. It was a rational, 
orderly, creative society. But because Spanish ports and vessels 
were closed to Dutch shipping, the economic survival of the tiny 
republic depended on its ability to construct, man and deploy a 
great fleet of commercial sailing vessels. 

The Dutch East India Company, a joint governmental and 
private enterprise, sent ships to the far corners of the world to 
acquire rare commodities and resell them at a profit in Europe. 
Such voyages were the life blood of the Republic. Navigational 
charts and maps were classified as state secrets. Ships often em¬ 
barked with sealed orders. Suddenly the Dutch were present all 
over the planet. The Barents Sea in the Arctic Ocean and Tas¬ 
mania in Australia are named after Dutch sea captains. These 
expeditions were not merely commercial exploitations, although 
there was plenty of that. There were powerful elements of scien¬ 
tific adventure and the zest for discovery of new lands, new 
plants and animals, new people; the pursuit of knowledge for its 
own sake. 

The Amsterdam Town Hall reflects the confident and secular 
self-image of seventeenth-century Holland. It took shiploads of 
marble to build. Constantijn Huygens, a poet and diplomat of the 
time, remarked that the Town Hall dispelled “the Gothic 
squint and squalor.” In the Town Hall to this day, there is a 










Travelers’ Tales — 141 


statue of Atlas supporting the heavens, festooned with constella¬ 
tions. Beneath is Justice, brandishing a golden sword and scales, 
standing between Death and Punishment, and treading unden 
foot Avarice and Envy, the gods of the merchants. The Dutch, 
whose economy was based on private profit, nevertheless unden 
stood that the unrestrained pursuit of profit posed a threat to the 
nation’s soul. 

A less allegorical symbol may be found under Atlas and Jus¬ 
tice, on the floor of the Town Hall. It is a great inlaid map, dating 
from the late seventeenth or early eighteenth centuries, reaching 
from West Africa to the Pacific Ocean. The whole world was 
Holland’s arena. And on this map, with disarming modesty the 
Dutch omitted themselves, using only the old Latin name Bel¬ 
gium for their part of Europe. 

In a typical year many ships set sail halfway around the world. 
Down the west coast of Africa, through what they called the 
Ethiopian Sea, around the south coast of Africa, within the 
Straits of Madagascar, and on past the southern tip of India they 
sailed, to one major focus of their interests, the Spice Islands, 
present-day Indonesia. Some expeditions journeyed from there 
to a land named New Holland, and today called Australia. A few 
ventured through the Straits of Malacca, past the Philippines, to 
China. We know from a mid-seventeenth-century account of an 
“Embassy from the East India Company of the United Provinces 
of the Netherlands, to the Grand Tartar, Cham, Emperor of 
China.” The Dutch burgers, ambassadors and sea captains stood 
wide-eyed in amazement, face to face with another civilization in 
the Imperial City of Peking.* 

Never before or since has Holland been the world power it 
was then. A small country, forced to live by its wits, its foreign 
policy contained a strong pacifist element. Because of its tolerance 
for unorthodox opinions, it was a haven for intellectuals who 
were refugees from censorship and thought control elsewhere in 
Europe—much as the United States benefited enormously in the 
1930’s by the exodus of intellectuals from Nazi-dominated 
Europe. So seventeenth-century Holland was the home of the 
great Jewish philosopher Spinoza, whom Einstein admired; of 
Descartes, a pivotal figure in the history of mathematics and 
philosophy; and of John Locke, a political scientist who in¬ 
fluenced a group of philosophically inclined revolutionaries 
named Paine, Hamilton, Adams, Franklin and Jefferson. Never 
before or since has Holland been graced by such a galaxy of 
artists and scientists, philosophers and mathematicians. This was 
the time of the master painters Rembrandt and Vermeer and 
Frans Hals; of Leeuwenhoek, the inventor of the microscope; of 



Galileo Galilei (1564T642). In this paint - 
ing by Jean-Leon Huens, Galileo is at¬ 
tempting to convince skeptical 
ecclesiastics that there are mountains on 
the Moon and that the planet Jupiter pos¬ 
sesses several moons of its own. The 
Catholic hierarchy remained uncon¬ 
vinced. In 1633 Galileo was compelled to 
stand trial for “vehement suspicion of 
heresy.” Convicted on the evidence of a 
forged document, Galileo spent the last 
eight years of his life under house arrest in 
his small house outside Florence. Galileo 
was the first person to apply the telescope 
to a study of the skies. Painting by Jean- 
Leon Huens, © National Geographic So¬ 
ciety. 


* We even know what gifts they brought the Court. The Empress was 
presented with “six little chests of divers pictures.” And the Emperor 
received “two fardels of cinnamon.” 




142 — Cosmos 


Grotius, the founder of international law; of Willebrord Snellius, 
who discovered the law of the refraction of light. 

In the Dutch tradition of encouraging freedom of thought, the 
University of Leiden offered a professorship to an Italian scientist 
named Galileo, who had been forced by the Catholic Church 
under threat of torture to recant his heretical view that the Earth 
moved about the Sun and not vice versa.* Galileo had close ties 
with Holland, and his first astronomical telescope was an inv 
provement of a spyglass of Dutch design. With it he discovered 
sunspots, the phases of Venus, the craters of the Moon, and the 
four large moons of Jupiter now called, after him, the Galilean 
satellites. Galileo’s own description of his ecclesiastical travails is 
contained in a letter he wrote in the year 1615 to the Grand 
Duchess Christina: 

Some years ago as Your Serene Highness well knows, I 
discovered in the heavens many things that had not been 
seen before our own age. The novelty of these things, as 
well as some consequences which followed from them in 
contradiction to the physical notions commonly held 
among academic philosophers, stirred up against me no 
small number of professors [many of them ecclesiastics]—as 
if I had placed these things in the sky with my own hands in 
order to upset Nature and overturn the sciences. They 
seemed to forget that the increase of known truths stimm 
lates the investigation, establishment, and growth of the 
arts. 1 " 

The connection between Holland as an exploratory power and 
Holland as an intellectual and cultural center was very strong. 
The improvement of sailing ships encouraged technology of all 
kinds. People enjoyed working with their hands. Inventions were 
prized. Technological advance required the freest possible pursuit 


* In 1979 Pope John Paul II cautiously proposed reversing the conderm 
nation of Galileo done 346 years earlier by the “Holy Inquisition.” 

t The courage of Galileo (and Kepler) in promoting the heliocentric 
hypothesis was not evident in the actions of others, even those residing 
in less fanatically doctrinal parts of Europe. For example, in a letter dated 
April 1634, Rene Descartes, then living in Holland, wrote: 

Doubtless you know that Galileo was recently censured by the 
Inquisitors of the Faith, and that his views about the movement of 
the Earth were condemned as heretical. I must tell you that all the 
things I explained in my treatise, which included the doctrine of 
the movement of the Earth, were so interdependent that it is 
enough to discover that one of them is false to know that all the 
arguments I was using are unsound. Though I thought they were 
based on very certain and evident proofs, I would not wish, for 
anything in the world, to maintain them against the authority of 
the Church. ... I desire to live in peace and to continue the life I 
have begun under the motto to live well you must live unseen . 



Travelers’ Tales — 143 


of knowledge, so Holland became the leading publisher and 
bookseller in Europe, translating works written in other lam 
guages and permitting the publication of works proscribed else- 
where. Adventures into exotic lands and encounters with strange 
societies shook complacency, challenged thinkers to reconsider 
the prevailing wisdom and showed that ideas that had been 
accepted for thousands of years—for example, on geography— 
were fundamentally in error. In a time when kings and emperors 
ruled much of the world, the Dutch Republic was governed, 
more than any other nation, by the people. The openness of the 
society and its encouragement of the life of the mind, its material 
well-being and its commitment to the exploration and utilization 
of new worlds generated a joyful confidence in the human enter¬ 
prise.* 

In Italy, Galileo had announced other worlds, and Giordano 
Bruno had speculated on other lifeforms. For this they had been 
made to suffer brutally. But in Holland, the astronomer Chris¬ 
tiaan Huygens, who believed in both, was showered with 
honors. His father was Constantijn Huygens, a master diplomat 
of the age, a litterateur, poet, composer, musician, close friend 
and translator of the English poet John Donne, and the head of 
an archetypical great family. Constantijn admired the painter 
Rubens, and “discovered” a young artist named Rembrandt van 
Rijn, in several of whose works he subsequently appears. After 
their first meeting, Descartes wrote of him: “I could not believe 
that a single mind could occupy itself with so many things, and 
equip itself so well in all of them.” The Huygens home was filled 
with goods from all over the world. Distinguished thinkers from 
other nations were frequent guests. Growing up in this environ¬ 
ment, the young Christiaan Huygens became simultaneously 
adept in languages, drawing, law, science, engineering, mathe¬ 
matics and music. His interests and allegiances were broad. “The 
world is my country,” he said, “science my religion.” 

Light was a motif of the age: the symbolic enlightenment of 
freedom of thought and religion, of geographical discovery; the 
light that permeated the paintings of the time, particularly the 
exquisite work of Vermeer; and light as an object of scientific 
inquiry, as in Snell’s study of refraction, Leeuwenhoek’s inven¬ 
tion of the microscope and Huygens’ own wave theory of lightC 



Portrait of Christiaan Huygens (1629— 
1695) by Bernard Vaillant. Courtesy 
Huygensmuseum “Hofwijck,” Voorburg, 
Holland. 


* This exploratory tradition may account for the fact that Holland has, 
to this day, produced far more than its per capita share of distinguished 
astronomers, among them Gerard Peter Kuiper, who in the 1940’s and 
1950’s was the world’s only full-time planetary astrophysicist. The sub¬ 
ject was then considered by most professional astronomers to be at least 
slightly disreputable, tainted with Lowellian excesses. I am grateful to 
have been Kuiper’s student. 


t Isaac Newton admired Christiaan Huygens and thought him “the most 
elegant mathematician” of their time, and the truest follower of the 




144 - Cosmos 



Ult Cm. Huijccns Oruvrei CoaplMn. Tom XIII. F«*c II. (1916) BU 7M. 

A detail from the notebooks of Christiaan 
Huygens, recording his observations, with 
one of Leeuwenhoeks microscopes, of 
spermatazoa from the seminal fluids of a 
dog (left) and a man. 


These were all connected activities, and their practitioners min- 
gled freely. Vermeer’s interiors are characteristically tilled with 
nautical artifacts and wall maps. Microscopes were drawing-room 
curiosities. Leeuwenhoek was the executor of Vermeer’s estate 
and a frequent visitor at the Huygens home in Hofwijck. 

Leeuwenhoek’s microscope evolved from the magnifying 
glasses employed by drapers to examine the quality of cloth. 
With it he discovered a universe in a drop of water: the mi¬ 
crobes, which he described as “animalcules” and thought “cute.” 
Huygens had contributed to the design of the first microscopes 
and himself made many discoveries with them. Leeuwenhoek 
and Huygens were among the first people ever to see human 
sperm cells, a prerequisite for understanding human reproduc¬ 
tion. To explain how microorganisms slowly develop in water 
previously sterilized by boiling, Huygens proposed that they were 
small enough to float through the air and reproduced on alight¬ 
ing in water. Thus he established an alternative to spontaneous 
generation—the notion that life could arise, in fermenting grape 
juice or rotting meat, entirely independent of preexisting life. It 
was not until the time of Louis Pasteur, two centuries later, that 
Huygens’ speculation was proved correct. The Viking search for 
life on Mars can be traced in more ways than one back to 
Leeuwenhoek and Huygens. They are also the grandfathers of 
the germ theory of disease, and therefore of much of modern 
medicine. But they had no practical motives in mind. They were 
merely tinkering in a technological society. 

The microscope and telescope, both developed in early seven¬ 
teenth-century Holland, represent an extension of human vi¬ 
sion to the realms of the very small and the very large. Our 
observations of atoms and galaxies were launched in this time 
and place. Christiaan Huygens loved to grind and polish lenses 
for astronomical telescopes and constructed one five meters long. 


mathematical tradition of the ancient Greeks—then, as now, a great 
compliment. Newton believed, in part because shadows had sharp edges, 
that light behaved as if it were a stream of tiny particles. He thought that 
red light was composed of the largest particles and violet the smallest. 
Huygens argued that instead light behaved as if it were a wave propa¬ 
gating in a vacuum, as an ocean wave does in the sea—which is why we 
talk about the wavelength and frequency of light. Many properties of 
light, including diffraction, are naturally explained by the wave theory, 
and in subsequent years Huygens’ view carried the day. But in 1905, 
Einstein showed that the particle theory of light could explain the pho¬ 
toelectric effect, the ejection of electrons from a metal upon exposure to 
a beam of light. Modern quantum mechanics combines both ideas, and it 
is customary today to think of light as behaving in some circumstances as 
a beam of particles and in others as a wave. This wave-particle dualism 
may not correspond readily to our common-sense notions, but it is in 
excellent accord with what experiments have shown light really does. 
There is something mysterious and stirring in this marriage of opposites, 
and it is fitting that Newton and Huygens, bachelors both, were the 
parents of our modern understanding of the nature of light. 



Travelers’ Tales - 145 


His discoveries with the telescope would by themselves have 
ensured his place in the history of human accomplishment In the 
footsteps of Eratosthenes, he was the first person to measure the 
size of another planet. He was also the first to speculate that 
Venus is completely covered with clouds; the first to draw a 
surface feature on the planet Mars (a vast dark windswept slope 
called Syrtis Major); and by observing the appearance and disap' 
pearance of such features as the planet rotated, the first to deter- 
mine that the Martian day was, like ours, roughly twenty-four 
hours long. He was the first to recognize that Saturn was sur¬ 
rounded by a system of rings which nowhere touches the planet.* 
And he was the discoverer of Titan, the largest moon of Saturn 
and, as we now know, the second largest moon in the solar sys¬ 
tem—a world of extraordinary interest and promise. Most of these 
discoveries he made in his twenties. He also thought astrology was 
nonsense. 

Huygens did much more. A key problem for marine naviga¬ 
tion in this age was the determination of longitude. Latitude 
could easily be determined by the stars—the farther south you 
were, the more southern constellations you could see. But longi¬ 
tude required precise timekeeping. An accurate shipboard clock 
would tell the time in your home port; the rising and setting of 
the Sun and stars would specify the local shipboard time; and the 
difference between the two would yield your longitude. Huygens 
invented the pendulum clock (its principle had been discovered 
earlier by Galileo), which was then employed, although not fully 
successfully, to calculate position in the midst of the great ocean. 
His efforts introduced an unprecedented accuracy in astronomi¬ 
cal and other scientific observations and stimulated further ad¬ 
vances in nautical clocks. He invented the spiral balance spring 
still used in some watches today; made fundamental contribu¬ 
tions to mechanics—e.g., the calculation of centrifugal force— 
and, from a study of the game of dice, to the theory of 
probability. He improved the air pump, which was later to revo¬ 
lutionize the mining industry, and the “magic lantern,” the ances¬ 
tor of the slide projector. He also invented something called the 
“gunpowder engine,” which influenced the development of an¬ 
other machine, the steam engine. 

Huygens was delighted that the Copemican view of the Earth 
as a planet in motion around the Sun was widely accepted even 
by the ordinary people in Holland. Indeed, he said, Copernicus 
was acknowledged by all astronomers except those who “were a 
bit slow-witted or under the superstitions imposed by merely 
human authority.” In the Middle Ages, Christian philosophers 
were fond of arguing that, since the heavens circle the Earth once 

* Galileo discovered the rings, but had no idea what to make of them. 
Through his early astronomical telescope, they seemed to be two pro¬ 
jections symmetrically attached to Saturn, resembling, he said in some 
bafflement, ears. 


O 

O 

I w 

X, 

- 

o 

9 

- - 

< 



7 _ 


SL 

-e- 

B ^ 

© 

A detail from Christiaan Huygens’ Sys- 
tema Saturnium , published in 1659. 
Shown is his (correct) explanation of the 
changing appearance of the rings of Saturn 


over the years as the relative geometry of 
Earth and Saturn changes. In position B 
the comparatively paper-thin rings disap¬ 
pear as they are seen edge-on. In position 
A they display their maximum extent vis¬ 
ible from Earth, the configuration that 
caused Galileo, with a significantly inferior 
telescope, considerable consternation. 



146 - Cosmos 


every day, they can hardly be infinite in extent; and therefore an 
infinite number of worlds, or even a large number of them (or 
even one other of them), is impossible. The discovery that the 
Earth is turning rather than the sky moving had important impli- 
cations for the uniqueness of the Earth and the possibility of life 
elsewhere. Copernicus held that not just the solar system but the 
entire universe was heliocentric, and Kepler denied that the stars 
have planetary systems. The first person to make explicit the idea 
of a large—indeed, an infinite—number of other worlds in orbit 
about other suns seems to have been Giordano Bruno. But 
others thought that the plurality of worlds followed immediately 
from the ideas of Copernicus and Kepler and found themselves 
aghast. In the early seventeenth century, Robert Merton com 
tended that the heliocentric hypothesis implied a multitude of 
other planetary systems, and that this was an argument of the sort 
called reductio ad absurdum (Appendix 1), demonstrating the 
error of the initial assumption. He wrote, in an argument which 
may once have seemed withering, 

For if the firmament be of such an incomparable bigness, as 
these Copemical giants will have it..., so vast and full of 
innumerable stars, as being infinite in extent . . . why may 
we not suppose . . . those infinite stars visible in the fir¬ 
mament to be so many suns, with particular fixed centers; to 
have likewise their subordinate planets, as the sun hath his 
dancing still around him?. . . And so, in consequence, there 
are infinite habitable worlds; what hinders? . . . these and 
suchlike insolent and bold attempts, prodigious paradoxes, 
inferences must needs follow, if it once be granted which 
. . . Kepler . . . and others maintain of the Earth’s motion. 

But the Earth does move. Merton, if he lived today, would be 
obliged to deduce “infinite, habitable worlds.” Huygens did not 
shrink from this conclusion; he embraced it gladly: Across the sea 
of space the stars are other suns. By analogy with our solar 
system, Huygens reasoned that those stars should have their own 
planetary systems and that many of these planets might be in¬ 
habited: “Should we allow the planets nothing but vast deserts 
. . . and deprive them of all those creatures that more plainly 
bespeak their divine architect, we should sink them below the 
Earth in beauty and dignity, a thing very unreasonable.”* 

These ideas were set forth in an extraordinary book bearing 
the triumphant title The Celestial Worlds Discover'd: Conjectures 
Concerning the Inhabitants , Plants and Productions of the Worlds 
in the Planets . Composed shortly before Huygens died in 1690, 
the work was admired by many, including Czar Peter the Great, 


* A few others had held similar opinions. In his Harmonice Mundi 
Kepler remarked “it was Tycho Brahe’s opinion concerning that bare 
wilderness of globes that it does not exist fruitlessly but is filled with 
inhabitants.” 



Travelers’ Tales - 147 


who made it the first product of Western science to be published 
in Russia. The book is in large part about the nature or environ- 
ments of the planets. Among the figures in the finely rendered 
first edition is one in which we see, to scale, the Sun and the giant 
planets Jupiter and Saturn. They are, comparatively, rather small. 
There is also an etching of Saturn next to the Earth: Our planet is 
a tiny circle. 

By and large Huygens imagined the environments and inhabi- 
tants of other planets to be rather like those of seventeenth^ 
century Earth. He conceived of “planetarians” whose “whole 
Bodies, and every part of them, may be quite distinct and dif- 
ferent from ours . . . ’tis a very ridiculous opinion . . . that it is 
impossible a rational Soul should dwell in any other shape than 
ours.” You could be smart, he was saying, even if you looked 
peculiar. But he then went on to argue that they would not look 
very peculiar—that they must have hands and feet and walk 
upright, that they would have writing and geometry, and that 
Jupiter has its four Galilean satellites to provide a navigational aid 
for the sailors in the Jovian oceans. Huygens was, of course, a 
citizen of his time. Who of us is not? He claimed science as his 
religion and then argued that the planets must be inhabited 
because otherwise God had made worlds for nothing. Because he 
lived before Darwin, his speculations about extraterrestrial life 
are innocent of the evolutionary perspective. But he was able to 
develop on observational grounds something akin to the modern 
cosmic perspective: 

What a wonderful and Amazing scheme have we here of 
the magnificant vastness of the universe ... So many Suns, 
so many Earths . . . and every one of them stock’d with so 
many Herbs, Trees, and Animals, adorn’d with so many 
Seas and Mountains! . . . And how must our Wonder and 
Admiration be increased when we consider the prodigious 
Distance and Multitude of the Stars. 

The Voyager spacecraft are the lineal descendants of those 
sailing-ship voyages of exploration, and of the scientific and 
speculative tradition of Christiaan Huygens. The Voyagers are 
caravels bound for the stars, and on the way exploring those 
worlds that Huygens knew and loved so well. 

One of the main commodities returned on those voyages of 
centuries ago were travelers’ tales,* stories of alien lands and 
exotic creatures that evoked our sense of wonder and stimulated 
future exploration. There had been accounts of mountains that 

* Such tales are an ancient human tradition; many of them have had, 
from the beginning of exploration, a cosmic motif. For example, the 
fifteenth-century explorations of Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, Arabia and 
Africa by the Ming Dynasty Chinese were described by Fei Hsin, one of 
the participants, in a picture book prepared for the Emperor, as “The 
Triumphant Visions of the Starry Raft.” Unfortunately, the pictures— 
although not the text—have been lost. 



A giraffe, carried from Africa to China 
around 1420 in the wake of the great 
voyages of trade and discovery by the 
Ming Dynasty admiral Cheng Ho. The 
presence of this fabled animal in the Chi¬ 
nese Imperial Court was considered an 
auspicious sign. Earlier travelers’ tales 
about the giraffe may have been greeted 
with considerable skepticism. The Ming 
age of exploration, in fleets of oceangoing 
junks—which almost certainly included a 
rounding of the Cape of Good Hope, and 
the appearance of a Chinese navy in the 
Atlantic Ocean—ended just before the 
Portuguese entered the Indian Ocean, re¬ 
versing the vector of discovery. Shen Tu: 
The Tribute Giraffe with Attendant. 
Courtesy the Philadelphia Museum of 
Art. Gift of John T. Dorrance. 





148 - Cosmos 




Voyager 1 far encounter image (top) of Jupiter from a range of 28 million kilometers. Bottom: Voyager approaches 
Jupiter with the moons Io and Callisto in foreground. Courtesy NASA. 






Travelers’ Tales — 149 


reached the sky; of dragons and sea monsters; of everyday eating 
utensils made of gold; of a beast with an arm for a nose; of people 
who thought the doctrinal disputes among Protestants, Catho¬ 
lics, Jews and Muslims to be silly; of a black stone that burned; of 
headless humans with mouths in their chests; of sheep that grew 
on trees. Some of these stories were true; some were lies. Others 
had a kernel of truth, misunderstood or exaggerated by the ex¬ 
plorers or their informants. In the hands of Voltaire, say, or 
Jonathan Swift, these accounts stimulated a new perspective on 
European society, forcing a reconsideration of that insular world. 

Modern Voyagers also return travelers’ tales, tales of a world 
shattered like a crystal sphere; a globe where the ground is cov¬ 
ered, pole to pole, with what looks like a network of cobwebs; 
tiny moons shaped like potatoes; a world with an underground 
ocean; a land that smells of rotten eggs and looks like a pizza pie, 
with lakes of molten sulfur and volcanic eruptions ejecting smoke 
directly into space; a planet called Jupiter that dwarfs our own—so 
large that 1,000 Earths would fit within it. 

The Galilean satellites of Jupiter are each almost as big as the 
planet Mercury. We can measure their sizes and masses and so 
calculate their density, which tells us something about the com¬ 
position of their interiors. We find that the inner two, Io and 
Europa, have a density as high as rock. The outer two, Gan¬ 
ymede and Callisto, have a much lower density, halfway be¬ 
tween rock and ice. But the mixture of ice and rocks within these 
outer moons must contain, as do rocks on Earth, traces of radio¬ 
active minerals, which heat their surroundings. There is no ef¬ 
fective way for this heat, accumulated over billions of years, to 
reach the surface and be lost to space, and the radioactivity inside 
Ganymede and Callisto must therefore melt their icy interiors. 
We anticipate underground oceans of slush and water in these 
moons, a hint, before we have ever seen the surfaces of the 
Galilean satellites close up, that they may be very different one 
from another. When we do look closely, through the eyes of 
Voyager, this prediction is confirmed. They do not resemble 
each other. They are different from any worlds we have ever 
seen before. 

The Voyager 2 spacecraft will never return to Earth. But its 
scientific findings, its epic discoveries, its travelers’ tales, do re¬ 
turn. Take July 9, 1979, for instance. At 8:04 Pacific Standard 
Time on this morning, the first pictures of a new world, called 
Europa after an old one, were received on Earth. 

How does a picture from the outer solar system get to us? 
Sunlight shines on Europa in its orbit around Jupiter and is 
reflected back to space, where some of it strikes the phosphors of 
the Voyager television cameras, generating an image. The image 
is read by the Voyager computers, radioed back across the im¬ 
mense intervening distance of half a billion kilometers to a radio 
telescope, a ground station on the Earth. There is one in Spain, 



150 - Cosmos 



Flight paths of Voyager 1 (crossing the 
orbit of Uranus, top left) and Voyager 2 
(encountering Uranus in January 1986). 
Also shown is the alternative trajectory 
were Voyager 2 to have made a close en- 
counter with Titan, as Voyager 1 did. 




The passage of Voyager 1 (top) and 
Voyager 2 (bottom) past the Galilean sateb 
lites of Jupiter on March 5 and July 9, 
1979. 


The Jovian moon Europa, as seen by 
Voyager 2 during close encounter on July 
9, 1979. Europa is about the size of our 
moon but its topography is markedly dif¬ 
ferent. The lack of craters and mountains 
strongly suggests that a thick ice crust, 
perhaps 100 kilometers deep, jackets the 
silicate interior. The complex pattern of 
dark lines may be ice fractures which have 
been filled in with material from beneath 
the crust. The high brightness of Europa 
is consistent with this hypothesis. Cour¬ 
tesy NASA. 




















Travelers’ Tales — 151 


one in the Mojave Desert of Southern California and one in 
Australia. (On that July morning in 1979 it was the one in 
Australia that was pointed toward Jupiter and Europa.) It then 
passes the information via a communications satellite in Earth 
orbit to Southern California, where it is transmitted by a set of 
microwave relay towers to a computer at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, where it is processed. The picture is fundamentally 
like a newspaper wirephoto, made of perhaps a million individual 
dots, each a different shade of gray, so fine and close together 
that at a distance the constituent dots are invisible. We see only 
their cumulative effect. The information from the spacecraft 
specifies how bright or dark each dot is to be. After processing, 
the dots are then stored on a magnetic disc, something like a 
phonograph record. There are some eighteen thousand photo- 
graphs taken in the Jupiter system by Voyager 1 that are stored 
on such magnetic discs, and an equivalent number for Voyager 2. 
Finally, the end product of this remarkable set of links and relays 
is a thin piece of glossy paper, in this case showing the wonders of 
Europa, recorded, processed and examined for the first time in 
human history on July 9, 1979. 

What we saw on such pictures was absolutely astonishing. 
Voyager 1 obtained excellent imagery of the other three Galilean 
satellites of Jupiter. But not Europa. It was left for Voyager 2 to 
acquire the first close-up pictures of Europa, where we see things 
that are only a few kilometers across. At first glance, the place 
looks like nothing so much as the canal network that Percival 
Lowell imagined to adorn Mars, and that, we now know from 
space vehicle exploration, does not exist at all. We see on Europa 
an amazing, intricate network of intersecting straight and curved 
lines. Are they ridges—that is, raised? Are they troughs—that is, 
depressed? How are they made? Are they part of a global tectonic 
system, produced perhaps by fracturing of an expanding or con¬ 
tracting planet? Are they connected with plate tectonics on the 
Earth? What light do they shed on the other satellites of the 
Jovian system? At the moment of discovery, the vaunted tech¬ 
nology has produced something astonishing. But it remains for 
another device, the human brain, to figure it out. Europa turns 
out to be as smooth as a billiard ball despite the network of 
lineations. The absence of impact craters may be due to the 
heating and flow of surface ice upon impact. The lines are 
grooves or cracks, their origin still being debated long after the 
mission. 

If the Voyager missions were manned, the captain would keep 
a ship’s log, and the log, a combination of the events of Voyagers 
1 and 2, might read something like this: 

Day 1 After much concern about provisions and instru¬ 
ments, which seemed to be malfunctioning, we successfully 

lifted off from Cape Canaveral on our long journey to the 

planets and the stars. 



Voyager 2 image taken July 6, 1979, 
shows a region of the Jovian atmosphere 
from approximately 25°N to the equator. 
The north temperate “jet” of clouds is the 
rusty band running diagonally across top- 
mid frame. These clouds are moving at 
about 540 kilometers per hour. The 
bluish-white regions at bottom show 
breaks in the upper ammonia clouds. We 
are seeing approximately 60 kilometers 
down. Courtesy NASA. 



A break in the light-brown clouds of Ju¬ 
piter (with no white ammonia clouds 
above them) permits us to see to a deeper 
dark-brown cloud layer, possibly contain¬ 
ing complex organic matter. Infrared 
measurements show the dark-brown 
cloud to be warmer than its surroundings. 
Voyager 1 image. Courtesy NASA. 






152 — Cosmos 



A “snakeskin,” or cylindrical projection of the Jovian cloud features as seen by Voyager L Longitudes are given at 
bottom, latitudes at left. The symbols at right stand for, in order, the North Temperate Zone, North Tropical Zone, 
North Equatorial Belt, Equatorial Zone, South Equatorial Belt, South Tropical Zone, and the South Temperate Zone. 
Zones tend to be covered with high white ammonia clouds, unlike the colored belts. The Great Red Spot (GRS), at 
about 75° longitude, lives near the boundary of the SEB and the STrZ. The deepest and hottest places we see are the 
bluish patches at the heads of the regularly spaced white plumes in the NEB. Courtesy NASA. 



False color image of the Great Red Spot, in which the computer has exaggerated reds and blues at the expense of 
greens. High clouds temporarily overlie about a third of the GRS. Voyager 1 image. Courtesy NASA. 










Travelers’ Tales — 153 



Voyager 1 image of the surface of Io. Each of the dark, roughly circular features is a recently active volcano. The 
volcano with a bright halo at the rough center of the disc was observed in eruption just fifteen hours before this image 
was acquired; it has since been named Prometheus. The black, red, orange and yellow colors are thought to be frozen 
sulfur, originally spewed from the volcanoes in a molten state, with the initial temperatures highest for black deposits 
and lowest for yellow. White deposits, including those around Prometheus, may be frozen sulfur dioxide. Io is 3,640 
kilometers in diameter. Courtesy NASA. 



154 - Cosmos 



Two erupting volcanoes at the limb or 
edge of crescent Io. They had apparently 
been erupting continuously for four 
months. The lower plume is from the 
Maui Patera volcano. Voyager 2 image. 
Courtesy NASA. 



Recent flows of molten sulfur from the Ra 
Patera volcano on Io. We are viewing ah 
most directly down the volcanic caldera. 
Voyager 1 image. Courtesy NASA. 


Day 2 A problem in the deployment of the boom that 
supports the science scan platform. If the problem is not 
solved, we will lose most of our pictures and other scientific 
data. 

Day 13 We have looked back and taken the first photo- 
graph ever obtained of the Earth and Moon as worlds 
together in space. A pretty pair. 

Day 150 Engines fired nominally for a mid-course trajec- 
tory correction. 

Day 170 Routine housekeeping functions. An uneventful 
few months. 

Day 185 Successful calibration images taken of Jupiter. 

Day 207 Boom problem solved, but failure of main radio 
transmitter. We have moved to back-up transmitter. If it 
fails, no one on Earth will ever hear from us again. 

Day 215 We cross the orbit of Mars. The planet itself is 
on the other side of the Sun. 

Day 295 We enter the asteroid belt. There are many 
large, tumbling boulders here, the shoals and reefs of space. 
Most of them are uncharted. Lookouts posted. We hope to 
avoid a collision. 

Day 475 We safely emerge from the main asteroid belt, 
happy to have survived. 

Day 570 Jupiter is becoming prominent in the sky. We 
can now make out finer detail on it than the largest tele- 
scopes on Earth have ever obtained. 

Day 615 The colossal weather systems and changing 
clouds of Jupiter, spinning in space before us, have us hyp' 
notized. The planet is immense. It is more than twice as 
massive as all the other planets put together. There are no 
mountains, valleys, volcanoes, rivers; no boundaries be- 
tween land and air; just a vast ocean of dense gas and 
floating clouds—a world without a surface. Everything we 
can see on Jupiter is floating in its sky. 

Day 630 The weather on Jupiter continues to be spectac- 
ular. This ponderous world spins on its axis in less than ten 
hours. Its atmospheric motions are driven by the rapid 
rotation, by sunlight and by the heat bubbling and welling 
up from its interior. 

Day 640 The cloud patterns are distinctive and gorgeous. 
They remind us a little of Van Gogh’s Starry Night , or 
works by William Blake or Edvard Munch. But only a little. 
No artist ever painted like this because none of them ever 
left our planet. No painter trapped on Earth ever imagined a 
world so strange and lovely. 

We observe the multicolored belts and bands of Jupiter 
close up. The white bands are thought to be high clouds, 






Travelers’ Tales - 155 



The volcanic plume of the Loki Patera volcano on Io. Ultraviolet light is here transcribed as blue. Surrounding the 
plume seen in visible light is a vast cloud, bright in reflected ultraviolet sunlight and composed of very small particles. 
The effect is similar to the blue cast of the light reflected by fine smoke particles. The top of the ultraviolet cloud is 
more than 200 kilometers above the surface of Io and may eject extremely small particles and atoms directly into 
space. The ejected matter would still be in orbit about Jupiter, as Io is, and supply the great tube of atoms which 
surrounds Jupiter at Io’s distance. Voyager 1 image. Courtesy NASA. 



156 - Cosmos 



The irregularly shaped small moon of Ju- 
piter, Amalthea, as seen by Voyager L 
The bright spots are probably impact 
craters. The reddish color may be a stain 
from material lost by Io and swept up by 
Amalthea, which orbits Jupiter at 181,000 
kilometers, interior to the orbit of Io. 
Amalthea is about 240 kilometers across, 
its long axis pointing toward Jupiter. 
Courtesy NASA. 



Cutaway model of the interior of Jupiter. 
On this scale, the visible clouds are thim 
ner than the paint on the exterior of the 
model’s surface. At the core is a sphere of 
rock and metal a little like the Earth, sun 
rounding which is a great ocean of liquid 
metallic hydrogen. 


probably ammonia crystals; the brownish-colored belts, 
deeper and hotter places where the atmosphere is sinking. 
The blue places are apparently deep holes in the overlying 
clouds through which we see clear sky. 

We do not know the reason for the reddish-brown color 
of Jupiter. Perhaps it is due to the chemistry of phosphorus 
or sulfur. Perhaps it is due to complex brightly colored 
organic molecules produced when ultraviolet light from the 
Sun breaks down the methane, ammonia, and water in the 
Jovian atmosphere and the molecular fragments recombine. 

In that case, the colors of Jupiter speak to us of chemical 
events that four billion years ago back on Earth led to the 
origin of life. 

Day 647 The Great Red Spot. A great column of gas 
reaching high above the adjacent clouds, so large that it 
could hold half a dozen Earths. Perhaps it is red because it is 
carrying up to view the complex molecules produced or 
concentrated at greater depth. It may be a great storm sys¬ 
tem a million years old. 

Day 650 Encounter. A day of wonders. We successfully 
negotiate the treacherous radiation belts of Jupiter with 
only one instrument, the photopolarimeter, damaged. We 
accomplish the ring plane crossing and suffer no collisions 
with the particles and boulders of the newly discovered 
rings of Jupiter. And wonderful images of Amalthea, a tiny, 
red, oblong world that lives in the heart of the radiation 
belt; of multicolored Io; of the linear markings on Europa; 
the cobwebby features of Ganymede; the great multi-ringed 
basin on Callisto. We round Callisto and pass the orbit of 
Jupiter 13, the outermost of the planets known moons. We 
are outward bound. 

Day 662 Our particle and field detectors indicate that we 
have left the Jovian radiation belts. The planet’s gravity has 
boosted our speed. We are free of Jupiter at last and sail 
again the sea of space. 

Day 874 A loss of the ship’s lock on the star Canopus—in 
the lore of constellations the rudder of a sailing vessel. It is 
our rudder too, essential for the ship’s orientation in the 
dark of space, to find our way through this unexplored part 
of the cosmic ocean. Canopus lock reacquired. The optical 
sensors seem to have mistaken Alpha and Beta Centauri for 
Canopus. Next port of call, two years hence: the Saturn 
system. 

Of all the travelers’ tales returned by Voyager, my favorites 
concern the discoveries made on the innermost Galilean satellite, 
Io.* Before Voyager, we were aware of something strange about 


* Frequently pronounced “eyeoh” by Americans, because this is the pre¬ 
ferred enunciation in the Oxford English Dictionary. But the British have 
no special wisdom here. The word is of Eastern Mediterranean origin 
and is pronounced throughout the rest of Europe, correctly, as “ee-oh.” 









Travelers’ Tales — 157 


Io. We could resolve few features on its surface, but we knew it 
was red—extremely red, redder than Mars, perhaps the reddest 
object in the solar system. Over a period of years something 
seemed to be changing on it, in infrared light and perhaps in its 
radar reflection properties. We also know that partially sun 
rounding Jupiter in the orbital position of Io was a great dough' 
nut'shaped tube of atoms, sulfur and sodium and potassium, 
material somehow lost from Io. 

When Voyager approached this giant moon we found a 
strange multicolored surface unlike any other in the solar system. 
Io is near the asteroid belt. It must have been thoroughly puim 
meled throughout its history by falling boulders. Impact craters 
must have been made. Yet there were none to be seen. Accord' 
ingly, there had to be some process on Io that was extremely 
efficient in rubbing craters out or filling them in. The process 
could not be atmospheric, since Io’s atmosphere has mostly 
escaped to space because of its low gravity. It could not be 
running water; Io’s surface is far too cold. There were a few 
places that resembled the summits of volcanoes. But it was hard 
to be sure. 

Linda Morabito, a member of the Voyager Navigation Team 
responsible for keeping Voyager precisely on its trajectory, was 
routinely ordering a computer to enhance an image of the edge of 
Io, to bring out the stars behind it. To her astonishment, she saw 
a bright plume standing off in the darkness from the satellites 
surface and soon determined that the plume was in exactly the 
position of one of the suspected volcanoes. Voyager had discov' 
ered the first active volcano beyond the Earth. We know now of 
nine large volcanoes, spewing out gas and debris, and hum 
dreds—perhaps thousands—of extinct volcanoes on Io. The 
debris, rolling and flowing down the sides of the volcanic mourn 
tains, arching in great jets over the polychrome landscape, is 
more than enough to cover the impact craters. We are looking at 
a fresh planetary landscape, a surface newly hatched. How Gaik 
leo and Huygens would have marveled. 

The volcanoes of Io were predicted, before they were discov' 
ered, by Stanton Peale and his co'workers, who calculated the 
tides that would be raised in the solid interior of Io by the 
combined pulls of the nearby moon Europa and the giant planet 
Jupiter. They found that the rocks inside Io should have been 
melted, not by radioactivity but by tides; that much of the inte' 
rior of Io should be liquid. It now seems likely that the volcanoes 
of Io are tapping an underground ocean of liquid sulfur, melted 
and concentrated near the surface. When solid sulfur is heated a 
little past the normal boiling point of water, to about 115°C, it 
melts and changes color. The higher the temperature, the deeper 
the color. If the molten sulfur is quickly cooled, it retains its 
color. The pattern of colors that we see on Io resembles closely 
what we would expect if rivers and torrents and sheets of molten 



158 - Cosmos 




The Antarctic terrain of Io. A great pro¬ 
fusion of landscapes can be seen (top), in¬ 
cluding smooth plains, volcanic calderas, 
sulfur flows, steep escarpments, and, at 
bottom right, surrounded by a bright 
halo, rugged and isolated mountains. The 
picture is about 1,700 kilometers across. 
At bottom is a close-up of a feature seen 
in the top picture at left center, a volcanic 
flow pattern 225 kilometers across, ema¬ 
nating from a caldera with an irregular is¬ 
land inside. Voyager 1 images. Courtesy 
NASA. 


sulfur were pouring out of the mouths of the volcanoes: black 
sulfur, the hottest, near the top of the volcano; red and orange, 
including the rivers, nearby; and great plains covered by yellow 
sulfur at a greater remove. The surface of Io is changing on a 
time scale of months. Maps will have to be issued regularly, like 
weather reports on Earth. Those future explorers on Io will have 
to keep their wits about them. 

The very thin and tenuous atmosphere of Io was found by 
Voyager to be composed mainly of sulfur dioxide. But this thin 
atmosphere can serve a useful purpose, because it may be just 
thick enough to protect the surface from the intense charged 
particles in the Jupiter radiation belt in which Io is embedded. At 
night the temperature drops so low that the sulfur dioxide should 
condense out as a kind of white frost; the charged particles would 
then immolate the surface, and it would probably be wise to 
spend the nights just slightly underground. 

The great volcanic plumes of Io reach so high that they are 
close to injecting their atoms directly into the space around Ju¬ 
piter. The volcanoes are the probable source of the great dough- 
nut-shaped ring of atoms that surrounds Jupiter in the position of 
Io’s orbit. These atoms, gradually spiraling in toward Jupiter, 
should coat the inner moon Amalthea and may be responsible 
for its reddish coloration. It is even possible that the material 
outgassed from Io contributes, after many collisions and conden¬ 
sations, to the ring system of Jupiter. 

A substantial human presence on Jupiter itself is much more 
difficult to imagine—although I suppose great balloon cities per¬ 
manently floating in its atmosphere are a technological possibility 
for the remote future. As seen from the near sides of Io or 
Europa, that immense and variable world fills much of the sky, 
hanging aloft, never to rise or set, because almost every satellite 
in the solar system keeps a constant face to its planet, as the 
Moon does to the Earth. Jupiter will be a source of continuing 
provocation and excitement for the future human explorers of 
the Jovian moons. 

As the solar system condensed out of interstellar gas and dust, 
Jupiter acquired most of the matter that was not ejected into 
interstellar space and did not fall inward to form the Sun. Had 
Jupiter been several dozen times more massive, the matter in its 
interior would have undergone thermonuclear reactions, and Ju¬ 
piter would have begun to shine by its own light. The largest 
planet is a star that failed. Even so, its interior temperatures are 
sufficiently high that it gives off about twice as much energy as it 
receives from the Sun. In the infrared part of the spectrum, it 
might even be correct to consider Jupiter a star. Had it become a 
star in visible light, we would today inhabit a binary or double¬ 
star system, with two suns in our sky, and the nights would come 
more rarely—a commonplace, I believe, in countless solar systems 
throughout the Milky Way Galaxy. We would doubtless think 



Travelers’ Tales - 159 


the circumstances natural and lovely. 

Deep below the clouds of Jupiter the weight of the overlying 
layers of atmosphere produces pressures much higher than any 
found on Earth, pressures so great that electrons are squeezed off 
hydrogen atoms, producing a remarkable substance, liquid me^ 
tallic hydrogen—a physical state that has never been observed in 
terrestrial laboratories, because the requisite pressures have never 
been achieved on Earth. (There is some hope that metallic hy- 
drogen is a superconductor at moderate temperatures. If it could 
be manufactured on Earth, it would work a revolution in elec- 
tronics.) In the interior of Jupiter, where the pressures are about 
three million times the atmospheric pressure at the surface of the 
Earth, there is almost nothing but a great dark sloshing ocean of 
metallic hydrogen. But at the very core of Jupiter there may be a 
lump of rock and iron, an Earthdike world in a pressure vise, 
hidden forever at the center of the largest planet. 

The electrical currents in the liquid metal interior of Jupiter 
may be the source of the planet’s enormous magnetic field, the 
largest in the solar system, and of its associated belt of trapped 
electrons and protons. These charged particles are ejected from 
the Sun in the solar wind and captured and accelerated by Ju- 
piter’s magnetic field. Vast numbers of them are trapped far 
above the clouds and are condemned to bounce from pole to 
pole until by chance they encounter some high-altitude atmo¬ 
spheric molecule and are removed from the radiation belt. Io 
moves in an orbit so close to Jupiter that it plows through the 
midst of this intense radiation, creating cascades of charged part¬ 
icles, which in turn generate violent bursts of radio energy. (They 
may also influence eruptive processes on the surface of Io.) It is 
possible to predict radio bursts from Jupiter with better reliability 
than weather forecasts on Earth, by computing the position of Io. 

That Jupiter is a source of radio emission was discovered 
accidentally in the 1950’s, the early days of radio astronomy. 
Two young Americans, Bernard Burke and Kenneth Franklin, 
were examining the sky with a newly constructed and for that 
time very sensitive radio telescope. They were searching the 
cosmic radio background—that is, radio sources far beyond our 
solar system. To their surprise, they found an intense and pre¬ 
viously unreported source that seemed to correspond to no 
prominent star, nebula or galaxy. What is more, it gradually 
moved, with respect to the distant stars, much faster than any 
remote object could.* After finding no likely explanation of all 
this in their charts of the distant Cosmos, they one day stepped 
outside the observatory and looked up at the sky with the naked 
eye to see if anything interesting happened to be there. Bemu- 
sedly they noted an exceptionally bright object in the right place, 
which they soon identified as the planet Jupiter. This accidental 



Ganymede, the largest moon of Jupiter. 
The smallest features visible in this 
Voyager 1 image are about three kilome¬ 
ters across. Numerous impact craters are 
evident, many with bright rays. The 
gently swerving and intersecting bands are 
composed of parallel grooves of uncertain 
origin. Courtesy NASA. 



A Voyager 2 image of Ganymede on July 
8, 1979. The parallel bright stripes ex¬ 
tending across the dark plain at right 
might possibly have been caused, like rip¬ 
ples in a pond, by an ancient impact in this 
icy surface. There is no crater at the pre¬ 
sumptive impact site, perhaps because of 
slow viscous deformation over the aeons. 
Courtesy NASA. 


Because the speed of light is finite (see Chapter 8). 





160 — Cosmos 



Callisto, photographed by Voyager 1 on 
March 6,1979 at a range of 350,000 kilo¬ 
meters. Callisto is about the size of the 
planet Mercury. The numerous impact 
craters on Callisto suggest that it has the 
oldest surface of all the Galilean moons of 
Jupiter, possibly dating back to the termi¬ 
nal accretion era some 4 to 4.5 billion 
years ago. Callisto has about half the al¬ 
bedo of Ganymede, suggesting that its icy 
crust is “dirty” (it is still twice as bright as 
our Moon). The “bull’s-eye” at right was 
formed by a large impact. The bright spot 
at its center is about 600 kilometers across. 
Courtesy NASA. 



Twelve drawings of Titan by Audouin 
Dollfus at the Pic du Midi Observatory in 
the French Pyrenees. As seen from Earth, 
the image of Titan is so small that even its 
disk is barely discernible. The observa¬ 
tions suggest variable white clouds, per¬ 
haps methane cirrus, over a darker 
layer—probably the clouds of organic 
matter suggested on other evidence. The 
need for close-up space vehicle photo¬ 
graphs, such as those programmed for 
Voyager 1 in November 1980, is obvious. 
Courtesy Audouin Dollfus. 


discovery is, incidentally, entirely typical of the history of sci¬ 
ence. 

Every evening before Voyager l’s encounter with Jupiter, I 
could see that giant planet twinkling in the sky, a sight our 
ancestors have enjoyed and wondered at for a million years. And 
on the evening of Encounter, on my way to study the Voyager 
data arriving at JPL, I thought that Jupiter would never be the 
same, never again just a point of light in the night sky, but would 
forever after be a place to be explored and known. Jupiter and its 
moons are a kind of miniature solar system of diverse and exqui¬ 
site worlds with much to teach us. 

In composition and in many other respects Saturn is similar to 
Jupiter, although smaller. Rotating once every ten hours, it ex¬ 
hibits colorful equatorial banding, which is, however, not so 
prominent as Jupiter’s. It has a weaker magnetic field and radia¬ 
tion belt than Jupiter and a more spectacular set of circumplane- 
tary rings. And it also is surrounded by a dozen or more satellites. 

The most interesting of the moons of Saturn seems to be 
Titan, the largest moon in the solar system and the only one with 
a substantial atmosphere. Prior to the encounter of Voyager 1 
with Titan in November 1980, our information about Titan was 
scanty and tantalizing. The only gas known unambiguously to be 
present was methane, CH 4 , discovered by G. P. Kuiper. Ultravi¬ 
olet light from the sun converts methane to more complex hy¬ 
drocarbon molecules and hydrogen gas. The hydrocarbons 
should remain on Titan, covering the surface with a brownish 
tarry organic sludge, something like that produced in experiments 
on the origin of life on Earth. The lightweight hydrogen gas 
should, because of Titan’s low gravity, rapidly escape to space by 
a violent process known as “blowoff,” which should carry the 
methane and other atmospheric constituents with it. But Titan 




Travelers’ Tales — 161 



has an atmospheric pressure at least as great as that of the planet 
Mars. Blowoff does not seem to be happening. Perhaps there is 
some major and as yet undiscovered atmospheric constituent- 
nitrogen, for example—which keeps the average molecular 
weight of the atmosphere high and prevents blowoff. Or perhaps 
blowoff is happening, but the gases lost to space are being re¬ 
plenished by others released from the satellite’s interior. The 
bulk density of Titan is so low that there must be a vast supply of 
water and other ices, probably including methane, which are at 
unknown rates being released to the surface by internal heating. 

When we examine Titan through the telescope we see a 
barely perceptible reddish disc. Some observers have reported 
variable white clouds above that disc—most likely, clouds of 


False color image of Callisto. Every bright 
spot is an impact crater. Voyager 1 pic¬ 
ture. Courtesy NASA. 




162 - Cosmos 



The rings of Jupiter, discovered by 
Voyager 1 and here photographed by 
Voyager 2. Jupiter is out of frame at lower 
right. Composed of small particles, it 
seems to extend all the way down to the 
Jovian cloudtops, suggesting a steady state 
between production, perhaps from mate- 
rial escaping from Io, and destruction by 
entry into the clouds of Jupiter. It is much 
smaller and dimmer than the rings of Sat- 
urn, accounting for the fact that it was 
never reliably discovered from Earth be¬ 
fore Voyager. Courtesy NASA. 


methane crystals. But what is responsible for the reddish color¬ 
ation? Most students of Titan agree that complex organic mole¬ 
cules are the most likely explanation. The surface temperature 
and atmospheric thickness are still under debate. There have 
been some hints of an enhanced surface temperature due to an 
atmospheric greenhouse effect. With abundant organic mole¬ 
cules on its surface and in its atmosphere, Titan is a remarkable 
and unique denizen of the solar system. The history of our past 
voyages of discovery suggests that Voyager and other spacecraft 
reconnaissance missions will revolutionize our knowledge of this 
place. 

Through a break in the clouds of Titan, you might glimpse 
Saturn and its rings, their pale yellow color diffused by the inter¬ 
vening atmosphere. Because the Saturn system is ten times far¬ 
ther from the Sun than is the Earth, the sunshine on Titan is only 
1 percent as intense as we are accustomed to, and the tempera¬ 
tures should be far below the freezing point of water even with a 
sizable atmospheric greenhouse effect. But with abundant or¬ 
ganic matter, sunlight and perhaps volcanic hot spots, the possi¬ 
bility of life on Titan* cannot be readily dismissed. In that very 
different environment, it would, of course, have to be very dif¬ 
ferent from life on Earth. There is no strong evidence either for 
or against life on Titan. It is merely possible. We are unlikely to 
determine the answer to this question without landing instru¬ 
mented space vehicles on the Titanian surface. 

To examine the individual particles composing the rings of 
Saturn, we must approach them closely, for the particles are 
small—snowballs and ice chips and tiny tumbling bonsai glaciers, 
a meter or so across. We know they are composed of water ice, 
because the spectral properties of sunlight reflected off the rings 
match those of ice in the laboratory measurements. To approach 
the particles in a space vehicle, we must slow down, so that we 
move along with them as they circle Saturn at some 45,000 miles 
per hour; that is, we must be in orbit around Saturn ourselves, 
moving at the same speed as the particles. Only then will we be 
able to see them individually and not as smears or streaks. 

* The view of Huygens, who discovered Titan in 1655, was: “Now can 
any one look upon, and compare these Systems [of Jupiter and Saturn] 
together, without being amazed at the vast Magnitude and noble At¬ 
tendants of these two Planets, in respect of this little pitiful Earth of ours? 
Or can they force themselves to think, that the wise Creator has dis¬ 
posed of all his Animals and Plants here, has furnished and adorn’d this 
Spot only, and has left all those Worlds bare and destitute of Inhabi¬ 
tants, who might adore and worship Him; or that all those prodigious 
Bodies were made only to twinkle to, and be studied by some few 
perhaps of us poor Fellows?” Since Saturn moves around the Sun once 
every thirty years, the length of the seasons on Saturn and its moons is 
much longer than on Earth. Of the presumed inhabitants of the moons 
of Saturn, Huygens therefore wrote: “It is impossible but that their way 
of living must be very different from ours, having such tedious Winters.” 


Travelers’ Tales - 163 





Pioneer 11 image of Saturn and its rings 
obtained from a range of 2.5 million kilo¬ 
meters on August 29,1979, after a voyage 
of more than five years. Courtesy NASA. 



Computer graphics of Saturn in three dif¬ 
ferent orientations to our line of sight, 
ranging from the rings almost edge-on (top) 
to the rings almost face-on (bottom), a view 
never obtained from Earth. The principal 
break in the rings is the Cassini Division; 
stars can be seen through it, but it is not 
devoid of ring particles. For this reason, a 
plan to thread Pioneer 11 through the 
Cassini Division was abandoned. The 
precise number, position and opacity of 
other breaks in the rings is still under de¬ 
termination. Courtesy J. Blinn and C. 
Kohlhase, Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 






164 - Cosmos 



The maps of new worlds. At top, U.S. Geological Survey cartography of Io, based on Voyager 1 and 2 data. Features 
named Ra, Loki, Maui and Prometheus, shown in previous Voyager images in this chapter, are indicated. At bottom, 
the first map to show the Americas, as compiled in the year 1500 by Juan de la Cosa, an officer who served under 
Columbus. Courtesy American Geographical Society Collection of the University of Wisconsin—Milwaukee. 

































Travelers’ Tales — 165 


Why is there not a single large satellite instead of a ring system 
around Saturn? The closer a ring particle is to Saturn, the faster 
its orbital speed (the faster it is “falling” around the planet— 
Kepler’s third law); the inner particles are streaming past the outer 
ones (the “passing lane” as we see it is always to the left). Ah 
though the whole assemblage is tearing around the planet itself at 
some 20 kilometers per second, the relative speed of two adjacent 
particles is very low, only some few centimeters per minute. 
Because of this relative motion, the particles can never stick 
together by their mutual gravity. As soon as they try, their 
slightly different orbital speeds pull them apart. If the rings were 
not so close to Saturn, this effect would not be so strong, and the 
particles could accrete, making small snowballs and eventually 
growing into satellites. So it is probably no coincidence that 
outside the rings of Saturn there is a system of satellites varying in 
size from a few hundred kilometers across to Titan, a giant moon 
nearly as large as the planet Mars. The matter in all the satellites 
and the planets themselves may have been originally distributed 
in the form of rings, which condensed and accumulated to form 
the present moons and planets. 

For Saturn as for Jupiter, the magnetic field captures and ac- 
celerates the charged particles of the solar wind. When a charged 
particle bounces from one magnetic pole to the other, it must 
cross the equatorial plane of Saturn. If there is a ring particle in 
the way, the proton or electron is absorbed by this small snow' 
ball. As a result, for both planets, the rings clear out the radiation 
belts, which exist only interior and exterior to the particle rings. 
A close moon of Jupiter or Saturn will likewise gobble up radia- 
tion belt particles, and in fact one of the new moons of Saturn 
was discovered in just this way: Pioneer 11 found an unexpected 
gap in the radiation belts, caused by the sweeping up of charged 
particles by a previously unknown moon. 

The solar wind trickles into the outer solar system far beyond 
the orbit of Saturn. When Voyager reaches Uranus and the 
orbits of Neptune and Pluto, if the instruments are still function^ 
ing, they will almost certainly sense its presence, the wind be- 
tween the worlds, the top of the Sun’s atmosphere blown 
outward toward the realm of the stars. Some two or three times 
farther from the Sun than Pluto is, the pressure of the interstellar 
protons and electrons becomes greater than the minuscule pres- 
sure there exerted by the solar wind. That place, called the 
heliopause, is one definition of the outer boundary of the Empire 
of the Sun. But the Voyager spacecraft will plunge on, penetrat¬ 
ing the heliopause sometime in the middle of the twenty-first 
century, skimming through the ocean of space, never to enter 
another solar system, destined to wander through eternity far 
from the stellar islands and to complete its first circumnavigation 
of the massive center of the Milky Way a few hundred million 
years from now. We have embarked on epic voyages. 




The Backbone of Night. A painting by Jon Lomberg depicting a metaphor about the nature of the Milky Way told by 
the !Kung people of the Republic of Botswana. 



ChpterVn 

THE IACKIONE OF 

NIGHT 


They came to a round hole in the sky . * . glowing like fire. This, the Raven 
said, was a star. 

—Eskimo creation myth 

I would rather understand one cause than be King of Persia. 

—Democritus of Abdera 

But Aristarchus of Samos brought out a book consisting of some hypothec 
ses, in which the premises lead to the result that the universe is many times 
greater than that now so called. His hypotheses are that the fixed stars and 
the Sun remain unmoved, that the Earth revolves about the Sun in the 
circumference of a circle, the Sun lying in the middle of the orbit, and that 
the sphere of the fixed stars, situated about the same center as the Sun, is so 
great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a 
proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the center of the sphere bears 
to its surface. 

—Archimedes, The Sand Reckoner 

If a faithful account was rendered of Man’s ideas upon Divinity, he would 
be obliged to acknowledge, that for the most part the word “gods” has been 
used to express the concealed, remote, unknown causes of the effects he 
witnessed; that he applies this term when the spring of the natural, the 
source of known causes, ceases to be visible: as soon as he loses the thread of 
these causes, or as soon as his mind can no longer follow the chain, he 
solves the difficulty, terminates his research, by ascribing it to his gods . . . 
When, therefore, he ascribes to his gods the production of some phenome¬ 
non . . . does he, in fact, do any thing more than substitute for the darkness 
of his own mind, a sound to which he has been accustomed to listen with 
reverential awe? 

—Paul Heinrich Dietrich, Baron von Holbach, Systeme de la Nature , 

London, 1770 






168 - Cosmos 


WHEN I WAS LITTLE, I lived in the Bensonhurst section of 
Brooklyn in the City of New York. I knew my immediate neigh- 
borhood intimately, every apartment building, pigeon coop, 
backyard, front stoop, empty lot, elm tree, ornamental railing, 
coal chute and wall for playing Chinese handball, among which 
the brick exterior of a theater called the Loew’s Stillwell was of 
superior quality. 1 knew where many people lived: Bruno and 
Dino, Ronald and Harvey, Sandy, Bernie, Danny, Jackie and 
Myra. But more than a few blocks away, north of the raucous 
automobile traffic and elevated railway on 86th Street, was a 
strange unknown territory, offdimits to my wanderings. It could 
have been Mars for all I knew. 

Even with an early bedtime, in winter you could sometimes 
see the stars. I would look at them, twinkling and remote, and 
wonder what they were. I would ask older children and adults, 
who would only reply, “They’re lights in the sky, kid.” I could see 
they were lights in the sky. But what were they? Just small how 
ering lamps? Whatever for? I felt a kind of sorrow for them: a 
commonplace whose strangeness remained somehow hidden 
from my incurious fellows. There had to be some deeper answer. 

As soon as I was old enough, my parents gave me my first 
library card. I think the library was on 85th Street, an alien land. 
Immediately, I asked the librarian for something on stars. She 
returned with a picture book displaying portraits of men and 
women with names like Clark Gable and Jean Harlow. I com¬ 
plained, and for some reason then obscure to me, she smiled and 
found another book—the right kind of book. I opened it breath¬ 
lessly and read until I found it. The book said something aston¬ 
ishing, a very big thought. It said that the stars were suns, only 
very far away. The Sun was a star, but close up. 

Imagine that you took the Sun and moved it so far away that it 
was just a tiny twinkling point of light. How far away would you 
have to move it? I was innocent of the notion of angular size. I 
was ignorant of the inverse square law for light propagation. I 
had not a ghost of a chance of calculating the distance to the 
stars. But I could tell that if the stars were suns, they had to be 
very far away—farther away than 85th Street, farther away than 
Manhattan, farther away, probably, than New Jersey. The 
Cosmos was much bigger than I had guessed. 

Later I read another astonishing fact. The Earth, which in¬ 
cludes Brooklyn, is a planet, and it goes around the Sun. There 
are other planets. They also go around the Sun; some are closer 
to it and some are farther away. But the planets do not shine by 
their own light, as the Sun does. They merely reflect light from 
the Sun. If you were a great distance away, you would not see the 
Earth and the other planets at all; they would be only faint 
luminous points, lost in the glare of the Sun. Well, then, I 
thought, it stood to reason that the other stars must have planets 
too, ones we have not yet detected, and some of those other 



The Backbone of Night - 169 


planets should have life (why not?), a kind of life probably dif¬ 
ferent from life as we know it, life in Brooklyn. So I decided I 
would be an astronomer, learn about the stars and planets and, if 
I could, go and visit them. 

It has been my immense good fortune to have parents and 
some teachers who encouraged this odd ambition and to live in 
this time, the first moment in human history when we are, in fact, 
visiting other worlds and engaging in a deep reconnaissance of 
the Cosmos. If I had been born in a much earlier age, no matter 
how great my dedication, I would not have understood what the 
stars and planets are. I would not have known that there were 
other suns and other worlds. This is one of the great secrets, 
wrested from Nature through a million years of patient observa¬ 
tion and courageous thinking by our ancestors. 

What are the stars? Such questions are as natural as an infant’s 
smile. We have always asked them. What is different about our 
time is that at last we know some of the answers. Books and 
libraries provide a ready means for finding out what those an¬ 
swers are. In biology there is a principle of powerful if imperfect 
applicability called recapitulation: in our individual embryonic 
development we retrace the evolutionary history of the species. 
There is, I think, a kind of recapitulation that occurs in our 
individual intellectual developments as well. We unconsciously 
retrace the thoughts of our remote ancestors. Imagine a time 
before science, a time before libraries. Imagine a time hundreds 
of thousands of years ago. We were then just about as smart, just 
as curious, just as involved in things social and sexual. But the 
experiments had not yet been done, the inventions had not yet 
been made. It was the childhood of genus Homo. Imagine the 
time when fire was first discovered. What were human lives like 
then? What did our ancestors believe the stars were? Sometimes, 
in my fantasies, I imagine there was someone who thought like 
this: 

We eat berries and roots. Nuts and leaves. And dead animals. 
Some animals <we find. Some we kill. We know which foods are 

good and which are dangerous. If we taste some foods we are struck 
down, in punishment for eating them. We did not mean to do 

something bad. But foxglove or hemlock can kill you. We love our 

children and our friends. We warn them of such foods. 

When we hunt animals, then also can we be killed. We can be 
gored. Or trampled. Or eaten. What animals do means life and 
death for us: how they behave, what tracks they leave, their times for 
mating and giving birth, their times for wandering. We must know 
these things. We tell our children. They will tell their children. 

We depend on animals. We follow them-especially in winter 
when there are few plants to eat. We are wandering hunters and 

gatherers. We call ourselves the hunterfolk. 

Most of us fall asleep under the sky or under a tree or in its 
branches. We use animal skins for clothing: to keep us warm, to 



170 - Cosmos 


cover our nakedness and sometimes as a hammock. When we wear 
the animal skins we feel the animal’s power. We leap with the 
gazelle. We hunt with the bear. There is a bond between us and the 
animals. We hunt and eat the animals. They hunt and eat us. We 
are part of one another. 

We make tools and stay alive. Some of us are experts at splitting; 
flaking, sharpening and polishing, as well as finding, rocks. Some 
rocks we tie with animal sinew to a wooden handle and make an ax. 
With the ax we strike plants and animals. Other rocks are tied to 
long sticks. If we are quiet and watchful, we can sometimes come 
close to an animal and stick it with the spear. 

Meat spoils. Sometimes we are hungry and try not to notice. 

Sometimes we mix herbs with the bad meat to hide the taste. We 
fold foods that will not spoil into pieces of animal skin. Or big 
leaves. Or the shell of a large nut. It is wise to put food aside and 
carry it. If we eat this food too early, some of us will starve later. So 
we must help one another. For this and many other reasons we have 
rides. Everyone must obey the rules. We have always had rules. 

Rules are sacred. 

One day there was a storm, with much lightning and thunder and 
rain. The little ones are afraid of storms. And sometimes so am I. 

The secret of the storm is hidden. The thunder is deep and loud; the 
lightning is brief and bright. Maybe someone very powerful is very 
angry. It must be someone in the sky, I think. 

After the storm there was a flickering and crackling in the forest 
nearby. We went to see. There was a bright, hot, leaping thing, 
yellow and red. We had never seen such a thing before. We now call 
it “flame.” It has a special smell. In a way it is alive. It eats food. It 
eats plants and tree limbs and even whole trees, if you let it. It is 
strong. But it is not very smart. If all the food is gone, it dies. It will 
not walk a spear’s throw from one tree to another if there is no food 
along the way. It cannot walk without eating. But where there is 

much food, it grows and makes many flame children. 

One of us had a brave and fearful thought: to capture the flame, 
feed it a little, and make it our friend. We found some long branches 
of hard wood. The flame was eating them, but slowly. We could 
pick them up by the end that had no flame. If you run fast with a 
small flame, it dies. Their children are weak. We did not run. We 
walked, shouting good wishes. “Do not die,” we said to the flame. 
The other hunterfolk looked with wide eyes. 

Ever after, we have carried it with us. We have a flame mother 
to feed the flame slowly so it does not die of hunger.* Flame is a 

* This sense of fire as a living thing, to be protected and cared for, should 
not be dismissed as a “primitive” notion. It is to be found near the root of 
many modern civilizations. Every home in ancient Greece and Rome 
and among the Brahmans of ancient India had a hearth and a set of 
prescribed rules for caring for the flame. At night the coals were covered 
with ashes for insulation; in the morning twigs were added to revive the 
flame. The death of the flame in the hearth was considered synonymous 



The Backbone of Night -171 


wonder, and useful too; surely a gift from powerful beings. Are they 
the same as the angry beings in the storm? 

The flame keeps us warm on cold nights. It gives us light. It makes 
holes in the darkness when the Moon is new. We can fix spears at 
night for tomorrow’s hunt. And if we are not tired, even in the 
darkness we can see each other and talk. Also-a good thingl-fire 

keeps animals away. We can be hurt at night. Sometimes we have 
been eaten, even by small animals, hyenas and wolves. Now it is 
different. Now the flame keeps the animals back. We see them 
baying softly in the dark, prowling, their eyes glowing in the light of 
the flame. They are frightened of the flame. But we are not fright- 

ened. The flame is ours. We take care of the flame. The flame takes 

care of us. 

The sky is important. It covers us. It speaks to us. Before the time 
we found the flame, we would lie back in the dark and look up at all 
the points of light. Some points would come together to make a 
picture in the sky. One of us could see the pictures better than the 
rest. She taught us the star pictures and what names to call them. 
We would sit around late at night and make up stories about the 
pictures in the sky: lions, dogs, bears, hunterfolk. Other, stranger 

things. Could they be the pictures of the powerful beings in the sky, 
the ones who make the storms when angry? 

Mostly, the sky does not change. The same star pictures are there 
year after year. The Moon grows from nothing to a thin sliver to a 

round ball, and then back again to nothing. When the Moon 
changes, the women bleed. Some tribes have rules against sex at 

certain times in the growing and shrinking of the Moon. Some tribes 

scratch the days of the Moon or the days that the women bleed on 

antler bones. Then they can plan ahead and obey their rules. Rules 
are sacred. 

The stars are very far away. When we climb a hill or a tree they 
are no closer. And clouds come between us and the stars: the stars 
must be behind the clouds. The Moon, as it slowly moves, passes in 
front of stars. Later you can see that the stars are not harmed. The 
Moon does not eat stars. The stars must be behind the Moon. They 
flicker. A strange, cold, white, faraway light. Many of them. All 
over the sky. But only at night. I wonder what they are. 

After we found the flame, 1 was sitting near the campfire won¬ 
dering about the stars. Slowly a thought came: The stars are flame, I 
thought. Then I had another thought: The stars are campfires that 
other hunterfolk light at night. The stars give a smaller light than 
campfires. So the stars must be campfires very far away. “But,” they 
ask me, “how can there be campfires in the sky? Why do the camp¬ 
fires and the hunter people around those flames not fall down at our 

with the death of the family. In all three cultures, the hearth ritual was 
connected with the worship of ancestors. This is the origin of the eternal 
flame, a symbol still widely employed in religious, memorial, political and 
athletic ceremonials throughout the world. 



172 - Cosmos 


feet ? Why don’t strange tribes drop from the sky?” 

Those are good questions. They trouble me. Sometimes I think the 

sky is half of a big eggshell or a big nutshell. I think the people 
around those faraway campfires look down at us-except for them it 
seems up-and say that we are in their sky, and wonder why we do 
not fall up to them, if you see what I mean. But hunterfolk say, 
“Down is down and up is up. ” That is a good answer, too. 

There is another thought that one of us had. His thought is that 
night is a great black animal skin, thrown up over the sky. There are 
holes in the skin. We look through the holes. And we see flame. His 
thought is not just that there is flame in a few places where we see 
stars. He thinks there is flame everywhere. He thinks flame covers 
the whole sky. But the skin hides the flame. Except where there are 

holes. 

Some stars wander. Like the animals we hunt. Like us. If you 

watch with care over many months, you find they move. There are 

only five of them, like the fingers on a hand. They wander slowly 
among the stars. If the campfire thought is true, those stars must be 
tribes of wandering hunterfolk, carrying big fires. But I don’t see how 
wandering stars can be holes in a skin. When you make a hole, there 
it is. A hole is a hole. Holes do not wander. Also, I don’t want to be 
surrounded by a sky of flame. If the skin fell, the night sky would be 
bright-too bright-like seeing flame everywhere. I think a sky of 
flame would eat us all. Maybe there are two kinds of powerful 
beings in the sky. Bad ones, who wish the flame to eat us. And good 
ones who put up the skin to keep the flame away. We must find 
some way to thank the good ones. 

I don’t know if the stars are campfires in the sky. Or holes in a 
skin through which the flame of power looks down on us. Sometimes 
I think one way. Sometimes I think a different way. Once I thought 
there are no campfires and no holes but something else, too hard for 
me to understand. 

Rest your neck on a log. Your head goes back. Then you can see 
only the sky. No hills, no trees, no hunterfolk, no campfire. Just sky. 
Sometimes I feel I may fall up into the sky. If the stars are campfires, 

I would like to visit those other hunterfolk-the ones who wander. 
Then I feel good about falling up. But if the stars are holes in a skin, 

I become afraid. I don’t want to fall up through a hole and into the 
flame of power. 

1 wish I knew which was true. I don’t like not knowing. 

I do not imagine that many members of a hunter/gatherer 
group had thoughts like these about the stars. Perhaps, over the 
ages, a few did, but never all these thoughts in the same person. 
Yet, sophisticated ideas are common in such communities. For 
example, the !Kung* Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert in Bots^ 
wana have an explanation for the Milky Way, which at their 


* The exclamation point is a click, made by touching the tongue against 
the inside of the incisors, and simultaneously pronouncing the K. 



The Backbone of Night - 173 



A reconstruction of the Temple of Hera 
on the Greek island of Samos. The largest 
temple of its time, it was 120 meters long. 
Construction began in 530 B.C. and com 
tinued until the third century B.C. From 
Der Heratempel von Samos by Oscar 
Reuther (1957). 


latitude is often overhead. They call it “the backbone of night,” 
as if the sky were some great beast inside which we live. Their 
explanation makes the Milky Way useful as well as understand¬ 
able. The !Kung believe the Milky Way holds up the night; that 
if it were not for the Milky Way, fragments of darkness would 
come crashing down at our feet. It is an elegant idea. 

Metaphors like those about celestial campfires or galactic 
backbones were eventually replaced in most human cultures by 
another idea: The powerful beings in the sky were promoted to 
gods. They were given names and relatives, and special respon¬ 
sibilities for the cosmic services they were expected to perform. 
There was a god or goddess for every human concern. Gods ran 
Nature. Nothing could happen without their direct intervention. 
If they were happy, there was plenty of food, and humans were 
happy. But if something displeased the gods—and sometimes it 
took very little—the consequences were awesome: droughts, 
storms, wars, earthquakes, volcanoes, epidemics. The gods had 
to be propitiated, and a vast industry of priests and oracles arose 
to make the gods less angry. But because the gods were capri¬ 
cious, you could not be sure what they would do. Nature was a 
mystery. It was hard to understand the world. 

Little remains of the Heraion on the Aegean isle of Samos, one 
of the wonders of the ancient world, a great temple dedicated to 
Hera, who began her career as goddess of the sky. She was the 
patron deity of Samos, playing the same role there as Athena did 
in Athens. Much later she married Zeus, the chief of the Olym¬ 
pian gods. They honeymooned on Samos, the old stories tell us. 
The Greek religion explained that diffuse band of light in the 
night sky as the milk of Hera, squirted from her breast across the 
heavens, a legend that is the origin of the phrase Westerners still 
use—the Milky Way. Perhaps it originally represented the im¬ 
portant insight that the sky nurtures the Earth; if so, that meaning 
seems to have been forgotten millennia ago. 

We are, almost all of us, descended from people who re¬ 
sponded to the dangers of existence by inventing stories about 
unpredictable or disgruntled deities. For a long time the human 



The only surviving column from the 
Temple of Hera on Samos. 


BILL RAY 



























174 - Cosmos 



Black Sea 


ITALY 


ASIA MINOR 


Croton 


(Pythagoras, late)* Cl hcb< 


SICILY 


Agrigentun 

(Empedocles) 


^7 

CYPRUS JC 


•) Syracuse 
( Archimedes) 


Mediterranean Sea 


Alexandria^" 


AFRICA 


EGYPT 


A map of the eastern Mediterranean in instinct to understand was thwarted by facile religious explana- 
classical times, showing the cities associ- nons> as in ancient Greece in the time of Homer, where there 

ated with the great ancient scientists. 1 . t 1 

were gods or the sky and the Earth, the thunderstorm, the oceans 

and the underworld, fire and time and love and war; where every 

tree and meadow had its dryad and maenad. 

For thousands of years humans were oppressed—as some of us 
still are—by the notion that the universe is a marionette whose 
strings are pulled by a god or gods, unseen and inscrutable. Then, 
2,500 years ago, there was a glorious awakening in Ionia: on 
Samos and the other nearby Greek colonies that grew up among 
the islands and inlets of the busy eastern Aegean Sea.* Suddenly 
there were people who believed that everything was made of 
atoms; that human beings and other animals had sprung from 
simpler forms; that diseases were not caused by demons or the 
gods; that the Earth was only a planet going around the Sun. And 


that the stars were very far away. 


* As an aid to confusion, Ionia is not in the Ionian Sea; it was named by 
colonists from the coast of the Ionian Sea. 




The Backbone of Night — 175 


This revolution made Cosmos out of Chaos. The early Greeks 
had believed that the first being was Chaos, corresponding to the 
phrase in Genesis in the same context, “without form.” Chaos 
created and then mated with a goddess called Night, and their 
offspring eventually produced all the gods and men. A universe 
created from Chaos was in perfect keeping with the Greek belief 
in an unpredictable Nature run by capricious gods. But in the 
sixth century B.C., in Ionia, a new concept developed, one of the 
great ideas of the human species. The universe is knowable, the 
ancient Ionians argued, because it exhibits an internal order: 
there are regularities in Nature that permit its secrets to be un- 
covered. Nature is not entirely unpredictable; there are rules 
even she must obey. This ordered and admirable character of the 
universe was called Cosmos. 

But why Ionia, why in these unassuming and pastoral land¬ 
scapes, these remote islands and inlets of the Eastern Mediterra¬ 
nean? Why not in the great cities of India or Egypt, Babylonia, 
China or Mesoamerica? China had an astronomical tradition 
millennia old; it invented paper and printing, rockets, clocks, silk, 
porcelain, and ocean-going navies. Some historians argue it was 
nevertheless too traditionalist a society, too unwilling to adopt 
innovations. Why not India, an extremely rich, mathematically 
gifted culture? Because, some historians maintain, of a rigid fasci¬ 
nation with the idea of an infinitely old universe condemned to 
an endless cycle of deaths and rebirths, of souls and universes, in 
which nothing fundamentally new could ever happen. Why not 
Mayan and Aztec societies, which were accomplished in astron¬ 
omy and captivated, as the Indians were, by large numbers? 
Because, some historians declare, they lacked the aptitude or 
impetus for mechanical invention. The Mayans and the Aztecs 
did not even—except for children’s toys—invent the wheel. 

The Ionians had several advantages. Ionia is an island realm. 
Isolation, even if incomplete, breeds diversity. With many dif¬ 
ferent islands, there was a variety of political systems. No single 
concentration of power could enforce social and intellectual con¬ 
formity in all the islands. Free inquiry became possible. The 
promotion of superstition was not considered a political neces¬ 
sity. Unlike many other cultures, the Ionians were at the 
crossroads of civilizations, not at one of the centers. In Ionia, the 
Phoenician alphabet was first adapted to Greek usage and wide¬ 
spread literacy became possible. Writing was no longer a mo¬ 
nopoly of the priests and scribes. The thoughts of many were 
available for consideration and debate. Political power was in the 
hands of the merchants, who actively promoted the technology 
on which their prosperity depended. It was in the Eastern Medi¬ 
terranean that African, Asian, and European civilizations, in¬ 
cluding the great cultures of Egypt and Mesopotamia, met and 
cross-fertilized in a vigorous and heady confrontation of preju¬ 
dices, languages, ideas and gods. What do you do when you are 



176 — Cosmos 



A doorknob in the shape of a hand in the 
square of the town of Mili, on contempo¬ 
rary Samos. Respect for manual labor was 
one of the keys to the Ionian Awakening, 
centered around Samos, in the sixth 
through fourth centuries B.C. Photo by 
Ann Druyan. 


faced with several different gods each claiming the same terri¬ 
tory? The Babylonian Marduk and the Greek Zeus was each 
considered master of the sky and king of the gods. You might 
decide that Marduk and Zeus were really the same. You might 
also decide, since they had quite different attributes, that one of 
them was merely invented by the priests. But if one, why not 
both? 

And so it was that the great idea arose, the realization that 
there might be a way to know the world without the god hy¬ 
pothesis; that there might be principles, forces, laws of nature, 
through which the world could be understood without attribut¬ 
ing the fall of every sparrow to the direct intervention of Zeus. 

China and India and Mesoamerica would, I think, have tum¬ 
bled to science too, if only they had been given a little more time. 
Cultures do not develop with identical rhythms or evolve in 
lockstep. They arise at different times and progress at different 
rates. The scientific world view works so well, explains so much 
and resonates so harmoniously with the most advanced parts of 
our brains that in time, I think, virtually every culture on the 
Earth, left to its own devices, would have discovered science. 
Some culture had to be first. As it turned out, Ionia was the place 
where science was born. 

Between 600 and 400 B.C., this great revolution in human 
thought began. The key to the revolution was the hand. Some of 
the brilliant Ionian thinkers were the sons of sailors and farmers 
and weavers. They were accustomed to poking and fixing, unlike 
the priests and scribes of other nations, who, raised in luxury, 
were reluctant to dirty their hands. They rejected superstition, 
and they worked wonders. In many cases we have only fragmen¬ 
tary or secondhand accounts of what happened. The metaphors 
used then may be obscure to us now. There was almost certainly 
a conscious effort a few centuries later to suppress the new in¬ 
sights. The leading figures in this revolution were men with 
Greek names, largely unfamiliar to us today, but the truest pio¬ 
neers in the development of our civilization and our humanity. 

The first Ionian scientist was Thales of Miletus, a city in Asia 
across a narrow channel of water from the island of Samos. He 
had traveled in Egypt and was conversant with the knowledge of 
Babylon. It is said that he predicted a solar eclipse. He learned 
how to measure the height of a pyramid from the length of its 
shadow and the angle of the Sun above the horizon, a method 
employed today to determine the heights of the mountains of the 
Moon. He was the first to prove geometric theorems of the sort 
codified by Euclid three centuries later—for example, the propo¬ 
sition that the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are equal. 
There is a clear continuity of intellectual effort from Thales to 
Euclid to Isaac Newton’s purchase of the Elements of Geometry at 
Stourbridge Fair in 1663 (p. 68), the event that precipitated 
modern science and technology. 









The Backbone of Night - 177 


Thales attempted to understand the world without invoking 
the intervention of the gods. Like the Babylonians, he believed 
the world to have once been water. To explain the dry land, the 
Babylonians added that Marduk had placed a mat on the face of 
the waters and piled dirt upon it.* Thales held a similar view, 
but, as Benjamin Farrington said, “left Marduk out.” Yes, every- 
thing was once water, but the Earth formed out of the oceans by 
a natural process—similar, he thought, to the silting he had ot> 
served at the delta of the Nile. Indeed, he thought that water was 
a common principle underlying all of matter, just as today we 
might say the same of electrons, protons and neutrons, or of 
quarks. Whether Thales’ conclusion was correct is not as impor- 
tant as his approach: The world was not made by the gods, but 
instead was the work of material forces interacting in Nature. 
Thales brought back from Babylon and Egypt the seeds of the 
new sciences of astronomy and geometry, sciences that would 
sprout and grow in the fertile soil of Ionia. 

Very little is known about the personal life of Thales, but one 
revealing anecdote is told by Aristotle in his Politics : 

[Thales] was reproached for his poverty, which was sup¬ 
posed to show that philosophy is of no use. According to 
the story, he knew by his skill [in interpreting the heavens] 
while it was yet winter that there would be a great harvest 
of olives in the coming year; so, having a little money, he 
gave deposits for the use of all the olive-presses in Chios 
and Miletus, which he hired at a low price because no one 
bid against him. When the harvest time came, and many 
were wanted all at once, he let them out at any rate which 
he pleased and made a quantity of money. Thus he showed 
the world philosophers can easily be rich if they like, but 
that their ambition is of another sort. 

He was also famous as a political sage, successfully urging the 
Milesians to resist assimilation by Croesus, King of Lydia, and 
unsuccessfully urging a federation of all the island states of Ionia 
to oppose the Lydians. 

Anaximander of Miletus was a friend and colleague of Thales, 
one of the first people we know of to do an experiment. By 
examining the moving shadow cast by a vertical stick he deter¬ 
mined accurately the length of the year and the seasons. For ages 

* There is some evidence that the antecedent, early Sumerian creation 
myths were largely naturalistic explanations, later codified around 1000 
B.C. in the Enuma elish (“When on high,” the first words of the poem); 
but by then the gods had replaced Nature, and the myth offers a theog- 
ony, not a cosmogony. The Enuma elish is reminiscent of the Japanese 
and Ainu myths in which an originally muddy cosmos is beaten by the 
wings of a bird, separating the land from the water. A Fijian creation 
myth says: “Rokomautu created the land. He scooped it up out of the 
bottom of the ocean in great handfuls and accumulated it in piles here 
and there. These are the Fiji Islands.” The distillation of land from water 
is a natural enough idea for island and seafaring peoples. 



178 - Cosmos 



The tunnel of Eupalinos, piercing Mount 
Ampelus on Samos. It is mentioned by 
Herodotus as one of the three great 
achievements of Greek engineering (the 
other two, the Temple of Hera and the 
mole at what is now the harbor of Pytha- 
gorion, were also constructed on the is' 
land of Samos). Completed by the slaves 
of Poly crates, around 525 B.C. 


men had used sticks to club and spear one another. Anaximander 
used one to measure time. He was the first person in Greece to 
make a sundial, a map of the known world and a celestial globe 
that showed the patterns of the constellations. He believed the 
Sun, the Moon and the stars to be made of fire seen through 
moving holes in the dome of the sky, probably a much older 
idea. He held the remarkable view that the Earth is not sus^ 
pended or supported from the heavens, but that it remains by 
itself at the center of the universe; since it was equidistant from 
all places on the “celestial sphere,” there was no force that could 
move it. 

He argued that we are so helpless at birth that, if the first 
human infants had been put into the world on their own, they 
would immediately have died. From this Anaximander com 
eluded that human beings arose from other animals with more 
selbreliant newborns: He proposed the spontaneous origin of life 
in mud, the first animals being fish covered with spines. Some 
descendants of these fishes eventually abandoned the water and 
moved to dry land, where they evolved into other animals by the 
transmutation of one form into another. He believed in an infk 
nite number of worlds, all inhabited, and all subject to cycles of 
dissolution and regeneration. “Nor,” as Saint Augustine ruefully 
complained, “did he, any more than Thales, attribute the cause 
of all this ceaseless activity to a divine mind.” 

In the year 540 B.C. or thereabouts, on the island of Samos, 
there came to power a tyrant named Poly crates. He seems to 
have started as a caterer and then gone on to international piracy. 
Polycrates was a generous patron of the arts, sciences and engk 
neering. But he oppressed his own people; he made war on his 
neighbors; he quite rightly feared invasion. So he surrounded his 
capital city with a massive wall, about six kilometers long, whose 
remains stand to this day. To carry water from a distant spring 
through the fortifications, he ordered a great tunnel built. A 
kilometer long, it pierces a mountain. Two cuttings were dug 
from either end which met almost perfectly in the middle. The 
project took about fifteen years to complete, a testament to the 
civil engineering of the day and an indication of the extraordb 
nary practical capability of the Ionians. But there is another and 
more ominous side to the enterprise: it was built in part by slaves 
in chains, many captured by the pirate ships of Poly crates. 

This was the time of Theodorus, the master engineer of the 
age, credited among the Greeks with the invention of the key, 
the ruler, the carpenter’s square, the level, the lathe, bronze 
casting and central heating. Why are there no monuments to this 
man? Those who dreamed and speculated about the laws of 
Nature talked with the technologists and the engineers. They 
were often the same people. The theoretical and the practical 
were one. 

About the same time, on the nearby island of Cos, Hippocrates 



The Backbone of Night - 179 


was establishing his famous medical tradition, now barely 
remembered because of the Hippocratic oath. It was a practical 
and effective school of medicine, which Hippocrates insisted had 
to be based on the contemporary equivalent of physics and 
chemistry.* But it also had its theoretical side. In his book On 
Ancient Medicine, Hippocrates wrote: “Men think epilepsy divine, 
merely because they do not understand it. But if they called 
everything divine which they do not understand, why, there 
would be no end of divine things.” 

In time, the Ionian influence and the experimental method 
spread to the mainland of Greece, to Italy, to Sicily. There was 
once a time when hardly anyone believed in air. They knew 
about breathing, of course, and they thought the wind was the 
breath of the gods. But the idea of air as a static, material but 
invisible substance was unimagined. The first recorded experiment 
on air was performed by a physician' 1 ' named Empedocles, who 
flourished around 450 B.C. Some accounts claim he identified 
himself as a god. But perhaps it was only that he was so clever 
that others thought him a god. He believed that light travels 
very fast, but not infinitely fast. He taught that there was once 
a much greater variety of living things on the Earth, but that 
many races of beings “must have been unable to beget and 
continue their kind. For in the case of every species that exists, 
either craft or courage or speed has from the beginning of its 
existence protected and preserved it.” In this attempt to explain 
the lovely adaptation of organisms to their environments, Em- 
pedocles, like Anaximander and Democritus (see below), clearly 
anticipated some aspects of Darwin’s great idea of evolution by 
natural selection. 

Empedocles performed his experiment with a household inv 
plement people had used for centuries, the so-called clepsydra or 
“water thief,” which was used as a kitchen ladle. A brazen sphere 
with an open neck and small holes in the bottom, it is filled by 
immersing it in water. If you pull it out with the neck uncovered, 
the water pours out of the holes, making a little shower. But it 
you pull it out properly, with your thumb covering the neck, the 
water is retained within the sphere until you lift your thumb. If 
you try to fill it with the neck covered, nothing happens. Some 
material substance must be in the way of the water. We cannot 
see such a substance. What could it be? Empedocles argued that it 
could only be air. A thing we cannot see can exert pressure, can 



A modern reconstruction of the clepsydra, 
or “water thief,” with which Empedocles 
deduced that air was composed of innu- 
merable fine particles. 


* And astrology, which was then widely regarded as a science. In a typical 
passage, Hippocrates writes: “One must also guard against the risings of 
the stars, especially of the Dog Star [Sirius], then of Arcturus, and also of 
the setting of the Pleiades.” 


t The experiment was performed in support of a totally erroneous the¬ 
ory of the circulation of the blood, but the idea of performing any 
experiment to probe Nature is the important innovation. 






180 - Cosmos 


frustrate my wish to fill a vessel with water if I were dumb 
enough to leave my finger on the neck. Empedocles had discow 
ered the invisible. Air, he thought, must be matter in a form so 
finely divided that it could not be seen. 

Empedocles is said to have died in an apotheotic fit by leaping 
into the hot lava at the summit caldera of the great volcano of 
Aetna. But I sometimes imagine that he merely slipped during a 
courageous and pioneering venture in observational geophysics. 

This hint, this whiff, of the existence of atoms was carried 
much further by a man named Democritus, who came from the 
Ionian colony of Abdera in northern Greece. Abdera was a kind 
of joke town. If in 430 B.C. you told a story about someone from 
Abdera, you were guaranteed a laugh. It was in a way the 
Brooklyn of its time. For Democritus all of life was to be enjoyed 
and understood; understanding and enjoyment were the same 
thing. He said that “a life without festivity is a long road without 
an inn.” Democritus may have come from Abdera, but he was no 
dummy. He believed that a large number of worlds had formed 
spontaneously out of diffuse matter in space, evolved and then 
decayed. At a time when no one knew about impact craters, 
Democritus thought that worlds on occasion collide; he believed 
that some worlds wandered alone through the darkness of space, 
while others were accompanied by several suns and moons; that 
some worlds were inhabited, while others had no plants or am 
imals or even water; that the simplest forms of life arose from a 
kind of primeval ooze. He taught that perception—the reason, 
say, I think there is a pen in my hand—was a purely physical and 
mechanistic process; that thinking and feeling were attributes of 
matter put together in a sufficiently fine and complex way and not 
due to some spirit infused into matter by the gods. 

Democritus invented the word atom , Greek for “unable to be 
cut.” Atoms were the ultimate particles, forever frustrating our 
attempts to break them into smaller pieces. Everything, he said, is 
a collection of atoms, intricately assembled. Even we. “Nothing 
exists,” he said, “but atoms and the void.” 

When we cut an apple, the knife must pass through empty 
spaces between the atoms, Democritus argued. If there were no 
such empty spaces, no void, the knife would encounter the iim 
penetrable atoms, and the apple could not be cut. Having cut a 
slice from a cone, say, let us compare the cross sections of the two 
pieces. Are the exposed areas equal? No, said Democritus. The 
slope of the cone forces one side of the slice to have a slightly 
smaller cross section than the other. If the two areas were exactly 
equal, we would have a cylinder, not a cone. No matter how 
sharp the knife, the two pieces have unequal cross sections. 
Why? Because, on the scale of the very small, matter exhibits 
some irreducible roughness. This fine scale of roughness Demo' 
critus identified with the world of the atoms. His arguments were 
not those we use today, but they were subtle and elegant, derived 



The Backbone of Night — 181 


from everyday life. And his conclusions were fundamentally 
correct. 

In a related exercise, Democritus imagined calculating the voh 
ume of a cone or a pyramid by a very large number of extremely 
small stacked plates tapering in size from the base to the apex. He 
had stated the problem that, in mathematics, is called the theory 
of limits. He was knocking at the door of the differential and 
integral calculus, that fundamental tool for understanding the 
world that was not, so far as we know from written records, in 
fact discovered until the time of Isaac Newton. Perhaps if De¬ 
mocritus ’ work had not been almost completely destroyed, there 
would have been calculus by the time of Christ.* 

Thomas Wright marveled in 1750 that Democritus had be¬ 
lieved the Milky Way to be composed mainly of unresolved 
stars: “long before astonomy reaped any benefit from the im¬ 
proved sciences of optics; [he] saw, as we may say, through the 
eye of reason, full as far into infinity as the most able astronomers 
in more advantageous times have done since.” Beyond the Milk 
of Hera, past the Backbone of Night, the mind of Democritus 
soared. 

As a person, Democritus seems to have been somewhat un¬ 
usual. Women, children and sex discomfited him, in part because 
they took time away from thinking. But he valued friendship, 
held cheerfulness to be the goal of life and devoted a major 
philosophical inquiry to the origin and nature of enthusiasm. He 
journeyed to Athens to visit Socrates and then found himself too 
shy to introduce himself. He was a close friend of Hippocrates. 
He was awed by the beauty and elegance of the physical world. 
He felt that poverty in a democracy was preferable to wealth in a 
tyranny. He believed that the prevailing religions of his time 
were evil and that neither immortal souls nor immortal gods 
exist: “Nothing exists, but atoms and the void.” 

There is no record of Democritus having been persecuted for 
his opinions—but then, he came from Abdera. However, in his 
time the brief tradition of tolerance for unconventional views 
began to erode and then to shatter. People came to be punished 
for having unusual ideas. A portrait of Democritus is now on the 
Greek hundred-drachma bill. But his insights were suppressed, 
his influence on history made minor. The mystics were beginning 
to win. 

Anaxagoras was an Ionian experimentalist who flourished 
around 450 B.C. and lived in Athens. He was a rich man, indif¬ 
ferent to his wealth but passionate about science. Asked what 
was the purpose of life, he replied, “the investigation of the Sun, 
the Moon, and the heavens,” the reply of a true astronomer. He 
performed a clever experiment in which a single drop of white 
liquid, like cream, was shown not to lighten perceptibly the 

* The frontiers of the calculus were also later breached by Eudoxus and 
Archimedes. 



182 - Cosmos 



A recent 100-drachma note from Greece, 
bearing a symbolic atom (lithium), a like¬ 
ness of Democritus, and a modern Greek 
nuclear research institute named after De¬ 
mocritus . 


contents of a great pitcher of dark liquid, like wine. There must, 
he concluded, be changes deductible by experiment that are too 
subtle to be perceived directly by the senses. 

Anaxagoras was not nearly so radical as Democritus. Both 
were thoroughgoing materialists, not in prizing possessions but in 
holding that matter alone provided the underpinnings of the 
world. Anaxagoras believed in a special mind substance and 
disbelieved in the existence of atoms. He thought humans were 
more intelligent than other animals because of our hands, a very 
Ionian idea. 

He was the first person to state clearly that the Moon shines by 
reflected light, and he accordingly devised a theory of the phases 
of the Moon. This doctrine was so dangerous that the manu¬ 
script describing it had to be circulated in secret, an Athenian 
samizdat It was not in keeping with the prejudices of the time to 
explain the phases or eclipses of the Moon by the relative geom¬ 
etry of the Earth, the Moon and the self-luminous Sun. Aristotle, 
two generations later, was content to argue that those things 
happened because it was the nature of the Moon to have phases 
and eclipses—mere verbal juggling, an explanation that explains 
nothing. 

The prevailing belief was that the Sun and Moon were gods. 
Anaxagoras held that the Sun and stars are fiery stones. We do 
not feel the heat of the stars because they are too far away. He 
also thought that the Moon has mountains (right) and inhabi¬ 
tants (wrong). He held that the Sun was so huge that it was 
probably larger than the Peloponnesus, roughly the southern 
third of Greece. His critics thought this estimate excessive and 
absurd. 

Anaxagoras was brought to Athens by Pericles, its leader in its 
time of greatest glory, but also the man whose actions led to the 
Peloponnesian War, which destroyed Athenian democracy. 
Pericles delighted in philosophy and science, and Anaxagoras 
was one of his principal confidants. There are those who think 
that in this role Anaxagoras contributed significantly to the 
greatness of Athens. But Pericles had political problems. He was 
too powerful to be attacked directly, so his enemies attacked 
those close to him. Anaxagoras was convicted and imprisoned 
for the religious crime of impiety—because he had taught that the 
Moon was made of ordinary matter, that it was a place, and that 
the Sun was a red-hot stone in the sky. Bishop John Wilkins 
commented in 1638 on these Athenians: “Those zealous idola¬ 
ters [counted] it a great blasphemy to make their God a stone, 
whereas notwithstanding they were so senseless in their adora¬ 
tion of idols as to make a stone their God.” Pericles seems to have 
engineered Anaxagoras’ release from prison, but it was too late. 
In Greece the tide was turning, although the Ionian tradition 
continued in Alexandrian Egypt two hundred years later. 

The great scientists from Thales to Democritus and Anaxagoras 





The Backbone of Night - 183 


have usually been described in history or philosophy books 
as “Presocratics,” as if their main function was to hold the philo- 
sophical fort until the advent of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
and perhaps influence them a little. Instead, the old Ionians rep- 
resent a different and largely contradictory tradition, one in much 
better accord with modern science. That their influence was felt 
powerfully for only two or three centuries is an irreparable loss 
for all those human beings who lived between the Ionian 
Awakening and the Italian Renaissance. 

Perhaps the most influential person ever associated with Samos 
was Pythagoras,* a contemporary of Poly crates in the sixth cen¬ 
tury B.C. According to local tradition, he lived for a time in 
a cave on the Samian Mount Kerkis, and was the first person in the 
history of the world to deduce that the Earth is a sphere. Perhaps 
he argued by analogy with the Moon and the Sun, or noticed the 
curved shadow of the Earth on the Moon during a lunar eclipse, 
or recognized that when ships leave Samos and recede over the 
horizon, their masts disappear last. 

He or his disciples discovered the Pythagorean theorem: the 
sum of the squares of the shorter sides of a right triangle equals 
the square of the longer side. Pythagoras did not simply enumerate 
examples of this theorem; he developed a method of mathe¬ 
matical deduction to prove the thing generally. The modern 
tradition of mathematical argument, essential to all of science, 
owes much to Pythagoras. It was he who first used the word 
Cosmos to denote a well-ordered and harmonious universe, a 
world amenable to human understanding. 

Many Ionians believed the underlying harmony of the uni¬ 
verse to be accessible through observation and experiment, the 
method that dominates science today. However, Pythagoras em¬ 
ployed a very different method. He taught that the laws of 
Nature could be deduced by pure thought. He and his followers 
were not fundamentally experimentalistsd They were mathema¬ 
ticians. And they were thoroughgoing mystics. According to 
Bertrand Russell, in a perhaps uncharitable passage, Pythagoras 



An ancient Samian coin from the third 
century A.D. with a representation of Py¬ 
thagoras and the Greek legend, “Pythag¬ 
oras of Samos.” Reproduced by courtesy 
of the Trustees of the British Museum. 


* The sixth century B.C. was a time of remarkable intellectual and spiri¬ 
tual ferment across the planet. Not only was it the time of Thales, 
Anaximander, Pythagoras and others in Ionia, hut also the time of the 
Egyptian Pharaoh Necho who caused Africa to be circumnavigated, of 
Zoroaster in Persia, Confucius and Lao-tse in China, the Jewish prophets 
in Israel, Egypt and Babylon, and Gautama Buddha in India. It is hard to 
think these activities altogether unrelated. 

t Although there were a few welcome exceptions. The Pythagorean 
fascination with whole-number ratios in musical harmonies seems clearly 
to be based on observation, or even experiment on the sounds issued 
from plucked strings. Empedocles was, at least in part, a Pythagorean. 
One of Pythagoras’ students, Alcmaeon, is the first person known to 
have dissected a human body; he distinguished between arteries and 
veins, was the first to discover the optic nerve and the eustachian tubes, 
and identified the brain as the seat of the intellect (a contention later 




BILL RAY 


184 - Cosmos 



The five perfect solids of Pythagoras and 
Plato, on a ledge outside the cave atop 
Mount Kerkis, on Samos, in which ac- 
cording to local tradition Pythagoras lived. 
The solids resting on the ledge are (left to 
right) the tetrahedron, the cube, the octa- 
hedron and the icosahedron. Atop the 
cube, representing earth, is the dodecahe¬ 
dron, mystically associated by the Py¬ 
thagoreans with the heavens. 


“founded a religion, of which the main tenets were the transmi¬ 
gration of souls and the sinfulness of eating beans. His religion 
was embodied in a religious order, which, here and there, ac¬ 
quired control of the State and established a rule of the saints. 
But the unregenerate hankered after beans, and sooner or later 
rebelled.” 

The Pythagoreans delighted in the certainty of mathematical 
demonstration, the sense of a pure and unsullied world accessible 
to the human intellect, a Cosmos in which the sides of right 
triangles perfectly obey simple mathematical relationships. It was 
in striking contrast to the messy reality of the workaday world. 
They believed that in their mathematics they had glimpsed a 
perfect reality, a realm of the gods, of which our familiar world is 
but an imperfect reflection. In Plato’s famous parable of the cave, 
prisoners were imagined tied in such a way that they saw only the 
shadows of passersby and believed the shadows to be real—never 
guessing the complex reality that was accessible if they would but 
turn their heads. The Pythagoreans would powerfully influence 
Plato and, later, Christianity. 

They did not advocate the free confrontation of conflicting 
points of view. Instead, like all orthodox religions, they practiced 
a rigidity that prevented them from correcting their errors. 
Cicero wrote: 

In discussion it is not so much weight of authority as force 
of argument that should be demanded. Indeed, the author¬ 
ity of those who profess to teach is often a positive hin¬ 
drance to those who desire to learn; they cease to employ 
their own judgment, and take what they perceive to be the 
verdict of their chosen master as settling the question. In 
fact I am not disposed to approve the practice traditionally 
ascribed to the Pythagoreans, who, when questioned as to 
the grounds of any assertion that they advanced in debate, 
are said to have been accustomed to reply “The Master said 
so,” “the Master” being Pythagoras. So potent was an opin¬ 
ion already decided, making authority prevail unsupported 
by reason. 


The Pythagoreans were fascinated by the regular solids, sym¬ 
metrical three-dimensional objects all of whose sides are the same 
regular polygon. The cube is the simplest example, having six 
squares as sides. There are an infinite number of regular poly¬ 
gons, but only five regular solids. (The proof of this statement, a 
famous example of mathematical reasoning, is given in Appendix 
2.) For some reason, knowledge of a solid called the dodecahe¬ 
dron having twelve pentagons as sides seemed to them danger¬ 
ous. It was mystically associated with the Cosmos. The other 

denied by Aristotle, who placed intelligence in the heart, and then 
revived by Herophilus of Chalcedon). He also founded the science of 
embryology. But Alcmaeon’s zest for the impure was not shared by most 
of his Pythagorean colleagues in later times. 





The Backbone of Night - 185 


four regular solids were identified, somehow, with the four “ele¬ 
ments” then imagined to constitute the world: earth, fire, air and 
water. The fifth regular solid must then, they thought, corre¬ 
spond to some fifth element that could only be the substance of 
the heavenly bodies. (This notion of a fifth essence is the origin 
of our word quintessence.) Ordinary people were to be kept igno¬ 
rant of the dodecahedron. 

In love with whole numbers, the Pythagoreans believed all 
things could be derived from them, certainly all other numbers. 
A crisis in doctrine arose when they discovered that the square 
root of two (the ratio of the diagonal to the side of a square) was 
irrational, that if2 cannot be expressed accurately as the ratio of 
any two whole numbers, no matter how big these numbers are. 
Ironically this discovery (reproduced in Appendix 1) was 
made with the Pythagorean theorem as a tool. “Irrational” origi¬ 
nally meant only that a number could not be expressed as a ratio. 
But for the Pythagoreans it came to mean something threatening, 
a hint that their world view might not make sense, which is 
today the other meaning of “irrational.” Instead of sharing these 
important mathematical discoveries, the Pythagoreans sup¬ 
pressed knowledge of V~2 and the dodecahedron. The outside 
world was not to know.* Even today there are scientists opposed 
to the popularization of science: the sacred knowledge is to be 
kept within the cult, unsullied by public understanding. 

The Pythagoreans believed the sphere to be “perfect,” all 
points on its surface being at the same distance from its center. 
Circles were also perfect. And the Pythagoreans insisted that 
planets moved in circular paths at constant speeds. They seemed 
to believe that moving slower or faster at different places in the 
orbit would be unseemly; noncircular motion was somehow 
flawed, unsuitable for the planets, which, being free of the Earth, 
were also deemed “perfect.” 

The pros and cons of the Pythagorean tradition can be seen 
clearly in the life’s work of Johannes Kepler (Chapter 3). The 
Pythagorean idea of a perfect and mystical world, unseen by the 
senses, was readily accepted by the early Christians and was an 
integral component of Kepler’s early training. On the one hand, 
Kepler was convinced that mathematical harmonies exist in na¬ 
ture (he wrote that “the universe was stamped with the adorn¬ 
ment of harmonic proportions”); that simple numerical 
relationships must determine the motion of the planets. On the 
other hand, again following the Pythagoreans, he long believed 
that only uniform circular motion was admissible. He repeatedly 
found that the observed planetary motions could not be ex¬ 
plained in this way, and repeatedly tried again. But unlike many 

* A Pythagorean named Hippasus published the secret of the “sphere 
with twelve pentagons,” the dodecahedron. When he later died in a 
shipwreck, we are told, his fellow Pythagoreans remarked on the justice 
of the punishment. His book has not survived. 



186 - Cosmos 


Pythagoreans, he believed in observations and experiment in the 
real world. Eventually the detailed observations of the apparent 
motion of the planets forced him to abandon the idea of circular 
paths and to realize that planets travel in ellipses. Kepler was both 
inspired in his search for the harmony of planetary motion and 
delayed for more than a decade by the attractions of Pythagorean 
doctrine. 

A disdain for the practical swept the ancient world. Plato 
urged astronomers to think about the heavens, but not to waste 
their time observing them. Aristotle believed that: “The lower 
son are by nature slaves, and it is better for them as for all 
inferiors that they should be under the rule of a master. . . . The 
slave shares in his master’s life; the artisan is less closely com 
nected with him, and only attains excellence in proportion as he 
becomes a slave. The meaner sort of mechanic has a special and 
separate slavery.” Plutarch wrote: “It does not of necessity follow 
that, if the work delight you with its grace, the one who wrought 
it is worthy of esteem.” Xenophon’s opinion was: “What are 
called the mechanical arts carry a social stigma and are rightly 
dishonoured in our cities.” As a result of such attitudes, the 
brilliant and promising Ionian experimental method was largely 
abandoned for two thousand years. Without experiment, there is 
no way to choose among contending hypotheses, no way for 
science to advance. The antiempirical taint of the Pythagoreans 
survives to this day. But why? Where did this distaste for ex^ 
periment come from? 

An explanation for the decline of ancient science has been put 
forward by the historian of science, Benjamin Farrington: The 
mercantile tradition, which led to Ionian science, also led to a 
slave economy. The owning of slaves was the road to wealth and 
power. Polycrates’ fortifications were built by slaves. Athens in the 
time of Pericles, Plato and Aristotle had a vast slave population. 
All the brave Athenian talk about democracy applied only to a 
privileged few. What slaves characteristically perform is 
manual labor. But scientific experimentation is manual labor, 
from which the slaveholders are preferentially distanced; while it 
is only the slaveholders—politely called “gentleunen” in some 
societies—who have the leisure to do science. Accordingly, ah 
most no one did science. The Ionians were perfectly able to make 
machines of some elegance. But the availability of slaves unden 
mined the economic motive for the development of technology. 
Thus the mercantile tradition contributed to the great Ionian 
awakening around 600 B.C., and, through slavery, may have been 
the cause of its decline some two centuries later. There are great 
ironies here. 

Similar trends are apparent throughout the world. The high 
point in indigenous Chinese astronomy occurred around 1280, 
with the work of Kuo Shomching, who used an observational 
baseline of 1,500 years and improved both astronomical instruments 



The Backbone of Night - 187 



ally thought that Chinese astronomy thereafter underwent a other Greek scientists between the sew- 

steep decline. Nathan Sivin believes that the reason lies at least ent ^ century B.C. and the fifth century. 

partly “in increasing rigidity of elite attitudes, so that the educated The decline of Greek science is indicated 

i . i. i i . i . 11 . by the relatively few individuals shown 

were less inclined to be curious about techniques and less willing g i r- ^ ^ ^ 

n after the first century B.C. 

to value science as an appropriate pursuit for a gentleman.” The 
occupation of astronomer became a hereditary office, a practice 
inconsistent with the advance of the subject. Additionally, “the 
responsibility for the evolution of astronomy remained centered 
in the Imperial Court and was largely abandoned to foreign 
technicians,” chiefly the Jesuits, who had introduced Euclid and 
Copernicus to the astonished Chinese, but who, after the cem 
sorship of the latter’s book, had a vested interest in disguising and 
suppressing heliocentric cosmology. Perhaps science was stillborn 
in Indian, Mayan and Aztec civilizations for the same reason it 
declined in Ionia, the pervasiveness of the slave economy. A 
major problem in the contemporary (political) Third World is 
that the educated classes tend to be the children of the wealthy, 
with a vested interest in the status quo, and are unaccustomed 
either to working with their hands or to challenging convem 
tional wisdom. Science has been very slow to take root. 

Plato and Aristotle were comfortable in a slave society. They 
offered justifications for oppression. They served tyrants. They 
taught the alienation of the body from the mind (a natural 







188 - Cosmos 


enough ideal in a slave society); they separated matter from 
thought; they divorced the Earth from the heavens—divisions 
that were to dominate Western thinking for more than twenty 
centuries. Plato, who believed that “all things are full of gods,” 
actually used the metaphor of slavery to connect his politics with 
his cosmology. He is said to have urged the burning of all the 
books of Democritus (he had a similar recommendation for the 
books of Homer), perhaps because Democritus did not acknowh 
edge immortal souls or immortal gods or Pythagorean mysticism, 
or because he believed in an infinite number of worlds. Of the 
seventy-three books Democritus is said to have written, covering 
all of human knowledge, not a single work survives. All we know 
is from fragments, chiefly on ethics, and secondhand accounts. 
The same is true of almost all the other ancient Ionian scientists. 

In the recognition by Pythagoras and Plato that the Cosmos is 
knowable, that there is a mathematical underpinning to nature, 
they greatly advanced the cause of science. But in the suppression 
of disquieting facts, the sense that science should be kept for a 
small elite, the distaste for experiment, the embrace of mysticism 
and the easy acceptance of slave societies, they set back the 
human enterprise. After a long mystical sleep in which the tools 
of scientific inquiry lay moldering, the Ionian approach, in some 
cases transmitted through scholars at the Alexandrian Library, 
was finally rediscovered. The Western world reawakened. Ex- 
periment and open inquiry became once more respectable. For¬ 
gotten books and fragments were again read. Leonardo and 
Columbus and Copernicus were inspired by or independently 
retraced parts of this ancient Greek tradition. There is in our time 
much Ionian science, although not in politics and religion, and a 
fair amount of courageous free inquiry. But there are also appall¬ 
ing superstitions and deadly ethical ambiguities. We are flawed 
by ancient contradictions. 

The Platonists and their Christian successors held the peculiar 
notion that the Earth was tainted and somehow nasty, while the 
heavens were perfect and divine. The fundamental idea that the 
Earth is a planet, that we are citizens of the Universe, was re¬ 
jected and forgotten. This idea was first argued by Aristarchus, 
born on Samos three centuries after Pythagoras. Aristarchus was 
one of the last of the Ionian scientists. By this time, the center of 
intellectual enlightenment had moved to the great Library of 
Alexandria. Aristarchus was the first person to hold that the Sun 
rather than the Earth is at the center of the planetary system, that 
all the planets go around the Sun rather than the Earth. Typi¬ 
cally, his writings on this matter are lost. From the size of the 
Earth’s shadow on the Moon during a lunar eclipse, he deduced 
that the Sun had to be much larger than the Earth, as well as very 
far away. He may then have reasoned that it is absurd for so large 
a body as the Sun to revolve around so small a body as the Earth. 
He put the Sun at the center, made the Earth rotate on its axis 



The Backbone of Night - 189 


once a day and orbit the Sun once a year. 

It is the same idea we associate with the name of Copernicus, 
whom Galileo described as the “restorer and confirmer,” not the 
inventor, of the heliocentric hypothesis.* For most of the 1,800 
years between Aristarchus and Copernicus nobody knew the 
correct disposition of the planets, even though it had been laid 
out perfectly clearly around 280 B.C. The idea outraged some of 
Aristarchus’ contemporaries. There were cries, like those voiced 
about Anaxagoras and Bruno and Galileo, that he be condemned 
for impiety. The resistance to Aristarchus and Copernicus, a kind 
of geocentrism in everyday life, remains with us: we still talk 
about the Sun “rising” and the Sun “setting.” It is 2,200 years since 
Aristarchus, and our language still pretends that the Earth does 
not turn. 

The separation of the planets from one another—forty million 
kilometers from Earth to Venus at closest approach, six billion 
kilometers to Pluto—would have stunned those Greeks who were 
outraged by the contention that the Sun might be as large as the 
Peloponnesus. It was natural to think of the solar system as much 
more compact and local. If I hold my finger before my eyes and 
examine it first with my left and then with my right eye, it seems 
to move against the distant background. The closer my finger is, 
the more it seems to move. I can estimate the distance to my 
finger from the amount of this apparent motion, or parallax. If 
my eyes were farther apart, my finger would seem to move 
substantially more. The longer the baseline from which we make 
our two observations, the greater the parallax and the better we 
can measure the distance to remote objects. But we live on a 
moving platform, the Earth, which every six months has pro- 
gressed from one end of its orbit to the other, a distance of 
300,000,000 kilometers. If we look at the same unmoving celes- 
tial object six months apart, we should be able to measure very 
great distances. Aristarchus suspected the stars to be distant suns. 
He placed the Sun “among” the fixed stars. The absence of de¬ 
tectable stellar parallax as the Earth moved suggested that the 
stars were much farther away than the Sun. Before the invention 
of the telescope, the parallax of even the nearest stars was too 
small to detect. Not until the nineteenth century was the parallax 
of a star first measured. It then became clear, from straightfor¬ 
ward Greek geometry, that the stars were light-years away. 

* Copernicus may have gotten the idea from reading about Aristarchus. 
Recently discovered classical texts were a source of great excitement in 
Italian universities when Copernicus went to medical school there. In 
the manuscript of his book, Copernicus mentioned Aristarchus’ priority, 
but he omitted the citation before the book saw print. Copernicus wrote 
in a letter to Pope Paul III: “According to Cicero, Nicetas had thought 
the Earth was moved . . . According to Plutarch [who discusses Aris¬ 
tarchus] . . . certain others had held the same opinion. When from this, 
therefore, I had conceived its possibility, I myself also began to meditate 
upon the mobility of the Earth.” 



BILL RAY 


190 - Cosmos 



A simple reconstruction of the perforated 
brass plate used by Christiaan Huygens in 
the seventeenth century to determine the 
distance to the stars. 


There is another way to measure the distance to the stars 
which the Ionians were fully capable of discovering, although, so 
far as we know, they did not employ it. Everyone knows that the 
farther away an object is, the smaller it seems. This inverse 
proportionality between apparent size and distance is the basis of 
perspective in art and photography. So the farther away we are 
from the Sun, the smaller and dimmer it appears. How far would 
we have to be from the Sun for it to appear as small and as dim as 
a star? Or, equivalently, how small a piece of the Sun would be as 
bright as a star? 

An early experiment to answer this question was performed by 
Christiaan Huygens, very much in the Ionian tradition. Huygens 
drilled small holes in a brass plate, held the plate up to the Sun 
and asked himself which hole seemed as bright as he remem' 
bered the bright star Sirius to have been the night before. The 
hole was effectively* 1/28,000 the apparent size of the Sun. So 
Sirius, he reasoned, must be 28,000 times farther from us than 
the Sun, or about half a light-year away. It is hard to remember 
just how bright a star is many hours after you look at it, but 
Huygens remembered very well. If he had known that Sirius was 
intrinsically brighter than the Sun, he would have come up with 
almost exactly the right answer: Sirius is 8.8 light-years away. 
The fact that Aristarchus and Huygens used imprecise data and 
derived imperfect answers hardly matters. They explained their 
methods so clearly that, when better observations were available, 
more accurate answers could be derived. 

Between the times of Aristarchus and Huygens, humans an¬ 
swered the question that had so excited me as a boy growing up 
in Brooklyn: What are the stars? The answer is that the stars are 
mighty suns, light-years away in the vastness of interstellar space. 

The great legacy of Aristarchus is this: neither we nor our 
planet enjoys a privileged position in Nature. This insight has 
since been applied upward to the stars, and sideways to many 
subsets of the human family, with great success and invariable 
opposition. It has been responsible for major advances in astron¬ 
omy, physics, biology, anthropology, economics and politics. I 
wonder if its social extrapolation is a major reason for attempts at 
its suppression. 

The legacy of Aristarchus has been extended far beyond the 
realm of the stars. At the end of the eighteenth century, William 
Herschel, musician and astronomer to George III of England, 
completed a project to map the starry skies and found apparently 
equal numbers of stars in all directions in the plane or band of the 
Milky Way; from this, reasonably enough, he deduced that we 
were at the center of the Galaxy/ Just before World War I, 


* Huygens actually used a glass bead to reduce the amount of light passed 
by the hole. 

t This supposed privileged position of the Earth, at the center of what 



The Backbone of Night — 191 


Harlow Shapley of Missouri devised a technique for measuring 
the distances to the globular clusters, those lovely spherical ar¬ 
rays of stars which resemble a swarm of bees. Shapley had found 
a stellar standard candle, a star noticeable because of its variabil¬ 
ity, but which had always the same average intrinsic brightness. 
By comparing the faintness of such stars when found in globular 
clusters with their real brightness, as determined from nearby 
representatives, Shapley could calculate how far away they are- 
just as, in a field, we can estimate the distance of a lantern of 
known intrinsic brightness from the feeble light that reaches 
us—essentially, the method of Huygens. Shapley discovered that 
the globular clusters were not centered around the solar neigh¬ 
borhood but rather about a distant region of the Milky Way, in 
the direction of the constellation Sagittarius, the Archer. It 
seemed to him very likely that the globular clusters used in this 
investigation, nearly a hundred of them, would be orbiting 
about, paying homage to, the massive center of the Milky Way. 

Shapley had in 1915 the courage to propose that the solar 
system was in the outskirts and not near the core of our galaxy. 
Herschel had been misled because of the copious amount of 
obscuring dust in the direction of Sagittarius; he had no way to 
know of the enormous numbers of stars beyond. It is now very 
clear that we live some 30,000 light-years from the galactic core, 
on the fringes of a spiral arm, where the local density of stars is 
relatively sparse. There may be those who live on a planet that 
orbits a central star in one of Shapley’s globular clusters, or one 
located in the core. Such beings may pity us for our handful of 
naked-eye stars, because their skies will be ablaze with them. 
Near the center of the Milky Way, millions of brilliant stars 
would be visible to the naked eye, compared to our paltry few 
thousand. Our Sun or suns might set, but the night would never 
come. 

Well into the twentieth century, astronomers believed that 
there was only one galaxy in the Cosmos, the Milky Way—al¬ 
though in the eighteenth century Thomas Wright of Durban 
and Immanuel Kant of Konigsberg each had a premonition that 
the exquisite luminous spiral forms, viewed through the tele¬ 
scope, were other galaxies. Kant suggested explicitly that M31 in 
the constellation Andromeda was another Milky Way, com¬ 
posed of enormous numbers of stars, and proposed calling such 
objects by the evocative and haunting phrase “island universes.” 
Some scientists toyed with the idea that the spiral nebulae were 
not distant island universes but rather nearby condensing clouds 
of interstellar gas, perhaps on their way to make solar systems. 
To test the distance of the spiral nebulae, a class of intrinsically 
much brighter variable stars was needed to furnish a new standard 

was then considered the known universe, led A. R. Wallace to the 
anti-Aristarchian position, in his book Mans Place in the Universe 
(1903), that ours may be the only inhabited planet. 



Schematic representation of the Milky 
Way viewed edge-on, surrounded by a 
swarm of globular star clusters, each con¬ 
taining between one hundred thousand 
and ten million stars. On this scale the Sun 
and Earth lie close to the outer edge of the 
spiral arms, jutting out from the galactic 
core. Painting by Jon Lomberg. 




192 - Cosmos 



Globular star clusters gravitate about and demark the massive center of the Milky Way Galaxy. Many are located in a 
great spherical halo of stars and star clusters that encloses our spiral galaxy. A relative few, like these, are concentrated 
toward the galactic nucleus. From the planets of any one of these suns, the sky would be ablaze with stars. These 
globular clusters are designated NGC 6522 and NGC 6528, NGC being an abbreviation for “New General Catalog,” a 
compilation of clusters and galaxies. It was new when first compiled in 1888. Courtesy Kitt Peak National Observa- 
tory. © Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., the Kitt Peak National Observatory. 



The Backbone of Night - 193 


candle. Such stars, identified in M31 by Edwin Hubble in 
1924, were discovered to be alarmingly dim, and it became ap¬ 
parent that M31 was a prodigious distance away, a number now 
estimated at a little more than two million light-years. But if M31 
were at such a distance, it could not be a cloud of mere inter¬ 
stellar dimensions; it had to be much larger—an immense galaxy 
in its own right. And the other, fainter galaxies must be more 
distant still, a hundred billion of them, sprinkled through the 
dark to the frontiers of the known Cosmos. 

As long as there have been humans, we have searched for our 
place in the Cosmos. In the childhood of our species (when our 
ancestors gazed a little idly at the stars), among the Ionian scien¬ 
tists of ancient Greece, and in our own age, we have been trans¬ 
fixed by this question: Where are we? Who are we? We find that 
we live on an insignificant planet of a humdrum star lost between 
two spiral arms in the outskirts of a galaxy which is a member of 
a sparse cluster of galaxies, tucked away in some forgotten corner 
of a universe in which there are far more galaxies than people. 
This perspective is a courageous continuation of our penchant 
for constructing and testing mental models of the skies; the Sun as 
a red-hot stone, the stars as celestial flame, the Galaxy as the 
backbone of night. 

Since Aristarchus, every step in our quest has moved us farther 
from center stage in the cosmic drama. There has not been much 
time to assimilate these new findings. The discoveries of Shapley 
and Hubble were made within the lifetimes of many people still 
alive today. There are those who secretly deplore these great 
discoveries, who consider every step a demotion, who in their 
heart of hearts still pine for a universe whose center, focus and 
fulcrum is the Earth. But if we are to deal with the Cosmos we 
must first understand it, even if our hopes for some unearned 
preferential status are, in the process, contravened. Understand¬ 
ing where we live is an essential precondition for improving the 
neighborhood. Knowing what other neighborhoods are like also 
helps. If we long for our planet to be important, there is some¬ 
thing we can do about it. We make our world significant by the 
courage of our questions and by the depth of our answers. 

We embarked on our cosmic voyage with a question first 
framed in the childhood of our species and in each generation 
asked anew with undiminished wonder: What are the stars? Ex¬ 
ploration is in our nature. We began as wanderers, and we are 
wanderers still. We have lingered long enough on the shores of 
the cosmic ocean. We are ready at last to set sail for the stars. 




A hypothetical ice planet in the system of the Ring Nebula in Lyra. The central star has shed its outer atmosphere, 
producing a multicolored slowly expanding shell of glowing gas. This system is 1,500 light-years distant, an objective 
for human exploration in the far future. Painting by David Egge, 1979. 




Chapter VIII 

TRAVELS IN 
SPACE AND TIME 

No one has lived longer than a dead child, and Methusula* died young. 
Heaven and Earth are as old as I, and the ten thousand things are one, 

—Chuang Tzu, about 300 B.C., China 


We have loved the stars too fondly to be fearful of the night, 

—Tombstone epitaph of 
two amateur astronomers 

Stars scribble in our eyes the frosty sagas, 

The gleaming cantos of unvanquished space, 

—Hart Crane, The Bridge 


Actually, P’eng Tsu, the Chinese equivalent. 






196 - Cosmos 



Big Dipper as seen from Earth 




The Big Dipper, as seen from the Earth 
(top), from the side ( middle) and from the 
back (bottom). The last two views would 
be seen if we were able to travel to the 
proper vantage points, about 150 light- 
years away. 


THE RISING AND FALLING of the surf is produced in part by 
tides. The Moon and the Sun are far away. But their 
gravitational influence is very real and noticeable back here on 
Earth. The beach reminds us of space. Fine sand grains, all more 
or less uniform in size, have been produced from larger rocks 
through ages of jostling and rubbing, abrasion and erosion, 
again driven through waves and weather by the distant Moon 
and Sun. The beach also reminds us of time. The world is much 
older than the human species. 

A handful of sand contains about 10,000 grains, more than the 
number of stars we can see with the naked eye on a clear night. 
But the number of stars we can see is only the tiniest fraction of 
the number of stars that are . What we see at night is the merest 
smattering of the nearest stars. Meanwhile the Cosmos is rich 
beyond measure: the total number of stars in the universe is 
greater than all the grains of sand on all the beaches of the planet 
Earth. 

Despite the efforts of ancient astronomers and astrologers to 
put pictures in the skies, a constellation is nothing more than an 
arbitrary grouping of stars, composed of intrinsically dim stars 
that seem to us bright because they are nearby, and intrinsically 
brighter stars that are somewhat more distant. All places on 

Earth are, to high precision, the same distance from any star. 

This is why the star patterns in a given constellation do not 
change as we go from, say, Soviet Central Asia to the American 
Midwest. Astronomically, the U.S.S.R. and the United States are 
the same place. The stars in any constellation are all so far away that 
we cannot recognize them as a three-dimensional configuration 
as long as we are tied to Earth. The average distance between 

the stars is a few light-years, a light-year being, we 

remember, about ten trillion kilometers. For the patterns of the 
constellations to change, we must travel over distances comparable 
to those that separate the stars; we must venture across the 
light-years. Then some nearby stars will seem to move out of the 
constellation, others will enter it, and its configuration will alter 
dramatically. 

Our technology is, so far, utterly incapable of such grand 
interstellar voyages, at least in reasonable transit times. But our 
computers can be taught the three-dimensional positions of all 
the nearby stars, and we can ask to be taken on a little trip—a 
circumnavigation of the collection of bright stars that constitute 
the Big Dipper, say—and watch the constellations change. We 
connect the stars in typical constellations, in the usual celestial 
follow-the-dots drawings. As we change our perspective, we see 
their apparent shapes distort severely. The inhabitants of the 
planets of distant stars witness quite different constellations in 
their night skies than we do in ours—other Rorschach tests for 
other minds. Perhaps sometime in the next few centuries a 
spaceship from Earth will actually travel such distances at some 






Travels in Space and Time — 197 


remarkable speed and see new constellations that no human has 
ever viewed before—except with such a computer. 

The appearance of the constellations changes not only in space 
but also in time; not only if we alter our position but also if we 
merely wait sufficiently long. Sometimes stars move together in a 
group or cluster; other times a single star may move very rapidly 
with respect to its fellows. Eventually such stars leave an old 
constellation and enter a new one. Occasionally, one member of 
a double-star system explodes, breaking the gravitational 
shackles that bound its companion, which then leaps into space 
at its former orbital velocity, a slingshot in the sky. In addition, 
stars are born, stars evolve, and stars die. If we wait long enough, 
new stars appear and old stars vanish. The patterns in the sky 
slowly melt and alter. 

Even over the lifetime of the human species—a few million 
years—constellations have been changing. Consider the present 
configuration of the Big Dipper, or Great Bear. Our computer can 
carry us in time as well as in space. As we run the Big Dipper 
backwards into the past, allowing for the motion of its stars, we 
find quite a different appearance a million years ago. The Big 
Dipper then looked quite a bit like a spear. If a time machine 
dropped you precipitously in some unknown age in the distant 
past, you could in principle determine the epoch by the configu- 
ration of the stars: If the Big Dipper is a spear, this must be the 
Middle Pleistocene. 

We can also ask the computer to run a constellation forward 
into time. Consider Leo the Lion. The zodiac is a band of twelve 
constellations seemingly wrapped around the sky in the apparent 
annual path of the Sun through the heavens. The root of the 
word is that for zoo , because the zodiacal constellations, like Leo, 
are mainly fancied to be animals. A million years from now, Leo 
will look still less like a lion than it does today. Perhaps our 
remote descendants will call it the constellation of the radio 
telescope—although I suspect a million years from now the radio 
telescope will have become more obsolete than the stone spear is 
now. 

The (nonzodiacal) constellation of Orion, the hunter, is out- 
lined by four bright stars and bisected by a diagonal line of three 
stars, which represent the belt of the hunter. Three dimmer stars 
hanging from the belt are, according to the conventional astro- 
nomical projective test, Orion’s sword. The middle star in the 
sword is not actually a star but a great cloud of gas called the 
Orion Nebula, in which stars are being born. Many of the stars in 
Orion are hot and young, evolving rapidly and ending their lives 
in colossal cosmic explosions called supernovae. They are born 
and die in periods of tens of millions of years. If, on our conn 
puter, we were to run Orion rapidly into the far future, we would 
see a startling effect, the births and spectacular deaths of many of 
its stars, flashing on and winking off like fireflies in the night. 





Computer-generated images of the Big 
Dipper as it would have been seen on 
Earth one million years ago and half a 
million years ago. Its present appearance is 
shown at bottom. 



198 - Cosmos 



The Lion at present 



Computer-generated appearance of the 
constellation Leo, as it appears today (top), 
and as it will appear from our planet one 
million years in the future. 


The solar neighborhood, the immediate environs of the Sun 
in space, includes the nearest star system, Alpha Centauri. It is 
really a triple system, two stars revolving around each other, and 
a third, Proxima Centauri, orbiting the pair at a discreet distance. 
At some positions in its orbit, Proxima is the closest known star 
to the Sun—hence its name. Most stars in the sky are members of 
double or multiple star systems. Our solitary Sun is something of 
an anomaly. 

The second brightest star in the constellation Andromeda, 
called Beta Andromedae, is seventyTive light-years away. The 
light by which we see it now has spent seventy-five years tra¬ 
versing the dark of interstellar space on its long journey to Earth. 
In the unlikely event that Beta Andromedae blew itself up last 
Tuesday, we would not know it for another seventy-five years, as 
this interesting information, traveling at the speed of light, would 
require seventy-five years to cross the enormous interstellar dis¬ 
tances. When the light by which we now see this star set out on 
its long voyage, the young Albert Einstein, working as a Swiss 
patent clerk, had just published his epochal special theory of 
relativity here on Earth. 

Space and time are interwoven. We cannot look out into space 
without looking back into time. Light travels very fast. But space 
is very empty, and the stars are far apart. Distances of seventy- 
five light-years or less are very small compared to other distances 
in astronomy. From the Sun to the center of the Milky Way 
Galaxy is 30,000 light-years. From our galaxy to the nearest spiral 
galaxy, M31, also in the constellation Andromeda, is 2,000,000 
light-years. When the light we see today from M31 left for Earth, 
there were no humans on our planet, although our ancestors 
were evolving rapidly to our present form. The distance from the 
Earth to the most remote quasars is eight or ten billion light- 
years. We see them today as they were before the Earth accu¬ 
mulated, before the Milky Way was formed. 

This is not a situation restricted to astronomical objects, but 
only astronomical objects are so far away that the finite speed of 
light becomes important. If you are looking at a friend three 
meters (ten feet) away, at the other end of the room, you are not 
seeing her as she is “now”; but rather as she “was” a hundred 
millionth of a second ago. [(3 m) / (3 X 10 8 m/sec) = 1/(10 8 / 
sec) = 10' 8 sec, or a hundredth of a microsecond. In this cal¬ 
culation we have merely divided the distance by the speed to get 
the travel time.] But the difference between your friend “now” 
and now minus a hundred-millionth of a second is too small to 
notice. On the other hand, when we look at a quasar eight billion 
light-years away, the fact that we are seeing it as it was eight 
billion years ago may be very important. (For example, there are 
those who think that quasars are explosive events likely to hap¬ 
pen only in the early history of galaxies. In that case, the more 
distant the galaxy, the earlier in its history we are observing it, 



Travels in Space and Time - 199 


and the more likely it is that we should see it as a quasar. Indeed, 
the number of quasars increases as we look to distances of more 
than about five billion light-years). 

The two Voyager interstellar spacecraft, the fastest machines 
ever launched from Earth, are now traveling at one ten-thou¬ 
sandth the speed of light. They would need 40,000 years to go 
the distance to the nearest star. Do we have any hope of leaving 
Earth and traversing the immense distances even to Proxima 
Centauri in convenient periods of time? Can we do something to 
approach the speed of light? What is magic about the speed of 
light? Might we someday be able to go faster than that? 

If you had walked through the pleasant Tuscan countryside in 
the 1890’s, you might have come upon a somewhat long-haired 
teenage high school dropout on the road to Pavia. His teachers in 
Germany had told him that he would never amount to anything, 
that his questions destroyed classroom discipline, that he would 
be better off out of school. So he left and wandered, delighting in 
the freedom of Northern Italy, where he could ruminate on 
matters remote from the subjects he had been force-fed in his 
highly disciplined Prussian schoolroom. His name was Albert 
Einstein, and his ruminations changed the world. 

Einstein had been fascinated by Bernstein’s People's Book of 
Natural Science , a popularization of science that described on its 
very first page the astonishing speed of electricity through wires 
and light through space. He wondered what the world would 
look like if you could travel on a wave of light. To travel at the 
speed of light! What an engaging and magical thought for a boy 
on the road in a countryside dappled and rippling in sunlight. 
You could not tell you were on a light wave if you traveled with 
it. If you started on a wave crest, you would stay on the crest and 
lose all notion of it being a wave. Something strange happens at 
the speed of light. The more Einstein thought about such ques¬ 
tions, the more troubling they became. Paradoxes seemed to 
emerge everywhere if you could travel at the speed of light. 
Certain ideas had been accepted as true without sufficiently care¬ 
ful thought. Einstein posed simple questions that could have 
been asked centuries earlier. For example, what do we mean 
when we say that two events are simultaneous? 

Imagine that I am riding a bicycle toward you. As I approach 
an intersection I nearly collide, so it seems to me, with a horse- 
drawn cart. I swerve and barely avoid being run over. Now think 
of the event again, and imagine that the cart and the bicycle are 
both traveling close to the speed of light. If you are standing 
down the road, the cart is traveling at right angles to your line of 
sight. You see me, by reflected sunlight, traveling toward you. 
Would not my speed be added to the speed of light, so that my 
image would get to you considerably before the image of the 
cart? Should you not see me swerve before you see the cart 
arrive? Can the cart and I approach the intersection simultaneously 



Albert Einstein (1879-1955). Portrait by 
Jean-Leon Huens, © National Geographic 
Society. His latent interest in science was 
awakened at age twelve by a book of 
popular science given him by an impover¬ 
ished student named Max Talmey, who 
had been invited to dinner, in an act of 
charity and compassion, by Einstein’s 
parents. 


200 — Cosmos 


w<- 


->E 




t 







The simultaneity paradox in special rela¬ 
tivity. The observer is standing in the 
south leg of a crossroads. A bicyclist is 
approaching from the north at a velocity 
given by the solid arrow. Light reflected 
from the bicyclist is approaching the ob¬ 
server at a higher velocity, given by the 
dashed arrow. A cart is approaching the 
intersection from the west at a velocity 
given by its solid arrow, and light is re¬ 
flected off it to the south at a velocity 
given by the corresponding dashed arrow. 
If it were proper to add the bicyclist’s ve¬ 
locity to the velocity of light (since he is 
approaching the observer), the light from 
the bicyclist would arrive before the light 
from the cart, and what is perceived as a 
near-collision by the bicyclist and cart 
driver is witnessed very differently by the 
observer. Careful experiments show that 
this is not what happens. The paradox is 
noticeable only if the bicycle is moving 
very close to the speed of light. The reso¬ 
lution of the paradox is that the velocity 
of light must be independent of the ve¬ 
locity of the moving object. 


from my point of view, but not from yours? Could I 
experience a near collision with the cart while you perhaps see 
me swerve around nothing and pedal cheerfully on toward the 
town of Vinci? These are curious and subtle questions. They 
challenge the obvious. There is a reason that no one thought of 
them before Einstein. From such elementary questions, Einstein 
produced a fundamental rethinking of the world, a revolution in 
physics. 

If the world is to be understood, if we are to avoid such logical 
paradoxes when traveling at high speeds, there are some rules, 
commandments of Nature, that must be obeyed. Einstein codi¬ 
fied these rules in the special theory of relativity. Light (reflected 
or emitted) from an object travels at the same velocity whether 
the object is moving or stationary: Thou shalt not add thy speed to 
the speed of light . Also, no material object may move faster than 
light: Thou shalt not travel at or beyond the speed of light . Nothing 
in physics prevents you from traveling as close to the speed of 
light as you like; 99.9 percent of the speed of light would be just 
fine. But no matter how hard you try, you can never gain that last 
decimal point. For the world to be logically consistent, there 
must be a cosmic speed limit. Otherwise, you could get to any 
speed you wanted by adding velocities on a moving platform. 

Europeans around the turn of the century generally believed in 
privileged frames of reference: that German, or French, or British 
culture and political organization were better than those of other 
countries; that Europeans were superior to other peoples who 
were fortunate enough to be colonized. The social and political 
application of the ideas of Aristarchus and Copernicus was re¬ 
jected or ignored. The young Einstein rebelled against the notion 
of privileged frames of reference in physics as much as he did in 
politics. In a universe filled with stars rushing helter-skelter in all 
directions, there was no place that was “at rest,” no framework 
from which to view the universe that was superior to any other 
framework. This is what the word relativity means. The idea is 
very simple, despite its magical trappings: in viewing the universe, 
every place is as good as every other place. The laws of Nature 
must be identical no matter who is describing them. If this is to 
be true—and it would be stunning if there were something special 
about our insignificant location in the Cosmos—then it follows 
that no one may travel faster than light. 

We hear the crack of a bullwhip because its tip is moving 
faster than the speed of sound, creating a shock wave, a small 
sonic boom. A thunderclap has a similar origin. It was once 
thought that airplanes could not travel faster than sound. Today 
supersonic flight is commonplace. But the light barrier is different 
from the sound barrier. It is not merely an engineering problem 
like the one the supersonic airplane solves. It is a fundamental 
law of Nature, as basic as gravity. And there are no phenomena 




Travels in Space and Time — 201 


thunder for sound—to suggest the possibility of traveling in a 
vacuum faster than light. On the contrary, there is an extremely 
wide range of experience—with nuclear accelerators and atomic 
clocks, for example—in precise quantitative agreement with spe- 
cial relativity. 

The problems of simultaneity do not apply to sound as they do 
to light because sound is propagated through some material me¬ 
dium, usually air. The sound wave that reaches you when a 
friend is talking is the motion of molecules in the air. Light, 
however, travels in a vacuum. There are restrictions on how 
molecules of air can move which do not apply to a vacuum. Light 
from the Sun reaches us across the intervening empty space, but 
no matter how carefully we listen, we do not hear the crackle of 
sunspots or the thunder of the solar flares. It was once thought, in 
the days before relativity, that light did propagate through a 
special medium that permeated all of space, called “the lumin¬ 
iferous aether.” But the famous Michelson-Morley experiment 
demonstrated that such an aether does not exist. 

We sometimes hear of things that can travel faster than light. 
Something called “the speed of thought” is occasionally proffered. 
This is an exceptionally silly notion—especially since the speed of 
impulses through the neurons in our brains is about the same as 
the speed of a donkey cart. That human beings have been clever 
enough to devise relativity shows that we think well, but I do not 
think we can boast about thinking fast. The electrical impulses in 
modern computers do, however, travel nearly at the speed of 
light. 

Special relativity, fully worked out by Einstein in his middle 
twenties, is supported by every experiment performed to check it. 
Perhaps tomorrow someone will invent a theory consistent with 
everything else we know that circumvents paradoxes on such 
matters as simultaneity, avoids privileged reference frames and 
still permits travel faster than light. But I doubt it very much. 
Einstein’s prohibition against traveling faster than light may clash 
with our common sense. But on this question, why should we 
trust common sense? Why should our experience at 10 kilome¬ 
ters an hour constrain the laws of nature at 300,000 kilometers 
per second? Relativity does set limits on what humans can ulti¬ 
mately do. But the universe is not required to be in perfect 
harmony with human ambition. Special relativity removes from 
our grasp one way of reaching the stars, the ship that can go 
faster than light. Tantalizingly, it suggests another and quite 
unexpected method. 

Following George Gamow, let us imagine a place where the 
speed of light is not its true value of 300,000 kilometers per 
second, but something very modest: 40 kilometers per hour, 
say—and strictly enforced. (There are no penalties for breaking 
laws of Nature, because there are no crimes: Nature is self¬ 
regulating and merely arranges things so that its prohibitions 



A traffic signal briefly erected in the Italian 
town of Vinci. It reads: “Welcome to 
Vinci. Limit to the velocity of light, 40 
kilometers [per hour].” Photo by Ann 
Druyan. 


are 






202 - Cosmos 



Bust of Leonardo da Vinci (14524519) in 
the Leonardo Museum, Vinci. Photo by 
the author. 


impossible to transgress.) Imagine that you are approaching the 
speed of light on a motor scooter. (Relativity is rich in sentences 
beginning “Imagine ...” Einstein called such an exercise a Ge - 
dankenexperiment , a thought experiment.) As your speed in¬ 
creases, you begin to see around the corners of passing objects. 
While you are rigidly facing forward, things that are behind you 
appear within your forward field of vision. Close to the speed of 
light, from your point of view, the world looks very odd—ulti¬ 
mately everything is squeezed into a tiny circular window, which 
stays just ahead of you. From the standpoint of a stationary 
observer, light reflected off you is reddened as you depart and 
blued as you return. If you travel toward the observer at almost 
the speed of light, you will become enveloped in an eerie chro¬ 
matic radiance: your usually invisible infrared emission will be 
shifted to the shorter visible wavelengths. You become com¬ 
pressed in the direction of motion, your mass increases, and time, 
as you experience it, slows down, a breathtaking consequence of 
traveling close to the speed of light called time dilation. But from 
the standpoint of an observer moving with you—perhaps the 
scooter has a second seat—none of these effects occur. 

These peculiar and at first perplexing predictions of special 
relativity are true in the deepest sense that anything in science is 
true. They depend on your relative motion. But they are real, 
not optical illusions. They can be demonstrated by simple math¬ 
ematics, mainly first-year algebra and therefore understandable 
to any educated person. They are also consistent with many 
experiments. Very accurate clocks carried in airplanes slow down 
a little compared to stationary clocks. Nuclear accelerators are 
designed to allow for the increase of mass with increasing speed; 
if they were not designed in this way, accelerated particles would 
all smash into the walls of the apparatus, and there would be 
little to do in experimental nuclear physics. A speed is a distance 
divided by a time. Since near the velocity of light we cannot 
simply add speeds, as we are used to doing in the workaday 
world, the familiar notions of absolute space and absolute time- 
independent of your relative motion—must give way. That is 
why you shrink. That is the reason for time dilation. 

Traveling close to the speed of light you would hardly age at 
all, but your friends and your relatives back home would be 
aging at the usual rate. When you returned from your relativistic 
journey, what a difference there would be between your friends 
and you, they having aged decades, say, and you having aged 
hardly at all! Traveling close to the speed of light is a kind of 
elixir of life. Because time slows down close to the speed of light, 
special relativity provides us with a means of going to the stars. 
But is it possible, in terms of practical engineering, to travel close 
to the speed of light? Is a starship feasible? 

Tuscany was not only the caldron of some of the thinking of 
the young Albert Einstein; it was also the home of another great 







Travels in Space and Time — 203 


genius who lived 400 years earlier, Leonardo da Vinci, who 
delighted in climbing the Tuscan hills and viewing the ground 
from a great height, as if he were soaring like a bird. He drew the 
first aerial perspectives of landscapes, towns and fortifications. 
Among Leonardo’s many interests and accomplishments—in 
painting, sculpture, anatomy, geology, natural history, military 
and civil engineering—he had a great passion: to devise and fal> 
ricate a machine that could fly. He drew pictures, constructed 
models, built fulLsize prototypes—and not one of them worked. 
No sufficiently powerful and lightweight engine then existed. 
The designs, however, were brilliant and encouraged the engi- 
neers of future times. Leonardo himself was depressed by these 
failures. But it was hardly his fault. He was trapped in the fif¬ 
teenth century. 

A similar case occurred in 1939 when a group of engineers 
calling themselves the British Interplanetary Society designed a 
ship to take people to the Moon—using 1939 technology. It was 
by no means identical to the design of the Apollo spacecraft, 
which accomplished exactly this mission three decades later, but 
it suggested that a mission to the moon might one day be a 
practical engineering possibility. 

Today we have preliminary designs for ships to take people to 
the stars. None of these spacecraft is imagined to leave the Earth 
directly. Rather, they are constructed in Earth orbit from where 
they are launched on their long interstellar journeys. One of 
them was called Project Orion after the constellation, a reminder 
that the ship’s ultimate objective was the stars. Orion was de¬ 
signed to utilize explosions of hydrogen bombs, nuclear weapons, 
against an inertial plate, each explosion providing a kind of 
“putt-putt,” a vast nuclear motorboat in space. Orion seems en¬ 
tirely practical from an engineering point of view. By its very 
nature it would have produced vast quantities of radioactive 
debris, but for conscientious mission profiles only in the empti¬ 
ness of interplanetary or interstellar space. Orion was under seri¬ 
ous development in the United States until the signing of the 
international treaty that forbids the detonation of nuclear weap¬ 
ons in space. This seems to me a great pity. The Orion starship is 
the best use of nuclear weapons I can think of. 

Project Daedalus is a recent design of the British Interplanetary 
Society. It assumes the existence of a nuclear fusion reactor- 
something much safer as well as more efficient than existing 
fission power plants. We do not have fusion reactors yet, but 
they are confidently expected in the next few decades. Orion and 
Daedalus might travel at 10 percent the speed of light. A trip to 
Alpha Centauri, 43 light-years away, would then take forty- 
three years, less than a human lifetime. Such ships could not 
travel close enough to the speed of light for special relativistic 
time dilation to become important. Even with optimistic projec¬ 
tions on the development of our technology, it does not seem 




Two of Leonardo’s designs for flying ma¬ 
chines. Top: a model of a helical-screw 
helicopter from the Leonardo Museum, 
Vinci. This design inspired Igor Sikorsky 
to develop the modern helicopter. Bottom: 
A page from Leonardo’s notebooks, the 
inscription in his “mirror writing,” showing 
a design for a semi-ornithopter in which 
the fixed inner wing is an aerodynamic 
lifting body and the wing tip flapped. It 
was a significant move away from Leo¬ 
nardo’s initial notion that heavier-than-air 
craft needed wings that flapped like a 
bird’s. This design influenced Otto Li- 
lienthal’s hang gliders of 1891-96, which 
immediately preceded the inventions of 
Wilbur and Orville Wright. The note¬ 
book was written between 1497 and 
1500. 




Starships: Very schematic blueprints for three designs that have been seriously proposed for interstellar s\ 
three use one form or another of nuclear fusion. Orion is shown above, Daedalus below and the Bu 
opposite. Only the Ramjet could, in principle, travel close enough to the speed of light for special rel 
dilation to apply. Its effective collecting area, at right, for interstellar matter would have to be much largei 
Bluenrints from existing designs bv Rick Sternbach. 










































Travels in Space and Time — 205 





Three starship designs: Orion (Theodore Taylor, Free¬ 
man Dyson and others), top left; Daedalus (British Inter¬ 
planetary Society), top right; Interstellar Ramjet (R. W. 
Bussard and others), bottom. Paintings by Rick Stern- 
bach. 






























































































































206 - Cosmos 


likely that Orion, Daedalus or their ilk will be built before the 
middle of the twentyTirst century, although if we wished we 
could build Orion now. 

For voyages beyond the nearest stars, something else must be 
done. Perhaps Orion and Daedalus could be used as multigem 
eration ships, so those arriving at a planet of another star would 
be the remote descendants of those who had set out some cem 
turies before. Or perhaps a safe means of hibernation for humans 
will be found, so that the space travelers could be frozen and 
then reawakened centuries later. These nonrelativistic starships, 
enormously expensive as they would be, look relatively easy to 
design and build and use compared to starships that travel close 
to the speed of light. Other star systems are accessible to the 
human species, but only after great effort. 

Fast interstellar spaceflight—with the ship velocity approaching 
the speed of light—is an objective not for a hundred years but for 
a thousand or ten thousand. But it is in principle possible. A kind 
of interstellar ramjet has been proposed by R. W. Bussard which 
scoops up the diffuse matter, mostly hydrogen atoms, that floats 
between the stars, accelerates it into a fusion engine and ejects it 
out the back. The hydrogen would be used both as fuel and as 
reaction mass. But in deep space there is only about one atom in 
every ten cubic centimeters, a volume the size of a grape. For the 
ramjet to work, it needs a frontal scoop hundreds of kilometers 
across. When the ship reaches relativistic velocities, the hydn> 
gen atoms will be moving with respect to the spaceship at close to 
the speed of light. If adequate precautions are not taken, the 
spaceship and its passengers will be fried by these induced cosmic 
rays. One proposed solution uses a laser to strip the electrons off 
the interstellar atoms and make them electrically charged while 
they are still some distance away, and an extremely strong mag' 
netic field to deflect the charged atoms into the scoop and away 
from the rest of the spacecraft. This is engineering on a scale so 
far unprecedented on Earth. We are talking of engines the size of 
small worlds. 

But let us spend a moment thinking about such a ship. The 
Earth gravitationally attracts us with a certain force, which if we 
are falling we experience as an acceleration. Were we to fall out 
of a tree—and many of our protodiuman ancestors must have 
done so—we would plummet faster and faster, increasing our fall 
speed by ten meters (or thirty^two feet) per second, every second. 
This acceleration, which characterizes the force of gravity hold' 
ing us to the Earths surface, is called 1 g, g for Earth gravity. We 
are comfortable with accelerations of 1 g; we have grown up with 
1 g. If we lived in an interstellar spacecraft that could accelerate at 
1 g, we would find ourselves in a perfectly natural environment. 
In fact, the equivalence between gravitational forces and the 
forces we would feel in an accelerating spaceship is a major 
feature of Einstein’s later general theory of relativity. With a 



Travels in Space and Time - 207 


continuous 1 g acceleration, after one year in space we would be 
traveling very close to the speed of light [(0*01 km/sec 2 ) x (3 x 
10 7 sec) = 3 x 10 5 km/sec]. 

Suppose that such a spacecraft accelerates at 1 g, approaching 
more and more closely to the speed of light until the midpoint of 
the journey; and then is turned around and decelerates at 1 g until 
arriving at its destination. For most of the trip the velocity would 
be very close to the speed of light and time would slow down 
enormously. A nearby mission objective, a sun that may have 
planets, is Barnard’s Star, about six light-years away. It could be 
reached in about eight years as measured by clocks aboard the 
ship; the center of the Milky Way, in twenty-one years; M31, the 
Andromeda galaxy, in twenty-eight years. Of course, people left 
behind on Earth would see things differently. Instead of twenty- 
one years to the center of the Galaxy, they would measure an 
elapsed time of 30,000 years. When we got home, few of our 
friends would be left to greet us. In principle, such a journey, 
mounting the decimal points ever closer to the speed of light, 
would even permit us to circumnavigate the known universe in 
some fifty-six years ship time. We would return tens of billions of 
years in our future—to find the Earth a charred cinder and the 
Sun dead. Relativistic spaceflight makes the universe accessible to 
advanced civilizations, but only to those who go on the journey. 
There seems to be no way for information to travel back to those 
left behind any faster than the speed of light. 

The designs for Orion, Daedalus and the Bussard Ramjet are 
probably farther from the actual interstellar spacecraft we will 
one day build than Leonardo’s models are from today’s super¬ 
sonic transports. But if we do not destroy ourselves, I believe that 
we will one day venture to the stars. When our solar system is all 
explored, the planets of other stars will beckon. 

Space travel and time travel are connected. We can travel fast 
into space only by traveling fast into the future. But what of the 
past? Could we return to the past and change it? Could we make 
events turn out differently from what the history books assert? 
We travel slowly into the future all the time, at the rate of one 
day every day. With relativistic spaceflight we could travel fast 
into the future. But many physicists believe that a voyage into 
the past is impossible. Even if you had a device that could travel 
backwards in time, they say, you would be unable to do anything 
that would make any difference. If you journeyed into the past 
and prevented your parents from meeting, then you would never 
have been born—which is something of a contradiction, since 
you clearly exist. Like the proof of the irrationality of V 2, like 
the discussion of simultaneity in special relativity, this is an ar¬ 
gument in which the premise is challenged because the conclu¬ 
sion seems absurd. 

But other physicists propose that two alternative histories, two 
equally valid realities, could exist side by side—the one you know 



208 - Cosmos 



A symbolic representation of time travel 
The Time Machine is that built for the 
George Pal motion picture based on the 
H. G. Wells story. Photograph by Ed- 
wardo Castaneda. 



A postage stamp issued in conjunction 
with the Columbian Exposition of 1892, 
depicting Christopher Columbus present¬ 
ing his geographical and economic argu¬ 
ments to Queen Isabella. What great 
voyages of discovery will be underway in 
1992, the five hundredth anniversary of 
Columbus’ discovery of America? 


and the one in which you were never born. Perhaps time itself 
has many potential dimensions, despite the fact that we are con¬ 
demned to experience only one of them. Suppose you could go 
back into the past and change it—by persuading Queen Isabella 
not to support Christopher Columbus, for example. Then, it is 
argued, you would have set into motion a different sequence of 
historical events, which those you left behind in our time line 
would never know about. If that kind of time travel were possi¬ 
ble, then every imaginable alternative history might in some 
sense really exist. 

History consists for the most part of a complex bundle of 
deeply interwoven threads, social, cultural and economic forces 
that are not easily unraveled. The countless small, unpredictable 
and random events that flow on continually often have no long- 
range consequences. But some, those occurring at critical junc¬ 
tures or branch points, may change the pattern of history. There 
may be cases where profound changes can be made by relatively 
trivial adjustments. The farther in the past such an event is, the 
more powerful may be its influence—because the longer the lever 
arm of time becomes. 

A polio virus is a tiny microorganism. We encounter many of 
them every day. But only rarely, fortunately, does one of them 
infect one of us and cause this dread disease. Franklin D. Roo¬ 
sevelt, the thirty-second President of the United States, had 
polio. Because the disease was crippling, it may have provided 
Roosevelt with a greater compassion for the underdog; or per¬ 
haps it improved his striving for success. If Roosevelt’s personal¬ 
ity had been different, or if he had never had the ambition to be 
President of the United States, the great depression of the 1930’s, 
World War II and the development of nuclear weapons might 
just possibly have turned out differently. The future of the world 
might have been altered. But a virus is an insignificant thing, only 
a millionth of a centimeter across. It is hardly anything at all. 

On the other hand, suppose our time traveler had persuaded 
Queen Isabella that Columbus’ geography was faulty, that from 
Eratosthenes’ estimate of the circumference of the Earth, Co¬ 
lumbus could never reach Asia. Almost certainly some other 
European would have come along within a few decades and 
sailed west to the New World. Improvements in navigation, the 
lure of the spice trade and competition among rival European 
powers made the discovery of America around 1500 more or less 
inevitable. Of course, there would today be no nation of Co¬ 
lombia, or District of Columbia or Columbus, Ohio, or Colum¬ 
bia University in the Americas. But the overall course of history 
might have turned out more or less the same. In order to affect 
the future profoundly, a time traveler would probably have to 
intervene in a number of carefully chosen events, to change the 
weave of history. 

It is a lovely fantasy, to explore those worlds that never were. 








Travels in Space and Time - 209 



By visiting them we could truly understand how history works; 
history could become an experimental science. If an apparently 
pivotal person had never lived—Plato, say, or Paul, or Peter the 
Great—how different would the world be? What if the scientific 
tradition of the ancient Ionian Greeks had survived and 
flourished? That would have required many of the social forces 
of the time to have been different—including the prevailing belief 
that slavery was natural and right. But what if that light that 
dawned in the eastern Mediterranean 2,500 years ago had not 
flickered out? What if science and the experimental method and 
the dignity of crafts and mechanical arts had been vigorously 
pursued 2,000 years before the Industrial Revolution? What if 
the power of this new mode of thought had been more generally 
appreciated? I sometimes think we might then have saved ten or 
twenty centuries. Perhaps the contributions of Leonardo would 
have been made a thousand years ago and those of Albert Ein¬ 
stein five hundred years ago. In such an alternate Earth, Leon¬ 
ardo and Einstein would, of course, never have been born. Too 
many things would have been different. In every ejaculation 
there are hundreds of millions of sperm cells, only one of which 
can fertilize an egg and produce a member of the next generation 
of human beings. But which sperm succeeds in fertilizing an egg 
must depend on the most minor and insignificant of factors, both 
internal and external. If even a little thing had gone differently 


Seven solar systems generated by com¬ 
puter program ACCRETE, and one real 
system, our own (B). The distances of 
planets from their star are shown along 
the horizontal axis (1 astronomical unit = 
150,000,000 kilometers). The masses of 
the planets are shown in units of the 
Earth’s mass. Terrestrial planets are por¬ 
trayed as filled circles, jovian planets as 
empty circles. Systems A and C are very 
similar to our own, with terrestrial planets 
close to the star, and jovian planets farther 
away. System D has the opposite arrange¬ 
ment. Terrestrial and jovian planets are 
interspersed in E and F. Very massive jo¬ 
vian planets are produced in G, and in H 
the fifth planet is so massive that it has 
become a star, and the configuration has 
become a double star system. After cal¬ 
culations by Stephen Dole, Richard Isaac - 
man and the author. 




ALL PHOTOS BY BILL RAY 


210 — Cosmos 



An electric light hulb, representing a dis¬ 
tant star, and a small sphere representing a 
non-self-luminous planetary companion* 
Stars are so bright that their planets would 
ordinarily be totally lost in their glare* 



As the starlight is artificially eclipsed by a 
foreground occulting disk (or the lunar 
surface), the planet, shining by reflected 
light, becomes more easily seen. 



As the star is totally occulted, the planet 
emerges from the glare* Repeated such 
observations could determine the posi¬ 
tion, motion and perhaps other properties 
of the previously undiscovered planet* 


2,500 years ago, none of us would be here today* There would 
be billions of others living in our place* 

If the Ionian spirit had won, I think we—a different “we,” of 
course—might by now be venturing to the stars* Our first survey 
ships to Alpha Centauri and Barnard’s Star, Sirius and Tau Ceti 
would have returned long ago* Great fleets of interstellar trans¬ 
ports would be under construction in Earth orbit—unmanned 
survey ships, liners for immigrants, immense trading ships to 
plow the seas of space* On all these ships there would be symbols 
and writing* If we looked closely, we might see that the language 
was Greek* And perhaps the symbol on the bow of one of the 
first starships would be a dodecahedron, with the inscription 
“Starship Theodorus of the Planet Earth*” 

In the time line of our world, things have gone somewhat 
more slowly* We are not yet ready for the stars* But perhaps in 
another century or two, when the solar system is all explored, we 
will also have put our planet in order* We will have the will and 
the resources and the technical knowledge to go to the stars* We 
will have examined from great distances the diversity of other 
planetary systems, some very much like our own and some ex¬ 
tremely different* We will know which stars to visit* Our ma¬ 
chines and our descendants will then skim the light years, the 
children of Thales and Aristarchus, Leonardo and Einstein* 

We are not yet certain how many planetary systems there are, 
but there seem to be a great abundance* In our immediate 
vicinity, there is not just one, but in a sense four: Jupiter, Saturn 
and Uranus each has a satellite system that, in the relative sizes 
and spacings of the moons, resembles closely the planets about 
the Sun* Extrapolation of the statistics of double stars which 
are greatly disparate in mass suggests that almost all single stars 
like the Sun should have planetary companions* 

We cannot yet directly see the planets of other stars, tiny 

points of light swamped in the brilliance of their local suns* But 

we are becoming able to detect the gravitational influence of an 
unseen planet on an observed star* Imagine such a star with a 
large “proper motion,” moving over decades against the backdrop 
of more distant constellations; and with a large planet, the mass 
of Jupiter, say, whose orbital plane is by chance aligned at right 
angles to our line of sight* When the dark planet is, from our 

perspective, to the right of the star, the star will be pulled a little 

to the right, and conversely when the planet is to the left* Con¬ 
sequently, the path of the star will be altered, or perturbed, from 
a straight line to a wavy one* The nearest star for which this 
gravitational perturbation method can be applied is Barnard’s 
Star, the nearest single star* The complex interactions of the 
three stars in the Alpha Centauri system would make the search 
for a low-mass companion there very difficult* Even for Barnard’s 
Star, the investigation must be painstaking, a search for micro¬ 
scopic displacements of position on photographic plates exposed 








Travels in Space and Time — 211 


at the telescope over a period of decades. Two such quests have 
been performed for planets around Barnard’s Star, and both have 
been by some criteria successful, implying the presence of two or 
more planets of Jovian mass moving in an orbit (calculated by 
Kepler’s third law) somewhat closer to their star than Jupiter and 
Saturn are to the Sun. But unfortunately the two sets of obser¬ 
vations seem mutually incompatible. A planetary system around 
Barnard’s Star may well have been discovered, but an unambig¬ 
uous demonstration awaits further study. 

Other methods of detecting planets around the stars are under 
development, including one where the obscuring light from the 
star is artificially occulted—with a disk in front of a space tele¬ 
scope, or by using the dark edge of the Moon as such a disk—and 
the reflected light from the planet, no longer hidden by the 
brightness of the nearby star, emerges. In the next few decades 
we should have definitive answers to which of the hundred 
nearest stars have large planetary companions. 

In recent years, infrared observations have revealed a number 
of likely preplanetary disk-shaped clouds of gas and dust around 
some of the nearby stars. Meanwhile, some provocative theoret¬ 
ical studies have suggested that planetary systems are a galactic 
commonplace. A set of computer investigations has examined 
the evolution of a flat, condensing disk of gas and dust of the sort 
that is thought to lead to stars and planets. Small lumps of 
matter—the first condensations in the disk—are injected at ran¬ 
dom times into the cloud. The lumps accrete dust particles as 
they move. When they become sizable, they also gravitationally 
attract gas, mainly hydrogen, in the cloud. When two moving 


A moon-like world and a planet more 
promising for life around a star near the 
Horsehead Nebula, 1,500 light-years from 
Earth. Exploration of such a system is a 
feasible objective for humanity only if 
spaceships capable of traveling close to the 
speed of light could be developed. Paint¬ 
ing by David Egge, 1978. 





212 - Cosmos 


lumps collide, the computer program makes them stick. The 
process continues until all the gas and dust has been in this way 
used up. The results depend on the initial conditions, particularly 
on the distribution of gas and dust density with distance from the 
center of the cloud. But for a range of plausible initial conditions, 
planetary systems—about ten planets, terrestrials close to the star, 
Jovians on the exterior—recognizably like ours are generated. 
Under other circumstances, there are no planets—just a smatten 
ing of asteroids; or there may be Jovian planets near the star; or a 
Jovian planet may accrete so much gas and dust as to become a 
star, the origin of a binary star system. It is still too early to be 
sure, but it seems that a splendid variety of planetary systems is to 
be found throughout the Galaxy, and with high frequency—all 
stars must come, we think, from such clouds of gas and dust. 
There may be a hundred billion planetary systems in the Galaxy 
awaiting exploration. 

Not one of those worlds will be identical to Earth. A few will 
be hospitable; most will appear hostile. Many will be achingly 
beautiful. In some worlds there will be many suns in the daytime 
sky, many moons in the heavens at night, or great particle ring 
systems soaring from horizon to horizon. Some moons will be so 
close that their planet will loom high in the heavens, covering 
half the sky. And some worlds will look out onto a vast gaseous 
nebula, the remains of an ordinary star that once was and is no 
longer. In all those skies, rich in distant and exotic constellations, 
there will be a faint yellow star—perhaps barely seen by the 
naked eye, perhaps visible only through the telescope—the home 
star of the fleet of interstellar transports exploring this tiny region 
of the great Milky Way Galaxy. 

The themes of space and time are, as we have seen, inten 
twined. Worlds and stars, like people, are born, live and die. The 
lifetime of a human being is measured in decades; the lifetime of 
the Sun is a hundred million times longer. Compared to a star, 
we are like mayflies, fleeting ephemeral creatures who live out 
their whole lives in the course of a single day. From the point of 
view of a mayfly, human beings are stolid, boring, almost entirely 
immovable, offering hardly a hint that they ever do anything. 
From the point of view of a star, a human being is a tiny flash, 
one of billions of brief lives flickering tenuously on the suface of 
a strangely cold, anomalously solid, exotically remote sphere of 
silicate and iron. 

In all those other worlds in space there are events in progress, 
occurrences that will determine their futures. And on our small 
planet, this moment in history is a historical branch point as 
profound as the confrontation of the Ionian scientists with the 
mystics 2,500 years ago. What we do with our world in this time 
will propagate down through the centuries and powerfully de^ 
termine the destiny of our descendants and their fate, if any, 
among the stars. 



Travels in Space and Time — 213 



An airless planet in a binary star system. Every object casts two shadows, antbred and antbblue. Painting by David 
Hardy. ©David A. Hardy, from Challenge of the Stars (Rand McNally). 





214 “ Cosmos 



A hypothetical planet in the Pleione system. A member 
of the Pleiades star cluster, Pleione is rotating so rapidly 
that it has distorted to an oblate shape, and starstuff is 
pouring off into space along the stellar equator. Painting 
by Don Dixon. © Don Dixon 1974- 



A contact binary, a red giant and a blue dwarf, the latter 
undergoing a nova explosion. The event has withered 
the planetary landscape. Painting by David Hardy. 
© David A. Hardy, from Challenge of the Stars (Rand 
McNally). 



A planet in orbit about a distant member of a globular star cluster. Painting by Don Dixon. © Don Dixon 1978. 






Travels in Space and Time - 215 



A hypothetical planet about a contact binary from which the stellar atmospheres are being lost to space in a great spiral 
pattern orbiting the two stars. Painting by Don Dixon. © Don Dixon. 



The Pleiades at night, from an ice-cave on a hypothetical nearby planet. Because the Pleiades star cluster formed only 
recently, this world is very young. Painting by David Egge. 





The nearest star: the Sun seen in the light of ionized helium in the far ultraviolet. The solar prominence surging at top 
nght extends momentarily some 300,000 kilometers into space until it falls back on the glowing gas that is the Sun’s 
visible surface. The smallest patches of hot gas visible on this image of the solar surface are about the size of the Earth. 
Skylab 4 photo, courtesy NASA. 




Chapter IX 

THE LIVES OF 
THE STARS 


Opening his two eyes, [Ra, the Sun god] cast light on Egypt, he separated 
night from day. The gods came forth from his mouth and mankind from his 
eyes. All things took their birth from him, the child who shines in the lotus 
and whose rays cause all beings to live. 

—An incantation from Ptolemaic Egypt 


God is able to create particles of matter of several sizes and figures . . . and 
perhaps of different densities and forces, and thereby to vary the laws of 
Nature, and make worlds of several sorts in several parts of the Universe. At 
least, 1 see nothing of contradiction in all this. 

—Isaac Newton, Optics 


We had the sky, up there, all speckled with stars, and we used to lay on our 
backs and look up at them, and discuss about whether they was made, or 
only just happened. 

—Mark Twain, Huckleberry Finn 


I have ... a terrible need . . . shall I say the word? ... of religion. Then I go 
out at night and paint the stars. 

—Vincent van Gogh 


218 - Cosmos 



Atoms in motion: a motion picture film 
of disturbances in a carbon background 
(shown as blue-black) by the random mo- 
tions of uranium atoms (shown as red). 
Democritus would have enjoyed this 
movie. Courtesy Albert Crewe, Univer- 
sity of Chicago. 


TO MAKE AN APPLE PIE, you need wheat, apples, a pinch of 
this and that, and the heat of the oven. The ingredients are made 
of molecules—sugar, say, or water. The molecules, in turn, are 
made of atoms—carbon, oxygen, hydrogen and a few others. 
Where do these atoms come from? Except for hydrogen, they are 
all made in stars. A star is a kind of cosmic kitchen inside which 
atoms of hydrogen are cooked into heavier atoms. Stars con¬ 
dense from interstellar gas and dust, which are composed mostly 
of hydrogen. But the hydrogen was made in the Big Bang, the 
explosion that began the Cosmos. If you wish to make an apple 
pie from scratch, you must first invent the universe. 

Suppose you take an apple pie and cut it in half; take one of the 
two pieces, cut it in half; and, in the spirit of Democritus, con¬ 
tinue. How many cuts before you are down to a single atom? The 
answer is about ninety successive cuts. Of course, no knife could 
be sharp enough, the pie is too crumbly, and the atom would in 
any case be too small to see unaided. But there is a way to do it. 

At Cambridge University in England, in the forty-five years 
centered on 1910, the nature of the atom was first understood— 
partly by shooting pieces of atoms at atoms and watching how 
they bounce off. A typical atom has a kind of cloud of electrons 
on the outside. Electrons are electrically charged, as their name 
suggests. The charge is arbitrarily called negative. Electrons de¬ 
termine the chemical properties of the atom—the glitter of gold, 
the cold feel of iron, the crystal structure of the carbon diamond. 
Deep inside the atom, hidden far beneath the electron cloud, is 
the nucleus, generally composed of positively charged protons 
and electrically neutral neutrons. Atoms are very small—one 
hundred million of them end to end would be as large as the tip 
of your little finger. But the nucleus is a hundred thousand times 
smaller still, which is part of the reason it took so long to be 
discovered.* Nevertheless, most of the mass of an atom is in its 
nucleus; the electrons are by comparison just clouds of moving 
fluff. Atoms are mainly empty space. Matter is composed chiefly 
of nothing. 

I am made of atoms. My elbow, which is resting on the table 
before me, is made of atoms. The table is made of atoms. But if 
atoms are so small and empty and the nuclei smaller still, why 
does the table hold me up? Why, as Arthur Eddington liked to 
ask, do the nuclei that comprise my elbow not slide effortlessly 


*It had previously been thought that the protons were uniformly dis¬ 
tributed throughout the electron cloud, rather than being concentrated 
in a nucleus of positive charge at the center. The nucleus was discovered 
by Ernest Rutherford at Cambridge when some of the bombarding 
particles were bounced back in the direction from which they had come. 
Rutherford commented: “It was quite the most incredible event that has 
ever happened to me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired 
a 15-inch [cannon] shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and 
hit you.” 









The Lives of the Stars — 219 


through the nuclei that comprise the table? Why don’t I wind up 
on the floor? Or fall straight through the Earth? 

The answer is the electron cloud. The outside of an atom in 
my elbow has a negative electrical charge. So does every atom in 
the table. But negative charges repel each other. My elbow does 
not slither through the table because atoms have electrons 
around their nuclei and because electrical forces are strong. Ev¬ 
eryday life depends on the structure of the atom. Turn off the 
electrical charges and everything crumbles to an invisible fine 
dust. Without electrical forces, there would no longer be things 
in the universe—merely diffuse clouds of electrons, protons and 
neutrons, and gravitating spheres of elementary particles, the 
featureless remnants of worlds. 

When we consider cutting an apple pie, continuing down 
beyond a single atom, we confront an infinity of the very small. 
And when we look up at the night sky, we confront an infinity of 
the very large. These infinities represent an unending regress that 
goes on not just very far, but forever. If you stand between two 
mirrors—in a barber shop, say—you see a large number of images 
of yourself, each the reflection of another. You cannot see an 
infinity of images because the mirrors are not perfectly flat and 
aligned, because light does not travel infinitely fast, and because 
you are in the way. When we talk about infinity we are talking 
about a quantity greater than any number, no matter how large. 

The American mathematician Edward Kasner once asked his 
nine-year-old nephew to invent a name for an extremely large 
number—ten to the power one hundred (10 100 ), a one followed 
by a hundred zeroes. The boy called it a googol. Here it is: 
10, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 
000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 000 , 
000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000. You, too, can make up your own 
very large numbers and give them strange names. Try it. It has a 
certain charm, especially if you happen to be nine. 

If a googol seems large, consider a googolplex. It is ten to the 
power of a googol—that is, a one followed by a googol zeros. By 
comparison, the total number of atoms in your body is about 
10 28 , and the total number of elementary particles—protons and 
neutrons and electrons—in the observable universe is about 10 80 . 
If the universe were packed solid* with neutrons, say, so there 

* The spirit of this calculation is very old. The opening sentences of 
Archimedes’ The Sand Reckoner are: “There are some, King Gelon, who 
think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude: and I mean by 
the sand not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily, 
but also that which is found in every region, whether inhabited or 
uninhabited. And again, there are some who, without regarding it as 
infinite, yet think that no number has been named which is great enough 
to exceed its multitude.” Archimedes then went on not only to name the 
number but to calculate it. Later he asked how many grains of sand 
would fit, side by side, into the universe that he knew. His estimate: 10 63 , 
which corresponds, by a curious coincidence, to 10 83 or so atoms. 



220 - Cosmos 



Atoms of the mineral marcasite, magni- 
fied 4"5 million times with a microscope 
employing both visible light and X-rays. 
Marcasite is a crystal in which the unit 
FeS 2 is repeated, Fe standing for iron and 
represented by the large spots, S standing 
for sulfur and represented by the pair of 
small spots flanking each iron atom. 
Courtesy Institute Professor Martin J. 
Buerger, Massachusetts Institute of Tech¬ 
nology. 


was no empty space anywhere, there would still be only about 
10 128 particles in it, quite a bit more than a googol but trivially 
small compared to a googolplex. And yet these numbers, the 
googol and the googolplex, do not approach, they come nowhere 
near, the idea of infinity. A googolplex is precisely as far from 
infinity as is the number one. We could try to write out a 
googolplex, but it is a forlorn ambition. A piece of paper large 
enough to have all the zeroes in a googolplex written out expli¬ 
citly could not be stuffed into the known universe. Happily, there 
is a simpler and very concise way of writing a googolplex: 10 10100 ; 
and even infinity: 00 (pronounced “infinity”). 

In a burnt apple pie, the char is mostly carbon. Ninety cuts and 
you come to a carbon atom, with six protons and six neutrons in 
its nucleus and six electrons in the exterior cloud. If we were to 
pull a chunk out of the nucleus—say, one with two protons and 
two neutrons—it would be not the nucleus of a carbon atom, but 
the nucleus of a helium atom. Such a cutting or fission of atomic 
nuclei occurs in nuclear weapons and conventional nuclear 
power plants, although it is not carbon that is split. If you make 
the ninety-first cut of the apple pie, if you slice a carbon nucleus, 
you make not a smaller piece of carbon, but something else—an 
atom with completely different chemical properties. If you cut an 
atom, you transmute the elements. 

But suppose we go farther. Atoms are made of protons, neu¬ 
trons and electrons. Can we cut a proton? If we bombard protons 
at high energies with other elementary particles—other protons, 
say—we begin to glimpse more fundamental units hiding inside 
the proton. Physicists now propose that so-called elementary 
particles such as protons and neutrons are in fact made of still 
more elementary particles called quarks, which come in a variety 
of “colors” and “flavors,” as their properties have been termed in a 
poignant attempt to make the subnuclear world a little more like 
home. Are quarks the ultimate constituents of matter, or are they 
too composed of still smaller and more elementary particles? Will 
we ever come to an end in our understanding of the nature of 
matter, or is there an infinite regression into more and more 
fundamental particles? This is one of the great unsolved prob¬ 
lems in science. 

The transmutation of the elements was pursued in medieval 
laboratories in a quest called alchemy. Many alchemists believed 
that all matter was a mixture of four elementary substances: 
water, air, earth and fire, an ancient Ionian speculation. By alter¬ 
ing the relative proportions of earth and fire, say, you would be 
able, they thought, to change copper into gold. The field 
swarmed with charming frauds and con men, such as Cagliostro 
and the Count of Saint-Germain, who pretended not only to 
transmute the elements but also to hold the secret of immortality. 
Sometimes gold was hidden in a wand with a false bottom, to 
appear miraculously in a crucible at the end of some arduous 





The Lives of the Stars — 221 


experimental demonstration. With wealth and immortality the 
bait, the European nobility found itself transferring large sums to 
the practitioners of this dubious art. But there were more serious 
alchemists such as Paracelsus and even Isaac Newton. The 
money was not altogether wasted—new chemical elements, such 
as phosphorus, antimony and mercury, were discovered. In fact, 
the origin of modern chemistry can be traced directly to these 
experiments. 

There are ninety-two chemically distinct kinds of naturally 
occurring atoms. They are called the chemical elements and until 
recently constituted everything on our planet, although they are 
mainly found combined into molecules. Water is a molecule 
made of hydrogen and oxygen atoms. Air is made mostly of the 
atoms nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H) and 
argon (Ar), in the molecular forms N 2 , 0 2 , C0 2 , H 2 0 and Ar. 
The Earth itself is a very rich mixture of atoms, mostly silicon,* 
oxygen, aluminum, magnesium and iron. Fire is not made of 
chemical elements at all. It is a radiating plasma in which the high 
temperature has stripped some of the electrons from their nuclei. 
Not one of the four ancient Ionian and alchemical “elements” is 
in the modern sense an element at all: one is a molecule, two are 
mixtures of molecules, and the last is a plasma. 

Since the time of the alchemists, more and more elements 
have been discovered, the latest to be found tending to be the 
rarest. Many are familiar—those that primarily make up the 
Earth; or those fundamental to life. Some are solids, some gases, 
and two (bromine and mercury) are liquids at room temperature. 
Scientists conventionally arrange them in order of complexity. 
The simplest, hydrogen, is element 1; the most complex, ura¬ 
nium, is element 92. Other elements are less familiar—hafnium, 
erbium, dyprosium and praseodymium, say, which we do not 
much bump into in everyday life. By and large, the more familiar 
an element is, the more abundant it is. The Earth contains a great 
deal of iron and rather little yttrium. There are, of course, ex¬ 
ceptions to this rule, such as gold or uranium, elements prized 
because of arbitrary economic conventions or aesthetic judg¬ 
ments, or because they have remarkable practical applications. 

The fact that atoms are composed of three kinds of elementary 
particles—protons, neutrons and electrons—is a comparatively re¬ 
cent finding. The neutron was not discovered until 1932. Mod¬ 
ern physics and chemistry have reduced the complexity of the 
sensible world to an astonishing simplicity: three units put to¬ 
gether in various patterns make, essentially, everything. 

The neutrons, as we have said and as their name suggests, 
carry no electrical charge. The protons have a positive charge 
and the electrons an eaual negative charge. The attraction between 

* Silicon is an atom. Silicone is a molecule, one of billions of different 
varieties containing silicon. Silicon and silicone have different properties 
and applications. 



A representation of some of the 92 natu¬ 
rally occurring chemical elements. The 
atomic number (equal to the number of 
protons—or electrons) is shown for each 
element in red. The number of neutrons 
for each element is shown in black. The 
atomic weight is equal to the number of 
protons plus neutrons in the atomic nu¬ 
cleus. Under typical terrestrial pressures 
and temperatures, some elements are 
solids (e.g., selenium, atomic number 34), 
some are liquids (e.g., bromine, 35), and 
some are gases (e.g., krypton, 36). 


BILL RAY 










The turbulent surface of the Sun. Shown is the granulation, the solar provinces in which hot gas rises and sinks. Each 
turbulent cell is about 2,000 kilometers across, about the distance from Paris to Kiev. Photograph in ordinary yellow 
light from Pic du Midi Observatory, France. 


The Lives of the Stars — 223 


the unlike charges of electrons and protons is what holds the 
atom together. Since each atom is electrically neutral, the 
number of protons in the nucleus must exactly equal the number 
of electrons in the electron cloud. The chemistry of an atom 
depends only on the number of electrons, which equals the 
number of protons, and which is called the atomic number. 
Chemistry is simply numbers, an idea Pythagoras would have 
liked. If you are an atom with one proton, you are hydrogen; 
two, helium; three, lithium; four, beryllium; five, boron; six, can 
bon; seven, nitrogen; eight, oxygen; and so on, up to 92 protons, 
in which case your name is uranium. 

Like charges, charges of the same sign, strongly repel one 
another. We can think of it as a dedicated mutual aversion to 
their own kind, a little as if the world were densely populated by 
anchorites and misanthropes. Electrons repel electrons. Protons 
repel protons. So how can a nucleus stick together? Why does it 
not instantly fly apart? Because there is another force of nature: 
not gravity, not electricity, but the short-range nuclear force, 
which, like a set of hooks that engage only when protons and 
neutrons come very close together, thereby overcomes the elec¬ 
trical repulsion among the protons. The neutrons, which con¬ 
tribute nuclear forces of attraction and no electrical forces of 
repulsion, provide a kind of glue that helps to hold the nucleus 
together. Longing for solitude, the hermits have been chained to 
their grumpy fellows and set among others given to indiscrimi¬ 
nate and voluble amiability. 




Close-up of a sunspot group in red hy¬ 
drogen light. Sunspots are comparatively 
cooler regions with strong magnetic fields. 
The adjacent dark “spicules” are ordered 
by local magnetism, somewhat as iron fil¬ 
ings are by a bar magnet. The adjacent 
bright “plages” are associated with the ap¬ 
pearance of the great storms called solar 
flares. Courtesy Big Bear Solar Observa¬ 
tory. 


The photosphere of the Sun, the region in 
the solar atmosphere from which ordinary 
visible light is radiated to space. This 
photograph was taken near a maximum in 
sunspot activity, which recurs every 11.2 
years. At such times there may be 100 
separate sunspots visible. They are darker 
than their surroundings because they are 
about 2000°C cooler. Sunspots were first 
discovered by Galileo, although under fa¬ 
vorable conditions—at sunset, for exam¬ 
ple—they can be seen with the naked eye. 
Courtesy Gary Chapman, San Fernando 
Observatory, California State University, 
North ridge. 




224 - Cosmos 



A lifeform and its star. Through a solar 
telescope equipped with a filter admitting 
only the red light emitted by hot hydro- 
gen gas, the sunspots appear dark. In fore¬ 
ground, on a mountain, is an exultant 
human being. Courtesy National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration. Photo¬ 
graph by Joseph Sutorick. 


Two protons and two neutrons are the nucleus of a helium 
atom, which turns out to be very stable. Three helium nuclei 
make a carbon nucleus; four, oxygen; five, neon; six, magnesium; 
seven, silicon; eight, sulfur; and so on. Every time we add one or 
more protons and enough neutrons to keep the nucleus together, 
we make a new chemical element. If we subtract one proton and 
three neutrons from mercury, we make gold, the dream of the 
ancient alchemists. Beyond uranium there are other elements 
that do not naturally occur on Earth. They are synthesized by 
human beings and in most cases promptly fall to pieces. One of 
them, Element 94, is called plutonium and is one of the most 
toxic substances known. Unfortunately, it falls to pieces rather 
slowly. 

Where do the naturally occurring elements come from? We 
might contemplate a separate creation of each atomic species. But 
the universe, all of it, almost everywhere, is 99 percent hydrogen 
and helium,* the two simplest elements. Helium, in fact, was 


*The Earth is an exception, because our primordial hydrogen, only 
weakly bound by our planet’s comparatively feeble gravitational attrac¬ 
tion, has by now largely escaped to space. Jupiter, with its more massive 
gravity, has retained at least much of its original complement of the 
lightest element. 




The Lives of the Stars — 225 


detected on the Sun before it was found on the Earth—hence its 
name (from Helios, one of the Greek sun gods.) Might the other 
chemical elements have somehow evolved from hydrogen and 
helium? To balance the electrical repulsion, pieces of nuclear 
matter would have to be brought very close together so that the 
short-range nuclear forces are engaged. This can happen only at 
very high temperatures where the particles are moving so fast 
that the repulsive force does not have time to act—temperatures 
of tens of millions of degrees. In nature, such high temperatures 
and attendant high pressures are common only in the insides of 
the stars. 

We have examined our Sun, the nearest star, in various 
wavelengths from radio waves to ordinary visible light to X-rays, 
all of which arise only from its outermost layers. It is not exactly a 
red-hot stone, as Anaxagoras thought, but rather a great ball of 
hydrogen and helium gas, glowing because of its high tempera¬ 
tures, in the same way that a poker glows when it is brought to 
red heat. Anaxagoras was at least partly right. Violent solar 
storms produce brilliant flares that disrupt radio communications 
on Earth; and immense arching plumes of hot gas, guided by the 
Sun’s magnetic field, the solar prominences, which dwarf the 
Earth. The sunspots, sometimes visible to the naked eye at sun¬ 
set, are cooler regions of enhanced magnetic field strength. All 
this incessant, roiling, turbulent activity is in the comparatively 
cool visible surface. We see only to temperatures of about 6,000 
degrees. But the hidden interior of the Sun, where sunlight is 
being generated, is at 40 million degrees. 

Stars and their accompanying planets are born in the gravita¬ 
tional collapse of a cloud of interstellar gas and dust. The colli¬ 
sion of the gas molecules in the interior of the cloud heats it, 
eventually to the point where hydrogen begins to fuse into he¬ 
lium: four hydrogen nuclei combine to form a helium nucleus, 
with an attendant release of a gamma-ray photon. Suffering al¬ 
ternate absorption and emission by the overlying matter, gradu¬ 
ally working its way toward the surface of the star, losing energy 
at every step, the photon’s epic journey takes a million years 
until, as visible light, it reaches the surface and is radiated to 
space. The star has turned on. The gravitational collapse of the 
prestellar cloud has been halted. The weight of the outer layers 
of the star is now supported by the high temperatures and pres¬ 
sures generated in the interior nuclear reactions. The Sun has 
been in such a stable situation for the past five billion years. 
Thermonuclear reactions like those in a hydrogen bomb are 
powering the Sun in a contained and continuous explosion, con¬ 
verting some four hundred million tons (4 x 10 14 grams) of 
hydrogen into helium every second. When we look up at night 
and view the stars, everything we see is shining because of distant 
nuclear fusion. 

In the direction of the star Deneb, in the constellation of 



226 - Cosmos 



Loops of hot ionized gas above an active 
solar region are constrained to follow the 
local magnetic lines of force, like iron fil¬ 
ings in the held of a bar magnet. This 
Skylab photo was taken in far ultraviolet 
light. Such light is readily absorbed by the 
Earth’s atmosphere, so such pictures can 
be obtained only from Earth satellites or 
interplanetary probes. Courtesy NASA. 


Cygnus the Swan, is an enormous glowing superbubble of ex¬ 
tremely hot gas, probably produced by supernova explosions, the 
deaths of stars, near the center of the bubble. At the periphery, 
interstellar matter is compressed by the supernova shock wave, 
triggering new generations of cloud collapse and star formation. 
In this sense, stars have parents; and, as is sometimes also true for 
humans, a parent may die in the birth of the child. 

Stars like the Sun are born in batches, in great compressed 
cloud complexes such as the Orion Nebula. Seen from the out¬ 
side, such clouds seem dark and gloomy. But inside, they are 
brilliantly illuminated by the hot newborn stars (p. 230). Later, 
the stars wander out of their nursery to seek their fortunes in the 
Milky Way, stellar adolescents still surrounded by tufts of glow¬ 
ing nebulosity, residues still gravitationally attached of their am- 
niotic gas. The Pleiades (p. 231) are a nearby example. As in the 
families of humans, the maturing stars journey far from home, 
and the siblings see little of each other. Somewhere in the Galaxy 
there are stars—perhaps dozens of them—that are the brothers 
and sisters of the Sun, formed from the same cloud complex, 
some 5 billion years ago. But we do not know which stars they 
are. They may, for all we know, be on the other side of the 
Milky Way. 

The conversion of hydrogen into helium in the center of the 
Sun not only accounts for the Sun’s brightness in photons of 


The Lives of the Stars — 227 



A hole in the corona of the Sun. Surrounding the solar photosphere is the thin outer atmosphere of the Sun, at a 
temperature of a million degrees, which changes its shape with the 11.2-year solar cycle. The corona is seen here in 
soft X-rays as a red halo about the Sun. The coronal hole is boot-shaped at center. Through such holes stream the 
protons and electrons of the solar wind, on their way past the planets to interstellar space. Skylab photo, courtesy 

NASA. 




228 - Cosmos 




The death of the Earth and Sun* Several billion years from now, there will be a last perfect day (top left). 
Then, over a period of millions of years, the Sun will swell, the Earth will heat, many lifeforms will be 
extinguished, and the shoreline will retreat (top right). The oceans will rapidly evaporate (bottom left), 







The Lives of the Stars — 229 



and the atmosphere will escape to space. As the Sun evolves toward a red giant (bottom right), the Earth 
will become dry, barren and airless. Eventually the Sun will fill most of the sky, and may engulf the 
Earth. Paintings by Adolf Schaller. 



230 - Cosmos 



The Triffid Nebula in the constellation 
Sagittarius, several thousand light-years 
away. Stars embedded in the nebula in¬ 
duce the gas to shine. Most of the stars we 
see here are not associated with the neb¬ 
ula, but lie between it and us. The dark 
lanes in the nebula are composed of inter¬ 
stellar dust. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 



The Orion Nebula, the largest complex of 
gas and dust known in the Milky Way 
Galaxy. The first person to resolve indi¬ 
vidual stars in the inner region of this 
nebula was Christiaan Huygens in 1656. 
The gas is excited by the light of hot, 
young stars, recently formed, perhaps only 
25,000 years old. The Nebula is today 
visible with the naked eye. Did our ances¬ 
tors know it 100,000 years ago? Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 


visible light; it also produces a radiance of a more mysterious and 
ghostly kind: The Sun glows faintly in neutrinos, which, like 
photons, weigh nothing and travel at the speed of light. But 
neutrinos are not photons. They are not a kind of light. Neu¬ 
trinos have the same intrinsic angular momentum, or spin, as pro¬ 
tons, electrons and neutrons; while photons have twice as much 
spin. Matter is transparent to neutrinos, which pass almost effort¬ 
lessly through the Earth and through the Sun. Only a tiny fraction 
of them is stopped by the intervening matter. As I look up at the 
Sun for a second, a billion neutrinos pass through my eyeball. Of 
course, they are not stopped at the retina as ordinary photons are 
but continue unmolested through the back of my head. The 
curious part is that if at night I look down at the ground, toward 
the place where the Sun would be (if the Earth were not in the 
way), almost exactly the same number of solar neutrinos 
pass through my eyeball, pouring through an interposed Earth 
which is as transparent to neutrinos as a pane of clear glass is to 
visible light. 

If our knowledge of the solar interior is as complete as we 
think, and if we also understand the nuclear physics that makes 
neutrinos, then we should be able to calculate with fair accuracy 
how many solar neutrinos we should receive in a given area- 
such as my eyeball—in a given unit of time, such as a second. 
Experimental confirmation of the calculation is much more diffi¬ 
cult. Since neutrinos pass directly through the Earth, we cannot 
catch a given one. But for a vast number of neutrinos, a small 
fraction will interact with matter and in the appropriate circum¬ 
stances might be detected. Neutrinos can on rare occasion con¬ 
vert chlorine atoms into argon atoms, with the same total 
number of protons and neutrons. To detect the predicted solar 
neutrino flux, you need an immense amount of chlorine, so 
American physicists have poured a huge quantity of cleaning 
fluid into the Homestake Mine in Lead, South Dakota. The 
chlorine is microchemically swept for the newly produced argon. 
The more argon found, the more neutrinos inferred. These ex¬ 
periments imply that the Sun is dimmer in neutrinos than the 
calculations predict. 

There is a real and unsolved mystery here. The low solar 
neutrino flux probably does not put our view of stellar nucleo¬ 
synthesis in jeopardy, but it surely means something important. 
Proposed explanations range from the hypothesis that neutrinos 
fall to pieces during their passage between the Sun and the Earth 
to the idea that the nuclear fires in the solar interior are tempo¬ 
rarily banked, sunlight being generated in our time partly by slow 
gravitational contraction. But neutrino astronomy is very new. 
For the moment we stand amazed at having created a tool that 
can peer directly into the blazing heart of the Sun. As the sensi¬ 
tivity of the neutrino telescope improves, it may become possible 
to probe nuclear fusion in the deep interiors of the nearby stars. 



The Lives of the Stars — 231 


But hydrogen fusion cannot continue forever: in the Sun or 
any other star, there is only so much hydrogen fuel in its hot 
interior. The fate of a star, the end of its life cycle, depends very 
much on its initial mass. If, after whatever matter it has lost to 
space, a star retains two or three times the mass of the Sun, it 
ends its life cycle in a startlingly different mode than the Sun. But 
the Sun’s fate is spectacular enough. When the central hydrogen 
has all reacted to form helium, five or six billion years from now, 
the zone of hydrogen fusion will slowly migrate outward, an 
expanding shell of thermonuclear reactions, until it reaches the 
place where the temperatures are less than about ten million 
degrees. Then hydrogen fusion will shut itself off. Meanwhile 
the self-gravity of the Sun will force a renewed contraction of its 
helium-rich core and a further increase in its interior tempera¬ 
tures and pressures. The helium nuclei will be jammed together 
still more tightly, so much so that they begin to stick together, the 
hooks of their short-range nuclear forces becoming engaged de¬ 
spite the mutual electrical repulsion. The ash will become fuel, 
and the Sun will be triggered into a second round of fusion 
reactions. 

This process will generate the elements carbon and oxygen 
and provide additional energy for the Sun to continue shining for 
a limited time. A star is a phoenix, destined to rise for a time 
from its own ashes.* Under the combined influence of hydrogen 
fusion in a thin shell far from the solar interior and the high 
temperature helium fusion in the core, the Sun will undergo a 
major change: its exterior will expand and cool. The Sun will 
become a red giant star, its visible surface so tar from its interior 
that the gravity at its surface grows feeble, its atmosphere ex¬ 
panding into space in a kind of stellar gale. When the Sun, ruddy 
and bloated, becomes a red giant, it will envelop and devour the 
planets Mercury and Venus—and probably the Earth as well. 
The inner solar system will then reside within the Sun. 

Billions of years from now, there will be a last perfect day on 
Earth. Thereafter the Sun will slowly become red and distended, 
presiding over an Earth sweltering even at the poles. The Arctic 
and Antarctic icecaps will melt, flooding the coasts of the. world. 
The high oceanic temperatures will release more water vapor 
into the air, increasing cloudiness, shielding the Earth from sun¬ 
light and delaying the end a little. But solar evolution is inexora¬ 
ble. Eventually the oceans will boil, the atmosphere will 
evaporate away to space and a catastrophe of the most immense 
proportions imaginable will overtake our planetfl In the meantime, 

* Stars more massive than the Sun achieve higher central temperatures 
and pressures in their late evolutionary stages. They are able to rise more 
than once from their ashes, using carbon and oxygen as fuel for synthe¬ 
sizing still heavier elements. 

t The Aztecs foretold a time “when the Earth has become tired . . . , 
when the seed of Earth has ended.” On that day, they believed, the Sun 
will fall from the sky and the stars will be shaken from the heavens. 



The Pleiades in the constellation Taurus, 
first examined through the telescope by 
Galileo. The spectra of the blue nebulo¬ 
sity is the same as that of the nearby stars, 
showing the nebulosity to be dust, re¬ 
flecting the light of the newly-formed 
stars. About 400 light-years away, the 
brighter stars were named by the ancient 
Greeks after the daughters of Atlas, the 
Titan who held the heavens up. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 



The Rosette Nebula resembles a planetary 
nebula, but is associated with many stars, 
not just one; and these stars are hot and 
young (less than a million years old), while 
the central star in a planetary nebula is 
usually hot and billions of years old. Ra¬ 
diation pressure from the central stars is 
driving the red hydrogen gas out into 
space. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 





BILL RAY 


232 - Cosmos 



A true planetary nebula in the constella^ 
tion Aquarius, composed of a thin out' 
ward'moving shell of hot hydrogen. Such 
nebulae are typically a few lighnyears 
across and expanding at about 50 kilome' 
ters per second from a central star which 
has a surface temperature in excess of 
100,000 degrees. Five billion years from 
now, at the end of the red giant stage in 
the evolution of our Sun, the solar system 
from afar may look like this. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 



A photograph of an Anasazi rock painting 
from the lower face of an overhanging 
ledge in the canyonlands of New Mexico. 
Painted in the middle of the eleventh 
century, it probably depicts the supernova 
of 1054 in its proper relationship to the 
crescent moon on the days of its discow 
ery. 


human beings will almost certainly have evolved into 
something quite different. Perhaps our descendants will be able 
to control or moderate stellar evolution. Or perhaps they will 
merely pick up and leave for Mars or Europa or Titan or, at last, 
as Robert Goddard envisioned, seek out an uninhabited planet in 
some young and promising planetary system. 

The Sun’s stellar ash can be reused for fuel only up to a point. 
Eventually the time will come when the solar interior is all 
carbon and oxygen, when at the prevailing temperatures and 
pressures no further nuclear reactions can occur. After the central 
helium is almost all used up, the interior of the Sun will continue 
its postponed collapse, the temperatures will rise again, triggering 
a last round of nuclear reactions and expanding the solar atmo' 
sphere a little. In its death throes, the Sun will slowly pulsate, 
expanding and contracting once every few millennia, eventually 
spewing its atmosphere into space in one or more concentric 
shells of gas. The hot exposed solar interior will flood the shell 
with ultraviolet light, inducing a lovely red and blue fluorescence 
extending beyond the orbit of Pluto. Perhaps half the mass of the 
Sun will be lost in this way. The solar system will then be filled 
with an eerie radiance, the ghost of the Sun, outward bound. 

When we look around us in our little corner of the Milky' 
Way, we see many stars surrounded by spherical shells of glow' 
ing gas, the planetary nebulae. (They have nothing to do with 
planets, but some of them seemed reminiscent in inferior tele' 
scopes of the blue'green discs of Uranus and Neptune.) They 
appear as rings, but only because, as with soap bubbles, we see 
more of them at the periphery than at the center. Every planetary 
nebula is a token of a star in extremis. Near the central star there 
may be a retinue of dead worlds, the remnants of planets once 
full of life and now airless and oceamfree, bathed in a wraithlike 
luminance. The remains of the Sun, the exposed solar core at 
first enveloped in its planetary nebula, will be a small hot star, 
cooling to space, collapsed to a density unheard of on Earth, 
more than a ton per teaspoonful. Billions of years hence, the Sun 
will become a degenerate white dwarf, cooling like all those 
points of light we see at the centers of planetary nebulae from 
high surface temperatures to its ultimate state, a dark and dead 
black dwarf. 

Two stars of roughly the same mass will evolve roughly in 
parallel. But a more massive star will spend its nuclear fuel faster, 
become a red giant sooner, and be first to enter the final white 
dwarf decline. There should therefore be, as there are, many 
cases of binary stars, one component a red giant, the other a 
white dwarf. Some such pairs are so close together that they 
touch, and the glowing stellar atmosphere flows from the dis' 
tended red giant to the compact white dwarf, tending to fall on a 
particular province of the surface of the white dwarf. The hydrogen 



The Lives of the Stars - 233 


accumulates, compressed to higher and higher pressures 
and temperatures by the intense gravity of the white dwarf, until 
the stolen atmosphere of the red giant undergoes thermonuclear 
reactions, and the white dwarf briefly flares into brilliance. Such a 
binary is called a nova and has quite a different origin from a 
supernova. Novae occur only in binary systems and are powered 
by hydrogen fusion; supernovae occur in single stars and are 
powered by silicon fusion. 

Atoms synthesized in the interiors of stars are commonly re- 
turned to the interstellar gas. Red giants find their outer atmo¬ 
spheres blowing away into space; planetary nebulae are the final 
stages of Sunlike stars blowing their tops. Supernovae violently 
eject much of their stellar mass into space. The atoms returned 
are, naturally, those most readily made in the thermonuclear 
reactions in stellar interiors: Hydrogen fuses into helium, helium 
into carbon, carbon into oxygen and thereafter, in massive stars, 
by the successive addition of further helium nuclei, neon, mag¬ 
nesium, silicon, sulfur, and so on are built—additions by stages, 
two protons and two neutrons per stage, all the way to iron. 
Direct fusion of silicon also generates iron, a pair of silicon atoms, 
each with twenty-eight protons and neutrons, joining, at a tem¬ 
perature of billions of degrees, to make an atom of iron with 
fifty-six protons and neutrons. 

These are all familiar chemical elements. We recognize their 
names. Such stellar nuclear reactions do not readily generate 
erbium, hafnium, dyprosium, praseodymium or yttrium, but 
rather the elements we know in everyday life, elements returned 
to the interstellar gas, where they are swept up in a subsequent 
generation of cloud collapse and star and planet formation. All 
the elements of the Earth except hydrogen and some helium 
have been cooked by a kind of stellar alchemy billions of years 
ago in stars, some of which are today inconspicuous white dwarfs 
on the other side of the Milky Way Galaxy. The nitrogen in our 
DNA, the calcium in our teeth, the iron in our blood, the carbon 
in our apple pies were made in the interiors of collapsing stars. 
We are made of stars tuff. 

Some of the rarer elements are generated in the supernova 
explosion itself. We have relatively abundant gold and uranium 
on Earth only because many supernova explosions had occurred 
just before the solar system formed. Other planetary systems may 
have somewhat different amounts of our rare elements. Are 
there planets where the inhabitants proudly display pendants of 
niobium and bracelets of protactinium, while gold is a laboratory 
curiosity? Would our lives be improved if gold and uranium were 
as obscure and unimportant on Earth as praseodymium? 

The origin and evolution of life are connected in the most 
intimate way with the origin and evolution of the stars. First: The 
very matter of which we are composed, the atoms that make life 
possible, were generated long ago and far away in giant red stars. 



The Crab Nebula in Taurus, 6,000 light- 
years distant; it is the remains of the su¬ 
pernova explosion witnessed in the year 
1054 on Earth. Its filaments are unraveling 
at about 1,100 kilometers per second. 
After almost a millennium of expansion it 
is still losing about 100,000 times more 
energy to space every second than the Sun 
does. At its core is a condensed neutron 
star, a pulsar, flashing about 30 times a 
second. The period is known very pre¬ 
cisely. On June 28, 1969, the period was 
0.033099324 seconds, and was slowing 
down at a rate of roughly 0.0012 seconds 
per century. The corresponding loss of 
rotational energy is just enough to account 
for the brightness of the Nebula. The 
Crab is rich in heavy elements being re¬ 
turned to interstellar space for future 
generations of star formation. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 



The Veil Nebula, part of an old spherical 
supernova remnant called the Cygnus 
Loop. The supernova explosion that 
formed it occurred about 50,000 years 
ago. It is still expanding at about 100 kilo¬ 
meters per second, and is glowing from 
collisions with interstellar gas and dust. 
The atoms in the Veil are slowed by col¬ 
lision and eventually become part of the 
interstellar medium. Courtesy Hale Ob¬ 
servatories. 



234 - Cosmos 


The Milky Way Galaxy seen edge-on and 
face-on with the position of the Sun and 
the historical supernovae indicated. Be¬ 
cause massive stars tend to lie in the plane 
of the Galaxy, their end products, the su- 
pemovae, do so as well. But obscuring 
dust also is concentrated in the galactic 
plane, and supernovae tend to be visible 
only when relatively nearby: no such ex¬ 
plosion has ever been recorded on the 
other side of the Galaxy, although they 
undoubtedly occur there. The explosion 
that made the Crab Nebula, and Tycho’s 
supernova of 1572 both occurred in ga¬ 
lactic spiral arms exterior to the position 
of the Sun. Kepler’s supernova of 1604 
occurred near the center of the Galaxy, 
but was visible from Earth because it was 
above the galactic plane and relatively free 
of obscuring dust. The diameter of the 
Galaxy is about 100,000 light-years. 
Courtesy Scientific American . From His¬ 
torical Supernovas by F. Richard Stephen¬ 
son and David H. Clark. Copyright © 
1976 by Scientific American, Inc. All 
rights reserved. 



The Large Magellanic Cloud, a small, ir¬ 
regular satellite galaxy of the Milky Way. 
As in all galaxies, supernova explosions 
happen here. An unprecedented burst of 
X-rays and gamma rays was detected from 
a small region of the sky corresponding to 
supernova remnant N49 in the Large Ma¬ 
gellanic Cloud on March 5, 1979—by 

accident the date that Voyager 1 
encountered the Jupiter system. Courtesy 
Yerkes Observatory, University of Chi¬ 
cago. 



The relative abundance of the chemical elements found in the 
Cosmos matches the relative abundance of atoms generated in 
stars so well as to leave little doubt that red giants and super¬ 
novae are the ovens and crucibles in which matter has been 
forged. The Sun is a second- or third-generation star. All the 
matter in it, all the matter you see around you, has been through 
one or two previous cycles of stellar alchemy. Second: The exis¬ 
tence of certain varieties of heavy atoms on the Earth suggests 
that there was a nearby supernova explosion shortly before the 
solar system was formed. But this is unlikely to be a mere coinci¬ 
dence; more likely, the shock wave produced by the supernova 
compressed interstellar gas and dust and triggered the condensa¬ 
tion of the solar system. Third: When the Sun turned on, its 
ultraviolet radiation poured into the atmosphere of the Earth; its 
warmth generated lightning; and these energy sources sparked 
the complex organic molecules that led to the origin of life. 
Fourth: Life on Earth runs almost exclusively on sunlight. Plants 
gather the photons and convert solar to chemical energy. An¬ 
imals parasitize the plants. Farming is simply the methodical har¬ 
vesting of sunlight, using plants as grudging intermediaries. We 








The Lives of the Stars - 235 



are, almost all of us, solar-powered* Finally, the hereditary 
changes called mutations provide the raw material for evolution* 
Mutations, from which nature selects its new inventory of life 
forms, are produced in part by cosmic rays—high-energy particles 
ejected almost at the speed of light in supernova explosions* The 
evolution of life on Earth is driven in part by the spectacular 
deaths of distant, massive suns* 

Imagine carrying a Geiger counter and a piece of uranium ore 
to some place deep beneath the Earth—a gold mine, say, or a lava 
tube, a cave carved through the Earth by a river of molten rock* 
The sensitive counter clicks when exposed to gamma rays or to 
such high-energy charged panicles as protons and helium nuclei* 
If we bring it close to the uranium ore, which is emitting helium 
nuclei in a spontaneous nuclear decay, the count rate, the 
number of clicks per minute, increases dramatically* If we drop 
the uranium ore into a heavy lead canister, the count rate de¬ 
clines substantially; the lead has absorbed the uranium radiation* 
But some clicks can still be heard* Of the remaining counts, a 
traction come from natural radioactivity in the walls of the cave* 
But there are more clicks than can be accounted for by radioac¬ 
tivity* Some of them are caused by high-energy charged particles 
penetrating the roof* We are listening to cosmic rays, produced in 
another age in the depths of space* Cosmic rays, mainly electrons 
and protons, have bombarded the Earth for the entire history of 
life on our planet* A star destroys itself thousands of light-years 
away and produces cosmic rays that spiral through the Milky 
Way Galaxy for millions of years until, quite by accident, some 
of them strike the Earth, and our hereditary material* Perhaps 
some key steps in the development of the genetic code, or the 
Cambrian explosion, or bipedal stature among our ancestors 
were initiated by cosmic rays* 

On July 4, in the year 1054, Chinese astronomers recorded 
what they called a “guest star” in the constellation of Taurus, the 
Bull* A star never before seen became brighter than any star in 


Late stages of stellar evolution* In a con¬ 
tact binary, the luminous stellar atmo¬ 
sphere flows from a red giant star (left) to 
the accretion disk around a pulsar neutron 
star (right). The disk glows in X-rays and 
other radiation at the point of contact* 
Painting by Don Davis. 



The death of a solar system. Schematic 
views of the loss of planetary atmospheres 
and the vaporization of worlds when the 
local sun becomes a supernova. The 
shock waves we see propagate beyond the 
local system, compress the interstellar gas 
and dust, and lead to the formation of 
new planetary systems. Paintings by Adolf 
Schaller, Rick Sternbach and John Alli¬ 
son. 






236 - Cosmos 





The influence of gravity on matter and light. Alice, the 
March Hare, the Mad Hatter and the Cheshire Cat from 
Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland enjoy a tea party 
under ordinary Earth gravity (a) of 1 g. The light beam 
from the lantern at right is undetected by the Earth’s 
gravity. As we approach 0 g, the slightest motion sends 
our friends pirouetting off into space (b, c); the tea forms 
itself into floating spherical blobs. As we return to 1 g, 
Alice and companions are brought back to Earth, and, 
briefly, it is raining tea (d)* At several g’s, they are unable 
even to move themselves a little (e, f), but the beam of 
light is unaffected. By the time we reach 100,000 g’s, the 
entire landscape is crushed flat. At a billion g’s, gravity 
perceptibly bends light, and at billions of g’s, light falls 
back to the ground. At that point, the intense gravity has 
converted Wonderland into a black hole. Drawings after 
Tenniel by Brown. 





The Lives of the Stars — 237 


the sky. Halfway around the world, in the American Southwest, 
there was then a high culture, rich in astronomical tradition, that 
also witnessed this brilliant new star.* From carbon 14 dating of 
the remains of a charcoal fire, we know that in the middle 
eleventh century some Anasazi, the antecedents of the Hopi of 
today, were living under an overhanging ledge in what is today 
New Mexico. One of them seems to have drawn on the cliff 
overhang, protected from the weather, a picture of the new star. 
Its position relative to the crescent moon would have been just as 
was depicted. There is also a handprint, perhaps the artist’s sig¬ 
nature. 

This remarkable star, 5,000 light-years distant, is now called 
the Crab Supernova, because an astronomer centuries later was 
unaccountably reminded of a crab when looking at the explosion 
remnant through his telescope. The Crab Nebula is the remains 
of a massive star that blew itself up. The explosion was seen on 
Earth with the naked eye for three months. Easily visible in 
broad daylight, you could read by it at night. On the average, a 
supernova occurs in a given galaxy about once every century. 
During the lifetime of a typical galaxy, about ten billion years, a 
hundred million stars will have exploded—a great many, but still 
only about one star in a thousand. In the Milky Way, after the 
event of 1054, there was a supernova observed in 1572, and 
described by Tycho Brahe, and another, just after, in 1604, 
described by Johannes Keplerd Unhappily, no supernova explo¬ 
sions have been observed in our Galaxy since the invention of 
the telescope, and astronomers have been chafing at the bit for 
some centuries. 

Supernovae are now routinely observed in other galaxies. 
Among my candidates for the sentence that would most 
thoroughly astonish an astronomer of the early 1900’s is the 
following, from a paper by David Helfand and Knox Long in the 
December 6, 1979, issue of the British journal Nature: “On 5 
March, 1979, an extremely intense burst of hard x-rays and 
gamma rays was recorded by the nine interplanetary spacecraft of 
the burst sensor network, and localized by time-of-flight determi¬ 
nations to a position coincident with the supernova remnant N49 
in the Large Magellanic Cloud.” (The Large Magellanic Cloud, 



The dial of a magic gravity machine with 
which we could specify the local accelera¬ 
tion due to gravity. The standard value 
for the surface of the Earth is 1 g. At the 
high end of the dial we begin to approach 
the gravitational forces that make neutron 
stars and black holes. 


* Moslem observers noted it as well. But there is not a word about it in all 
the chronicles of Europe. 

t Kepler published in 1606 a book called De Stella Nova, “On the New 
Star,” in which he wonders if a supernova is the result of some random 
concatenation of atoms in the heavens. He presents what he says is “. . . 
not my own opinion, but my wife’s: Yesterday, when weary with writing, 
I was called to supper, and a salad I had asked for was set before me. ‘It 
seems then,’ 1 said, ‘if pewter dishes, leaves of lettuce, grains of salt, drops 
of water, vinegar, oil and slices of eggs had been flying about in the air for 
all eternity, it might at last happen by chance that there would come a 
salad.’ ‘Yes,’ responded my lovely, ‘but not so nice as this one of mine.’ ” 







238 - Cosmos 



A photograph of the X-ray sky, showing 
the bright source Cygnus X-l (center), a 
probable black hole. An image from High 
Energy Astrophysical Observatory 2, in 
Earth orbit. Courtesy Ricardo Giacconi 
and NASA. 



Schematic representation of the distortion 
of flat space by a massive object, useful in 
thinking about gravitation and black 
holes. 


so-called because the first inhabitant of the Northern Hemisphere 
to notice it was Magellan, is a small satellite galaxy of the Milky 
Way, 180,000 light-years distant. There is also, as you might 
expect, a Small Magellanic Cloud.) However, in the same issue of 
Nature , E. P. Mazets and colleagues of the Ioffe Institute, Lenin¬ 
grad—who observed this source with the gamma-ray burst detec¬ 
tor aboard the Venera 11 and 12 spacecraft on their way to land 
on Venus—argue that what is being seen is a flaring pulsar only a 
few hundred light-years away. But despite the close agreement in 
position Helfand and Long do not insist that the gamma-ray 
outburst is associated with the supernova remnant. They chari¬ 
tably consider many alternatives, including the surprising possi¬ 
bility that the source lies within the solar system. Perhaps it is the 
exhaust of an alien starship on its long voyage home. But a 
rousing of the stellar fires in N49 is a simpler hypothesis: we are 
sure there are such things as supernovae. 

The fate of the inner solar system as the Sun becomes a red 
giant is grim enough. But at least the planets will never be melted 
and frizzled by an erupting supernova. That is a fate reserved for 
planets near stars more massive than the Sun. Since such stars 
with higher temperatures and pressures run rapidly through their 
store of nuclear fuel, their lifetimes are much shorter than the 
Sun’s. A star tens of times more massive than the Sun can stably 
convert hydrogen to helium for only a few million years before 
moving briefly on to more exotic nuclear reactions. Thus there is 
almost certainly not enough time for the evolution of advanced 
forms of life on any accompanying planets; and it will be rare that 
beings elsewhere can ever know that their star will become a 
supernova: if they live long enough to understand supernovae, 
their star is unlikely to become one. 

The essential preliminary to a supernova explosion is the gen¬ 
eration by silicon fusion of a massive iron core. Under enormous 
pressure, the free electrons in the stellar interior are forcibly 
melded with the protons of the iron nuclei, the equal and oppo¬ 
site electrical charges canceling each other out; the inside of the 
star is turned into a single giant atomic nucleus, occupying a 
much smaller volume than the precursor electrons and iron nu¬ 
clei. The core implodes violently, the exterior rebounds and a 
supernova explosion results. A supernova can be brighter than 
the combined radiance of all the other stars in the galaxy within 
which it is embedded. All those recently hatched massive blue- 
white supergiant stars in Orion are destined in the next few 
million years to become supernovae, a continuing cosmic 
fireworks in the constellation of the hunter. 

The awesome supernova explosion ejects into space most of 
the matter of the precursor star—a little residual hydrogen and 
helium and significant amounts of other atoms, carbon and sili¬ 
con, iron and uranium. Remaining is a core of hot neutrons, 
bound together by nuclear forces, a single, massive atomic nucleus 






















The Lives of the Stars — 239 


with an atomic weight about 10 56 , a sun thirty kilometers 
across; a tiny, shrunken, dense, withered stellar fragment, a rap¬ 
idly rotating neutron star. As the core of a massive red giant 
collapses to form such a neutron star, it spins faster. The neutron 
star at the center of the Crab Nebula is an immense atomic 
nucleus, about the size of Manhattan, spinning thirty times a 
second. Its powerful magnetic field, amplified during the collapse, 
traps charged particles rather as the much tinier magnetic field of 
Jupiter does. Electrons in the rotating magnetic field emit beamed 
radiation not only at radio frequencies but in visible light as well. 
If the Earth happens to lie in the beam of this cosmic lighthouse, 
we see it flash once each rotation. This is the reason it is called a 
pulsar. Blinking and ticking like a cosmic metronome, pulsars 
keep far better time than the most accurate ordinary clock. 
Long-term timing of the radio pulse rate of some pulsars, for 
instance, one called PSR 0329+54, suggests that these objects 
may have one or more small planetary companions. It is perhaps 
conceivable that a planet could survive the evolution of a star 
into a pulsar; or a planet could be captured at a later time. I 
wonder how the sky would look from the surface of such a 
planet. 

Neutron star matter weighs about the same as an ordinary 
mountain per teaspoonful—so much that if you had a piece of it 
and let it go (you could hardly do otherwise), it might pass 
effortlessly through the Earth like a falling stone through air, 
carving a hole for itself completely through our planet and 
emerging out the other side—perhaps in China. People there 
might be out for a stroll, minding their own business, when a tiny 
lump of neutron star plummets out of the ground, hovers for a 
moment, and then returns beneath the Earth, providing at least a 
diversion from the routine of the day. If a piece of neutron star 
matter were dropped from nearby space, with the Earth rotating 
beneath it as it fell, it would plunge repeatedly through the 
rotating Earth, punching hundreds of thousands of holes before 
friction with the interior of our planet stopped the motion. Be¬ 
fore it comes to rest at the center of the Earth, the inside of our 
planet might look briefly like a Swiss cheese until the subterra¬ 
nean flow of rock and metal healed the wounds. It is just as well 
that large lumps of neutron star matter are unknown on Earth. 
But small lumps are everywhere. The awesome power of the 
neutron star is lurking in the nucleus of every atom, hidden in 
every teacup and dormouse, every breath of air, every apple pie. 
The neutron star teaches us respect for the commonplace. 

A star like the Sun will end its days, as we have seen, as a red 
giant and then a white dwarf. A collapsing star twice as massive 
as the Sun will become a supernova and then a neutron star. But 
a more massive star, left, after its supernova phase, with, say, five 
times the Sun’s mass, has an even more remarkable fate reserved 
for it—its gravity will turn it into a black hole. Suppose we had a 



A bas-relief of five-pointed stars from 
pharaonic temple ruins in Dendera, Egypt. 
Photo by Ann Druyan. 



240 - Cosmos 



Motifs of the Sun and stars from the royal 
tombs in the Valley of the Kings on the 
west bank of the Nile, near Luxor, Egypt. 
Upper: The Sun’s rays fall through space 
on what seems to be a representation of a 
spherical Earth. Middle: The scarab or 
dung beetle, whose life cycle represented 
to the ancient Egyptians a metaphor of 
cyclical processes in nature and, particu- 
larly, the daily return of the Sun. Lower: 
The gods of the stars, in some tombs an 
rayed by the hundreds. Photographs by 
the author. 


magic gravity machine—a device with which we could control 
the Earth’s gravity, perhaps by turning a dial. Initially the dial is 
set at 1 g* and everything behaves as we have grown up to 
expect. The animals and plants on Earth and the structures of our 
buildings are all evolved or designed for 1 g. If the gravity were 
much less, there might be tall, spindly shapes that would not be 
tumbled or crushed by their own weight. If the gravity were 
much more, plants and animals and architecture would have to 
be short and squat and sturdy in order not to collapse. But even 
in a fairly strong gravity field, light would travel in a straight line, 
as it does, of course, in everyday life. 

Consider (page 236) a possibly typical group of Earth beings. 
As we lower the gravity, things weigh less. Near 0 g the slightest 
motion sends our friends floating and tumbling up in the air. 
Spilled tea—or any other liquid—forms throbbing spherical globs 
in the air: the surface tension of the liquid overwhelms gravity. 
Balls of tea are everywhere. If now we dial 1 g again, we make a 
rain of tea. When we increase the gravity a little—from 1 g to, 
say, 3 or 4 g’s—everyone becomes immobilized: even moving a 
paw requires enormous effort. As a kindness we remove our 
friends from the domain of the gravity machine before we dial 
higher gravities still. The beam from a lantern travels in a per¬ 
fectly straight line (as nearly as we can see) at a few g’s, as it does 
at 0 g. At 1000 g’s, the beam is still straight, but trees have 
become squashed and flattened; at 100,000 g’s, rocks are crushed 
by their own weight. Eventually, nothing at all survives except, 
through a special dispensation, the Cheshire cat. When the 
gravity approaches a billion g’s, something still more strange 
happens. The beam of light, which has until now been heading 
straight up into the sky, is beginning to bend. Under extremely 
strong gravitational accelerations, even light is affected. If we 
increase the gravity still more, the light is pulled back to the 
ground near us. Now the cosmic Cheshire cat has vanished; only 
its gravitational grin remains. 


* 1 g is the acceleration experienced by falling objects on the Earth, 
almost 10 meters per second every second. A falling rock will reach a 
speed of 10 meters per second after one second of fall, 20 meters per 
second after two seconds, and so on until it strikes the ground or is 
slowed by friction with the air. On a world where the gravitational 
acceleration was much greater, falling bodies would increase their speed 
by correspondingly greater amounts. On a world with 10 g acceleration, 
a rock would travel 10 x lOm/sec or almost 100 m/sec after the first 
second, 200 m/sec after the next second, and so on. A slight stumble 
could be fatal. The acceleration due to gravity should always be written 
with a lowercase g, to distinguish it from the Newtonian gravitational 
constant, G, which is a measure of the strength of gravity everywhere in 
the universe, not merely on whatever world or sun we are discussing. 
(The Newtonian relationship of the two quantities is F = mg = 
GMm/r 2 ; g = GM/r 2 , where F is the gravitational force, M is the mass 
of the planet or star, m is the mass of the falling object, and r is the 
distance from the falling object to the center of the planet or star.) 




The Lives of the Stars — 241 


When the gravity is sufficiently high, nothing, not even light, 
can get out. Such a place is called a black hole. Enigmatically 
indifferent to its surroundings, it is a kind of cosmic Cheshire cat. 
When the density and gravity become sufficiently high, the black 
hole winks out and disappears from our universe. That is why it 
is called black: no light can escape from it. On the inside, because 
the light is trapped down there, things may be attractively welh 
lit. Even if a black hole is invisible from the outside, its gravita- 
tional presence can be palpable. If, on an interstellar voyage, you 
are not paying attention, you can find yourself drawn into it 
irrevocably, your body stretched unpleasantly into a long, thin 
thread. But the matter accreting into a disk surrounding the black 
hole would be a sight worth remembering, in the unlikely case 
that you survived the trip. 

Thermonuclear reactions in the solar interior support the 
outer layers of the Sun and postpone for billions of years a 
catastrophic gravitational collapse. For white dwarfs, the pressure 
of the electrons, stripped from their nuclei, holds the star up. For 
neutron stars, the pressure of the neutrons staves off gravity. But 
for an elderly star left after supernova explosions and other im¬ 
petuosities with more than several times the Sun’s mass, there are 
no forces known that can prevent collapse. The star shrinks 
incredibly, spins, reddens and disappears. A star twenty times the 
mass of the Sun will shrink until it is the size of Greater Los 
Angeles; the crushing gravity becomes 10 10 g’s, and the star slips 
through a self-generated crack in the space-time continuum and 
vanishes from our universe. 

Black holes were first thought of by the English astronomer 
John Michell in 1783. But the idea seemed so bizarre that it was 
generally ignored until quite recently. Then, to the astonishment 
of many, including many astronomers, evidence was actually 
found for the existence of black holes in space. The Earth’s 
atmosphere is opaque to X-rays. To determine whether astro¬ 
nomical objects emit such short wavelengths of light, an X-ray 
telescope must be carried aloft. The first X-ray observatory was 
an admirably international effort, orbited by the United States 
from an Italian launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the coast 
of Kenya and named Uhuru, the Swahili word for “freedom.” In 
1971, Uhuru discovered a remarkably bright X-ray source in the 
constellation of Cygnus, the Swan, flickering on and off a thou¬ 
sand times a second. The source, called Cygnus X-l, must there¬ 
fore be very small. Whatever the reason for the flicker, 
information on when to turn on and off can cross Cyg X-l no 
faster than the speed of light, 300,000 km/sec. Thus Cyg X-l 
can be no larger than [300,000 km/sec] * [(1/1000) sec] = 300 
kilometers across. Something the size of an asteroid is a brilliant, 
blinking source of X-rays, visible over interstellar distances. 
What could it possibly be? Cyg X-l is in precisely the same place 
in the sky as a hot blue supergiant star, which reveals itself in 
visible light to have a massive close but unseen companion that 



242 - Cosmos 


gravitationally tugs it first in one direction and then in another. 
The companion’s mass is about ten times that of the Sun. The 
supergiant is an unlikely source of X-rays, and it is tempting to 
identify the companion inferred in visible light with the source 
detected in X-ray light. But an invisible object weighing ten times 
more than the Sun and collapsed into a volume the size of an 
asteroid can only be a black hole. The X-rays are plausibly 
generated by friction in the disk of gas and dust accreted around 
Cyg X4 from its supergiant companion. Other stars called V861 
Scorpii, GX339-4, SS433, and Circinus X-2 are also candidate 
black holes. Cassiopeia A is the remnant of a supernova whose 
light should have reached the Earth in the seventeenth century, 
when there were a fair number of astronomers. Yet no one 
reported the explosion. Perhaps, as I. S. Shklovskii has suggested, 
there is a black hole hiding there, which ate the exploding stellar 
core and damped the fires of the supernova. Telescopes in space 
are the means for checking these shards and fragments of data 
that may be the spoor, the trail, of the legendary black hole. 

A helpful way to understand black holes is to think about the 
curvature of space. Consider a flat, flexible, lined two-dimen- 
sional surface, like a piece of graph paper made of rubber. If we 
drop a small mass, the surface is deformed or puckered. A marble 
rolls around the pucker in an orbit like that of a planet around 
the Sun. In this interpretation, which we owe to Einstein, gravity 
is a distortion in the fabric of space. In our example, we see 
two-dimensional space warped by mass into a third physical di¬ 
mension. Imagine we live in a three-dimensional universe, locally 
distorted by matter into a fourth physical dimension that we 
cannot perceive directly. The greater the local mass, the more 
intense the local gravity, and the more severe the pucker, distor¬ 
tion or warp of space. In this analogy, a black hole is a kind of 
bottomless pit. What happens if you fall in? As seen from the 
outside, you would take an infinite amount of time to fall in, 
because all your clocks—mechanical and biological—would be 
perceived as having stopped. But from your point of view, all 
your clocks would be ticking away normally. If you could some¬ 
how survive the gravitational tides and radiation flux, and (a 
likely assumption) if the black hole were rotating, it is just possi¬ 
ble that you might emerge in another part of space-time—some¬ 
where else in space, somewhen else in time. Such worm holes in 
space, a little like those in an apple, have been seriously sug¬ 
gested, although they have by no means been proved to exist. 
Might gravity tunnels provide a kind of interstellar or intergalac- 
tic subway, permitting us to travel to inaccessible places much 
more rapidly than we could in the ordinary way? Can black holes 
serve as time machines, carrying us to the remote past or the 
distant future? The fact that such ideas are being discussed even 
semi-seriously shows how surreal the universe may be. 

We are, in the most profound sense, children of the Cosmos. 
Think of the Sun’s heat on your upturned face on a cloudless 



The Lives of the Stars - 243 



summer’s day; think how dangerous it is to gaze at the Sun 
directly. From 150 million kilometers away, we recognize its 
power. What would we feel on its seething self-luminous surface, 
or immersed in its heart of nuclear fire? The Sun warms us and 
feeds us and permits us to see. It fecundated the Earth. It is 
powerful beyond human experience. Birds greet the sunrise with 
an audible ecstasy. Even some one-celled organisms know to 
swim to the light. Our ancestors worshiped the Sun,* and they 
were far from foolish. And yet the Sun is an ordinary, even a 
mediocre star. If we must worship a power greater than ourselves, 
does it not make sense to revere the Sun and stars? Hidden within 
every astronomical investigation, sometimes so deeply buried 
that the researcher himself is unaware of its presence, lies a kernel 
of awe. 

The Galaxy is an unexplored continent filled with exotic 
beings of stellar dimensions. We have made a preliminary recon¬ 
naissance and have encountered some of the inhabitants. A few 
of them resemble beings we know. Others are bizarre beyond our 
most unconstrained fantasies. But we are at the very beginning of 
our exploration. Past voyages of discovery suggest that many of 
the most interesting inhabitants of the galactic continent remain 
as yet unknown and unanticipated. Not far outside the Galaxy 
there are almost certainly planets, orbiting stars in the Magellanic 
Clouds and in the globular clusters that surround the Milky 
Way. Such worlds would offer a breathtaking view of the Galaxy 
rising—an enormous spiral form comprising 400 billion stellar 
inhabitants, with collapsing gas clouds, condensing planetary sys¬ 
tems, luminous supergiants, stable middle-aged stars, red giants, 
white dwarfs, planetary nebulae, novae, supernovae, neutron 
stars and black holes. It would be clear from such a world, as it is 
beginning to be clear from ours, how our matter, our form and 
much of our character is determined by the deep connection 
between life and the Cosmos. 


The Milky Way Galaxy rising over an 
ocean of another world, high above the 
galactic plane. Painting by Adolf Schaller. 


* The early Sumerian pictograph for god was an asterisk, the symbol of 
the stars. Trie Aztec word for god was Teotl , and its glyph was a rep¬ 
resentation of the Sun. The heavens were called the Teoatl, the godsea, 
the cosmic ocean. 







The Dance of Creation. In his manifestation as Lord of the Dance, the Hindu god Shiva dances the dance of Creation. 
In this tenth-century Chola bronze, Shiva’s aureole of fire (the prabhamandala) represents the rhythm of the Universe 
and emanates from a lotus pedestal, the Hindu symbol of enlightenment. Shiva dances on the prostrate form of the 
Apasma-rapurusa, a symbol of human ignorance. The back right hand carries the damaru, a small drum symbolizing 
creation. The back left hand holds agni, the fire of destruction. The front left hand is in the gajahasta (“elephant 
trunk”) position. The front right hand is held in the abhaya-mundra pose (literally, “do not be afraid”). Courtesy 
Norton Simon Museum, Pasadena, California. The bronze is to be returned to India. 






Chapter X 

THE EDGE 
OF FOREVER 

There is a thing confusedly formed, 

Born before Heaven and Earth. 

Silent and void 

It stands alone and does not change, 

Goes round and does not weary. 

It is capable of being the mother of the world. 

I know not its name 
So I style it ‘The Way.’ 

I give it the makeshift name of ‘The Great.’ 

Being great, it is further described as receding, 

Receding, it is described as far away, 

Being far away, it is described as turning back. 

—Lao-tse, Tao Te Ching (China, about 600 B.C.) 

There is a way on high, conspicuous in the clear heavens, called the Milky 
Way, brilliant with its own brightness. By it the gods go to the dwelling of 
the great Thunderer and his royal abode . . . Here the famous and mighty 
inhabitants of heaven have their homes. This is the region which I might 
make bold to call the Palatine [Way] of the Great Sky. 

—Ovid, Metamorphoses (Rome, first century) 

Some foolish men declare that a Creator made the world. The doctrine that 
the world was created is ill-advised, and should be rejected. 

If God created the world, where was He before creation?. . . 

How could God have made the world without any raw material? If you say 
He made this first, and then the world, you are faced with an endless 
regression . . . 

Know that the world is uncreated, as time itself is, without beginning and 
end. 

And it is based on the principles . . . 

—The Mahapurana (The Great Legend), Jinasena (India, ninth century) 



246 - Cosmos 



The Whirlpool Galaxy, M51 (the 51st 
object in the catalogue of Charles Mes¬ 
sier), also known as NGC 5194' In 1845, 
William Parsons, third Earl of Rosse, dis¬ 
covered the spiral structure of this “neb¬ 
ula,” the first galaxy to have such structure 
observed. Thirteen million light-years 
distant, it is being gravitationally distorted 
by its small irregular galactic companion, 
NGC 5195 (below). Courtesy Hale Ob¬ 
servatories. 



The Great Galaxy in Andromeda, M31, is 
the most distant object in the Cosmos 
visible from Earth to the unaided eye. 
With at least seven spiral arms, it resem¬ 
bles our own Milky Way. A member of 
the Local Group of galaxies, it is some 2.3 
million light-years away. M31 is orbited 
by two dwarf elliptical galaxies, NGC 205 
and, just above the spiral, M32. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 


TEN OR TWENTY BILLION YEARS AGO, something hap¬ 
pened—the Big Bang, the event that began our universe. Why it 
happened is the greatest mystery we know. That it happened is 
reasonably clear. All the matter and energy now in the universe 
was concentrated at extremely high density—a kind of cosmic 
egg, reminiscent of the creation myths of many cultures—perhaps 
into a mathematical point with no dimensions at all. It was not 
that all the matter and energy were squeezed into a minor corner 
of the present universe; rather, the entire universe, matter and 
energy and the space they fill, occupied a very small volume. 
There was not much room for events to happen in. 

In that titanic cosmic explosion, the universe began an expan¬ 
sion which has never ceased. It is misleading to describe the 
expansion of the universe as a sort of distending bubble viewed 
from the outside. By definition, nothing we can ever know about 
was outside. It is better to think of it from the inside, perhaps 
with grid lines—imagined to adhere to the moving fabric of 
space—expanding uniformly in all directions. As space stretched, 
the matter and energy in the universe expanded with it and 
rapidly cooled. The radiation of the cosmic fireball, which, then 
as now, filled the universe, moved through the spectrum—from 
gamma rays to X-rays to ultraviolet light; through the rainbow 
colors of the visible spectrum; into the infrared and radio regions. 
The remnants of that fireball, the cosmic background radiation, 
emanating from all parts of the sky can be detected by radio 
telescopes today. In the early universe, space was brilliantly illu¬ 
minated. As time passed, the fabric of space continued to ex¬ 
pand, the radiation cooled and, in ordinary visible light, for the 
first time space became dark, as it is today. 

The early universe was filled with radiation and a plenum of 
matter, originally hydrogen and helium, formed from elementary 
particles in the dense primeval fireball. There was very little to 
see, if there had been anyone around to do the seeing. Then little 
pockets of gas, small nonuniformities, began to grow. Tendrils of 
vast gossamer gas clouds formed, colonies of great lumbering, 
slowly spinning things, steadily brightening, each a kind of beast 
eventually to contain a hundred billion shining points. The 
largest recognizable structures in the universe had formed. We 
see them today. We ourselves inhabit some lost corner of one. 
We call them galaxies. 

About a billion years after the Big Bang, the distribution of 
matter in the universe had become a little lumpy, perhaps be¬ 
cause the Big Bang itself had not been perfectly uniform. Matter 
was more densely compacted in these lumps than elsewhere. 
Their gravity drew to them substantial quantities of nearby gas, 
growing clouds of hydrogen and helium that were destined to 
become clusters of galaxies. A very small initial nonuniformity 
suffices to produce substantial condensations of matter later on. 

As the gravitational collapse continued, the primordial galaxies 




The Edge of Forever - 247 


spun increasingly faster, because of the conservation of angu- 
lar momentum. Some flattened, squashing themselves along the 
axis of rotation where gravity is not balanced by centrifugal 
force. These became the first spiral galaxies, great rotating pirn 
wheels of matter in open space. Other protogalaxies with weaker 
gravity or less initial rotation flattened very little and became the 
first elliptical galaxies. There are similar galaxies, as if stamped 
from the same mold, all over the Cosmos because these simple 
laws of nature—gravity and the conservation of angular momen- 
turn—are the same all over the universe. The physics that works 
for falling bodies and pirouetting ice skaters down here in the 
microcosm of the Earth makes galaxies up there in the macn> 
cosm of the universe. 

Within the nascent galaxies, much smaller clouds were also 
experiencing gravitational collapse; interior temperatures became 
very high, thermonuclear reactions were initiated, and the first 
stars turned on. The hot, massive young stars evolved rapidly, 
profligates carelessly spending their capital of hydrogen fuel, soon 
ending their lives in brilliant supernova explosions, returning 
thermonuclear ash—helium, carbon, oxygen and heavier ele- 
ments—to the interstellar gas for subsequent generations of star 
formation. Supernova explosions of massive early stars produced 
successive overlapping shock waves in the adjacent gas, conn 
pressing the intergalactic medium and accelerating the generation 
of clusters of galaxies. Gravity is opportunistic, amplifying even 
small condensations of matter. Supernova shock waves may have 
contributed to accretions of matter at every scale. The epic of 
cosmic evolution had begun, a hierarchy in the condensation of 
matter from the gas of the Big Bang—clusters of galaxies, galaxies, 
stars, planets, and, eventually, life and an intelligence able to 
understand a little of the elegant process responsible for its origin. 

Clusters of galaxies fill the universe today. Some are insignifi- 
cant, paltry collections of a few dozen galaxies. The affection- 
ately titled “Local Group” contains only two large galaxies of any 
size, both spirals: the Milky Way and M31. Other clusters run to 
immense hordes of thousands of galaxies in mutual gravitational 
embrace. There is some hint that the Virgo cluster contains tens 
of thousands of galaxies. 

On the largest scale, we inhabit a universe of galaxies, perhaps 
a hundred billion exquisite examples of cosmic architecture and 
decay, with order and disorder equally evident: normal spirals, 
turned at various angles to our earthly line of sight (face-on we 
see the spiral arms, edge-on, the central lanes of gas and dust in 
which the arms are formed); barred spirals with a river of gas and 
dust and stars running through the center, connecting the spiral 
arms on opposite sides; stately giant elliptical galaxies containing 
more than a trillion stars which have grown so large because they 
have swallowed and merged with other galaxies; a plethora of 
dwarf ellipticals, the galactic midges, each containing some paltry 



NGC 147, a small elliptical galaxy that 
accompanies M31. It contains perhaps a 
billion suns. From the planets of some of 
those stars, there is a glorious view of 
M31. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 



The Sombrero Galaxy, M104 (also called 
NGC 4594). The spiral arms, marked by 
lanes of dust, are tightly wound about its 
nucleus of stars. It is some 40 million 
light-years away, beyond the stars in the 
constellation Virgo, and may contain a 
trillion suns. Seen edge-on from some 
comparable distance, our spiral galaxy, the 
Milky Way, would resemble M104' 
Courtesy Hale Observatories. 





248 - Cosmos 



M81, another nearby spiral galaxy like the 
Milky Way; seven million light-years dis¬ 
tant, it is not a member of the Local 
Group. We view M81 neither edge-on 
nor face-on, but rather at an oblique 
angle. Galaxies are oriented at random to 
our earthly line of sight. Courtesy Hale 
Observatories. 



A spiral galaxy seen edge-on. NGC 891 
has a much less prominent nucleus than 
Ml04 (p. 247), and, relatively, much more 
prominent dust lanes in the spiral arms. 
The surrounding stars are in the fore¬ 
ground, within our own galaxy. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 


millions of suns; an immense variety of mysterious irregulars, 
indications that in the world of galaxies there are places where 
something has gone ominously wrong; and galaxies orbiting each 
other so closely that their edges are bent by the gravity of their 
companions and in some cases streamers of gas and stars are 
drawn out gravitationally, a bridge between the galaxies. 

Some clusters have their galaxies arranged in an unambi¬ 
guously spherical geometry; they are composed chiefly of ellipti¬ 
cals, often dominated by one giant elliptical, the presumptive 
galactic cannibal. Other clusters with a far more disordered ge¬ 
ometry have, comparatively, many more spirals and irregulars. 
Galactic collisions distort the shape of an originally spherical 
cluster and may also contribute to the genesis of spirals and 
irregulars from ellipticals. The form and abundance of the galax¬ 
ies have a story to tell us of ancient events on the largest possible 
scale, a story we are just beginning to read. 

The development of high-speed computers make possible nu¬ 
merical experiments on the collective motion of thousands or 
tens of thousands of points, each representing a star, each under 
the gravitational influence of all the other points. In some cases, 
spiral arms form all by themselves in a galaxy that has already 
flattened to a disk. Occasionally a spiral arm may be produced by 
the close gravitational encounter of two galaxies, each of course 
composed of billions of stars. The gas and dust diffusely spread 
through such galaxies will collide and become warmed. But 
when two galaxies collide, the stars pass effortlessly by one an¬ 
other, like bullets through a swarm of bees, because a galaxy is 
made mostly of nothing and the spaces between the stars are 
vast. Nevertheless, the configuration of the galaxies can be dis¬ 
torted severely. A direct impact on one galaxy by another can 
send the constituent stars pouring and careening through inter- 
galactic space, a galaxy wasted. When a small galaxy runs into a 
larger one face-on it can produce one of the loveliest of the rare 
irregulars, a ring galaxy thousands of light-years across, set 
against the velvet of intergalactic space. It is a splash in the 
galactic pond, a temporary configuration of disrupted stars, a 
galaxy with a central piece torn out. 

The unstructured blobs of irregular galaxies, the arms of spiral 
galaxies and the torus of ring galaxies exist for only a few frames 
in the cosmic motion picture, then dissipate, often to be re¬ 
formed again. Our sense of galaxies as ponderous rigid bodies is 
mistaken. They are fluid structures with 100 billion stellar com¬ 
ponents. Just as a human being, a collection of 100 trillion cells, is 
typically in a steady state between synthesis and decay and is 
more than the sum of its parts, so also is a galaxy. 

The suicide rate among galaxies is high. Some nearby exam¬ 
ples, tens or hundreds of millions of light-years away, are power¬ 
ful sources of X-rays, infrared radiation and radio waves, have 
extremely luminous cores and fluctuate in brightness on time 



The Edge of Forever — 249 


scales of weeks. Some display jets of radiation, thousand-light- 
yearlong plumes, and disks of dust in substantial disarray. These 
galaxies are blowing themselves up. Black holes ranging from 
millions to billions of times more massive than the Sun are 
suspected in the cores of giant elliptical galaxies such as NGC 
6251 and M87. There is something very massive, very dense, and 
very small ticking and purring inside M87—from a region smaller 
than the solar system. A black hole is implicated. Billions of 
light-years away are still more tumultuous objects, the quasars, 
which may be the colossal explosions of young galaxies, the 
mightiest events in the history of the universe since the Big Bang 
itself. 

The word “quasar” is an acronym for “quasi-stellar radio 
source.” After it became clear that not all of them were powerful 
radio sources, they were called QSO’s (“quasi-stellar objects”). 
Because they are starlike in appearance, they were naturally 
thought to be stars within our own galaxy. But spectroscopic 
observations of their red shift (see below) show them likely to be 




NGC 7217 in the constellation Pegasus. 
The spiral arms are tightly wound about 
the galactic nucleus. From a much greater 
distance, this galaxy might appear as a 
star-like point of light. Very distant galax¬ 
ies are not easily recognizable by their 
form. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 



NGC 1300, a barred spiral. About a third 
of spiral galaxies have a discernible “bar” 
of gas, dust and stars, an extension to the 
core of the spiral arms. The bar seems to 
be rotating as a solid body, as the core 
does. All known spirals rotate with the 
arms trailing, not leading. Courtesy Hale 
Observatories. 



Two schematic representations of quasars 
at the centers of massive galaxies. At top, 
a disk of accreting gas and dust surrounds 
an invisible rotating black hole. Material is 
ejected along the jets at close to the speed 
of light. At bottom, a condensing mass of 
billions of suns increases its rotation and 
strengthens its magnetic field. Paintings by 
Adolf Schaller. 






250 - Cosmos 



The most massive galaxy known. M87 is a 
giant elliptical galaxy near the center of 
the great Virgo cluster of galaxies, some 
40 million light-years away. There is al¬ 
most no gas and dust in its central regions, 
it all having been turned into stars or dis¬ 
sipated away to space. This seemingly 
bland object is the third brightest source 
of radio waves in the sky, after the Sun 
and Moon, and one of the brightest X-ray 
sources. Estimates of its mass range from 
trillions to a hundred trillion suns. A jet of 
gas 100,000 light-years long is being 
ejected from the nucleus, which may con¬ 
tain a massive black hole. M87 is sur¬ 
rounded by thousands of globular star 
clusters, a few of which can be seen here. 
Courtesy Hale Observatories. 


immense distances away. They seem to partake vigorously in the 
expansion of the universe, some receding from us at more than 
90 percent the speed of light. If they are very far, they must be 
intrinsically extremely bright to be visible over such distances; 
some are as bright as a thousand supernovae exploding at once. 
Just as for Cyg X-l, their rapid fluctuations show their enormous 
brightness to be confined to a very small volume, in this case less 
than the size of the solar system. Some remarkable process must 
be responsible for the vast outpouring of energy in a quasar. 
Among the proposed explanations are: (1) quasars are monster 
versions of pulsars, with a rapidly rotating supermassive core 
connected to a strong magnetic field; (2) quasars are due to mul¬ 
tiple collisions of millions of stars densely packed into the galactic 
core, tearing away the outer layers and exposing to full view the 
billion-degree temperatures of the interiors of massive stars; (3), a 
related idea, quasars are galaxies in which the stars are so densely 
packed that a supernova explosion in one will rip away the outer 
layers of another and make it a supernova, producing a stellar 
chain reaction; (4) quasars are powered by the violent mutual 
annihilation of matter and antimatter, somehow preserved in the 
quasar until now; (5) a quasar is the energy released when gas and 
dust and stars fall into an immense black hole in the core of such 
a galaxy, perhaps itself the product of ages of collision and co¬ 
alescence of smaller black holes; and (6) quasars are “white holes,” 
the other side of black holes, a funneling and eventual emergence 
into view of matter pouring into a multitude of black holes in 
other parts of the universe, or even in other universes. 

In considering the quasars, we confront profound mysteries. 
Whatever the cause of a quasar explosion, one thing seems clear: 
such a violent event must produce untold havoc. In every quasar 
explosion millions of worlds—some with life and the intelligence 
to understand what is happening—may be utterly destroyed. The 
study of the galaxies reveals a universal order and beauty. It also 
shows us chaotic violence on a scale hitherto undreamed of. 
That we live in a universe which permits life is remarkable. That 
we live in one which destroys galaxies and stars and worlds is also 
remarkable. The universe seems neither benign nor hostile, 
merely indifferent to the concerns of such puny creatures as we. 

Even a galaxy so seemingly well-mannered as the Milky Way 
has its stirrings and its dances. Radio observations show two 
enormous clouds of hydrogen gas, enough to make millions of 
suns, plummeting out from the galactic core, as if a mild explo¬ 
sion happened there every now and then. A high-energy astro¬ 
nomical observatory in Earth orbit has found the galactic core to 
be a strong source of a particular gamma ray spectral line, consis¬ 
tent with the idea that a massive black hole is hidden there. 
Galaxies like the Milky Way may represent the staid middle age 
in a continuous evolutionary sequence, which encompasses, in 
their violent adolescence, quasars and exploding galaxies: because 



The Edge of Forever - 251 



Centaurus A (NGC 5128), perhaps the 
collision of a giant elliptical and a spiral 
galaxy whose shattered arms we see edge- 
on. Today, it is more customary to think 
of it as a giant elliptical, with a sparse 
complement of gas and dust, completely 
encircled by a disk of gas and dust and, 
perhaps, some stars. It is an intense source 
of radio waves, which pour out of two 
great lobes oriented at right angles to the 
disk of dust; and X-rays and gamma rays as 
well. Rapid fluctuations in the X-ray 
emission may be due to the engulfing of 
entire clusters of stars by a giant black hole 
hidden at its center. Centaurus A is 14 
million light-years away; its radio lobes 
are 3 million light-years long. Courtesy 
Hale Observatories. 


the quasars are so distant, we see them in their youth, as they 
were billions of years ago. 

The stars of the Milky Way move with systematic grace. 
Globular clusters plunge through the galactic plane and out the 
other side, where they slow, reverse and hurtle back again. If we 
could follow the motion of individual stars bobbing about the 
galactic plane, they would resemble a froth of popcorn. We have 
never seen a galaxy change its form significantly only because it 
takes so long to move. The Milky Way rotates once every quar¬ 
ter billion years. If we were to speed the rotation, we would see 
that the Galaxy is a dynamic, almost organic entity, in some ways 
resembling a multi-cellular organism. Any astronomical photo¬ 
graph of a galaxy is merely a snapshot of one stage in its ponder¬ 
ous motion and evolution.* The inner region of a galaxy rotates 
as a solid body. But, beyond that, like the planets around the Sun 
following Kepler’s third law, the outer provinces rotate progres¬ 
sively more slowly. The arms have a tendency to wind up 
around the core in an ever-tightening spiral, and gas and dust 
accumulate in spiral patterns of greater density, which are in turn 
the locales for the formation of young, hot, bright stars, the stars 
that outline the spiral arms. These stars shine for ten million 
years or so, a period corresponding to only 5 percent of a galactic 
rotation. But as the stars that outline a spiral arm burn out, new 
stars and their associated nebulae are formed just behind them, 
and the spiral pattern persists. The stars that outline the arms do 
not survive even a single galactic rotation; only the spiral pattern 
remains. 


* This is not quite true. The near side of a galaxy is tens of thousands of 
light-years closer to us than the far side; thus we see the front as it was 
tens of thousands of years before the back. But typical events in galactic 
dynamics occupy tens of millions of years, so the error in thinking of an 
image of a galaxy as frozen in one moment of time is small. 



252 - Cosmos 




The Doppler effect. A stationary source 
of sound or light emits a set of spherical 
waves. If the source is in motion from 
right to left, it emits spherical waves pro¬ 
gressively centered on points 1 through 6, 
as shown. But an observer at B sees the 
waves as stretched out, while an observer 
at A sees them as compressed. A receding 
source is seen as red-shifted (the wave¬ 
lengths made longer); an approaching 
source is seen as blue-shifted (the wave¬ 
lengths made shorter). The Doppler effect 
is the key to cosmology. 


The speed of any given star around the center of the Galaxy is 
generally not the same as that of the spiral pattern. The Sun has 
been in and out of spiral arms often in the twenty times it has 
gone around the Milky Way at 200 kilometers per second 
(roughly half a million miles per hour). On the average, the Sun 
and the planets spend forty million years in a spiral arm, eighty 
million outside, another forty million in, and so on. Spiral arms 
outline the region where the latest crop of newly hatched stars is 
being formed, but not necessarily where such middle-aged stars 
as the Sun happen to be. In this epoch, we live between spiral 
arms. 

The periodic passage of the solar system through spiral arms 
may conceivably have had important consequences for us. 
About ten million years ago, the Sun emerged from the Gould 
Belt complex of the Orion Spiral Arm, which is now a little less 
than a thousand light-years away. (Interior to the Orion arm is 
the Sagittarius arm; beyond the Orion arm is the Perseus arm.) 
When the Sun passes through a spiral arm it is more likely than it 
is at present to enter into gaseous nebulae and interstellar dust 
clouds and to encounter objects of substellar mass. It has been 
suggested that the major ice ages on our planet, which recur 
every hundred million years or so, may be due to the interposi¬ 
tion of interstellar matter between the Sun and the Earth. W. 
Napier and S. Clube have proposed that a number of the moons, 
asteroids, comets and circumplanetary rings in the solar system 
once freely wandered in interstellar space until they were cap¬ 
tured as the Sun plunged through the Orion spiral arm. This is an 
intriguing idea, although perhaps not very likely. But it is test¬ 
able. All we need do is procure a sample of, say, Phobos or a 
comet and examine its magnesium isotopes. The relative abun¬ 
dance of magnesium isotopes (all sharing the same number of 
protons, but having differing numbers of neutrons) depends on 
the precise sequence of stellar nucleosynthetic events, including 
the timing of nearby supernova explosions, that produced any 
particular sample of magnesium. In a different corner of the 
Galaxy, a different sequence of events should have occurred and 
a different ratio of magnesium isotopes should prevail. 

The discovery of the Big Bang and the recession of the galax¬ 
ies came from a commonplace of nature called the Doppler ef¬ 
fect. We are used to it in the physics of sound. An automobile 
driver speeding by us blows his horn. Inside the car, the driver 
hears a steady blare at a fixed pitch. But outside the car, we hear a 
characteristic change in pitch. To us, the sound of the horn slides 
from high frequencies to low. A racing car traveling at 200 
kilometers per hour (120 miles per hour) is going almost one- 
fifth the speed of sound. Sound is a succession of waves in air, a 
crest and a trough, a crest and a trough. The closer together the 
waves are, the higher the frequency or pitch; the farther apart the 
waves are, the lower the pitch. If the car is racing away from us, it 



The Edge of Forever - 253 


stretches out the sound waves, moving them, from our point of 
view, to a lower pitch and producing the characteristic sound 
with which we are all familiar. If the car were racing toward us, 
the sound waves would be squashed together, the frequency 
would be increased, and we would hear a high-pitched wail If 
we knew what the ordinary pitch of the horn was when the car 
was at rest, we could deduce its speed blindfolded, from the 
change in pitch. 

Light is also a wave. Unlike sound, it travels perfectly well 
through a vacuum. The Doppler effect works here as well. If 
instead of sound the automobile were for some reason emitting, 
front and back, a beam of pure yellow light, the frequency of the 
light would increase slightly as the car approached and decrease 
slightly as the car receded. At ordinary speeds the effect would 
be imperceptible. If, however, the car were somehow traveling at 
a good fraction of the speed of light, we would be able to observe 
the color of the light changing toward higher frequency, that is, 
toward blue, as the car approached us; and toward lower fre¬ 
quencies, that is, toward red, as the car receded from us. An 
object approaching us at very high velocities is perceived to have 
the color of its spectral lines blue-shifted. An object receding 
from us at very high velocities has its spectral lines red-shifted.* 
This red shift, observed in the spectral lines of distant galaxies 
and interpreted as a Doppler effect, is the key to cosmology. 

During the early years of this century, the world’s largest tele¬ 
scope, destined to discover the red shift of remote galaxies, was 
being built on Mount Wilson, overlooking what were then the 
clear skies of Los Angeles. Large pieces of the telescope had to be 
hauled to the top of the mountain, a job for mule teams. A 
young mule skinner named Milton Humason helped to transport 
mechanical and optical equipment, scientists, engineers and dig¬ 
nitaries up the mountain. Humason would lead the column of 
mules on horseback, his white terrier standing just behind the 
saddle, its front paws on Humason’s shoulders. He was a to¬ 
bacco-chewing roustabout, a superb gambler and pool player and 
what was then called a ladies’ man. In his formal education, he 
had never gone beyond the eighth grade. But he was bright and 
curious and naturally inquisitive about the equipment he had 
laboriously carted to the heights. Humason was keeping com¬ 
pany with the daughter of one of the observatory engineers, a 
man who harbored reservations about his daughter seeing a 
young man who had no higher ambition than to be a mule 
skinner. So Humason took odd jobs at the observatory—electri¬ 
cian’s assistant, janitor, swabbing the floors of the telescope he 

* The object itself might be any color, even blue. The red shift means 
only that each spectral line appears at longer wavelengths than when the 
object is at rest; the amount of the red shift is proportional both to the 
velocity and to the wavelength of the spectral line when the object is at 
rest. 


* 

# 


Colliding galaxies about 50 million light- 
years away. NGC 4038 and NGC 4039 
are probably once-ordinary galaxies now 
emerging from a close gravitational en¬ 
counter. Their interiors have clearly been 
disrupted. When these galaxies are pho¬ 
tographed with longer time exposures the 
interior detail vanishes, and long curved 
tendrils of light, faintly visible in this 
image, become prominent. The tendrils 
are composed of a billion stars spilled out 
into intergalactic space and account for 
the name given to these two objects, “The 
Antennae.” From beginning to end this 
collision occupied more than a hundred 
million years. Courtesy Hale Observa¬ 
tories. 



NGC 2623, another example of colliding 
galaxies in which vast streamers of stars 
are strewn through intergalactic space. 
Courtesy Hale Observatories. 




254 - Cosmos 



Stephan’s Quintet. A group of five ap' 
parently interacting galaxies discovered in 
1877, the year Schiaparelli “discovered” 
canals on Mars, and posing a somewhat 
similar puzzle. Four of them are thought 
to be roughly a quarter of a billion light' 
years away. They have identical velocities 
of recession (6,000 kilometers per second) 
as determined by the red shift of their 
spectral lines, except for NGC 7320, at 
lower left (which has a Doppler velocity 
of 800 kilometers per second). If NGC 
7320 is really connected by a bridge of 
stars with the other galaxies, the observa' 
tional argument for an expanding universe 
is in some jeopardy. But recent indepem 
dent evidence suggests that NGC 7320 is 
in fact much closer to us and that the 
connection with the other galaxies is only 
apparent. © Association of Universities 
for Research in Astronomy, Inc. The Kitt 
Peak Observatory. 



A cluster of galaxies sometimes called 
Seyfert’s Sextet. Here, all members have 
the same red shift, except for the galaxy 
resembling a face'On spiral, which has a 
red shift four times higher than the 
others. Stephan’s Quintet and Seyfert’s 
Sextet are perhaps the largest regions of 
the Cosmos named by humans after indi¬ 
vidual humans. Courtesy Hale Observa' 
tories. 


had helped to build. One evening, so the story goes, the night 
telescope assistant fell ill and Humason was asked if he might fill 
in. He displayed such skill and care with the instruments that he 
soon became a permanent telescope operator and observing aide. 

After World War I, there came to Mount Wilson the soom 
to'be famous Edwin Hubble—brilliant, polished, gregarious out' 
side the astronomical community, with an English accent 
acquired during a single year as Rhodes scholar at Oxford. It was 
Hubble who provided the final demonstration that the spiral 
nebulae were in fact “island universes,” distant aggregations of 
enormous numbers of stars, like our own Milky Way Galaxy; he 
had figured out the stellar standard candle required to measure 
the distances to the galaxies. Hubble and Humason hit it off 
splendidly, a perhaps unlikely pair who worked together at the 
telescope harmoniously. Following a lead by the astronomer 
V. M. Slipher at Lowell Observatory, they began measuring the 
spectra of distant galaxies. It soon became clear that Humason 
was better able to obtain high'quality spectra of distant galaxies 
than any professional astronomer in the world. He became a full 
staff member of the Mount Wilson Observatory, learned many 
of the scientific underpinnings of his work and died rich in the 
respect of the astronomical community. 

The light from a galaxy is the sum of the light emitted by the 
billions of stars within it. As the light leaves these stars, certain 
frequencies or colors are absorbed by the atoms in the stars’ 
outermost layers. The resulting lines permit us to tell that stars 
millions of light-years away contain the same chemical elements 
as our Sun and the nearby stars. Humason and Hubble found, to 
their amazement, that the spectra of all the distant galaxies are 
red'shifted and, still more startling, that the more distant the 
galaxy was, the more red'shifted were its spectral lines. 

The most obvious explanation of the red shift was in terms of 
the Doppler effect: the galaxies were receding from us; the more 
distant the galaxy the greater its speed of recession. But why 
should the galaxies be fleeing us? Could there be something 
special about our location in the universe, as if the Milky Way 
had performed some inadvertent but offensive act in the social 
life of galaxies? It seemed much more likely that the universe 
itself was expanding, carrying the galaxies with it. Humason and 
Hubble, it gradually became clear, had discovered the Big 
Bang—if not the origin of the universe then at least its most 
recent incarnation. 

Almost all of modern cosmology—and especially the idea of an 
expanding universe and a Big Bang—is based on the idea that the 
red shift of distant galaxies is a Doppler effect and arises from 
their speed of recession. But there are other kinds of red shifts in 
nature. There is, for example, the gravitational red shift, in 
which the light leaving an intense gravitational field has to do so 
much work to escape that it loses energy during the journey, the 




The Edge of Forever — 255 



process perceived by a distant observer as a shift of the escaping 
light to longer wavelengths and redder colors. Since we think 
there may be massive black holes at the centers of some galaxies, 
this is a conceivable explanation of their red shifts. However, the 
particular spectral lines observed are often characteristic of very 
thin, diffuse gas, and not the astonishingly high density that must 
prevail near black holes. Or the red shift might be a Doppler 
effect due not to the general expansion of the universe but rather 
to a more modest and local galactic explosion. But then we 
should expect as many explosion fragments traveling toward us 
as away from us, as many blue shifts as red shifts. What we 
actually see, however, is almost exclusively red shifts no matter 
what distant objects beyond the Local Group we point our tele- 
scopes to. 

There is nevertheless a nagging suspicion among some astron- 
omers that all may not be right with the deduction, from the red 
shifts of galaxies via the Doppler effect, that the universe is 
expanding. The astronomer Halton Arp has found enigmatic and 
disturbing cases where a galaxy and a quasar, or a pair of galaxies, 
that are in apparent physical association have very different red 
shifts. Occasionally there seems to be a bridge of gas and dust 
and stars connecting them. If the red shift is due to the expansion 
of the universe, very different red shifts imply very different 
distances. But two galaxies that are physically connected can 
hardly also be greatly separated from each other—in some cases 
by a billion light-years. Skeptics say that the association is purely 
statistical: that, for example, a nearby bright galaxy and a much 


A portion of the Hercules cluster of gal¬ 
axies, with about 300 known members, 
retreating from our region of the Cosmos 
at some 10,000 kilometers per second. In 
this photograph there are more galaxies 
(in excess of 300 million light-years dis¬ 
tant) than there are foreground stars in our 
Milky Way Galaxy. If the Hercules Clus¬ 
ter is not flying apart, there must be five 
times more mass there, gravitationally 
gluing the cluster together, than we see in 
its galaxies. Such “missing mass,” if com¬ 
mon in intergalactic space, would make a 
major contribution to closing the uni¬ 
verse. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 




256 - Cosmos 





New stars are being born in the “bridge” 
connecting two galaxies (ESO B138- 
IG29,30). False color, computer-enhanced 
image. Courtesy of Arthur Hoag and Kitt 
Peak National Observatory. 



Milton Humason, astronomer (1891— 
1957). Courtesy Hale Observatories. 


more distant quasar, each having very different red shifts and 
very different speeds of recession, are merely accidentally aligned 
along the line of sight; that they have no real physical association. 
Such statistical alignments must happen by chance every now 
and then. The debate centers on whether the number of coinci¬ 
dences is more than would be expected by chance. Arp points to 
other cases in which a galaxy with a small red shift is flanked by 
two quasars of large and almost identical red shift. He believes 
the quasars are not at cosmological distances but instead are 
being ejected, left and right, by the “foreground” galaxy; and that 
the red shifts are the result of some as-yet-unfathomed mecha¬ 
nism. Skeptics argue coincidental alignment and the conventional 
Hubble-Humason interpretation of the red shift. If Arp is right, 
the exotic mechanisms proposed to explain the energy source of 
distant quasars—supernova chain reactions, supermassive black 
holes and the like—would prove unnecessary. Quasars need not 
then be very distant. But some other exotic mechanism will be 
required to explain the red shift. In either case, something very 
strange is going on in the depths of space. 

The apparent recession of the galaxies, with the red shift 
interpreted through the Doppler effect, is not the only evidence 
for the Big Bang. Independent and quite persuasive evidence 
derives from the cosmic black body background radiation, the 
faint static of radio waves coming quite uniformly from all direc¬ 
tions in the Cosmos at just the intensity expected in our epoch 
from the now substantially cooled radiation of the Big Bang. But 
here also there is something puzzling. Observations with a sensi¬ 
tive radio antenna carried near the top of the Earth’s atmosphere 
in a U-2 aircraft have shown that the background radiation is, to 
first approximation, just as intense in all directions—as if the 
fireball of the Big Bang expanded quite uniformly, an origin of 
the universe with a very precise symmetry. But the background 
radiation, when examined to finer precision, proves to be imper¬ 
fectly symmetrical. There is a small systematic effect that could 
be understood if the entire Milky Way Galaxy (and presumably 
other members of the Local Group) were streaking toward the 
Virgo cluster of galaxies at more than a million miles an hour 
(600 kilometers per second). At such a rate, we will reach it in ten 
billion years, and extragalactic astronomy will then be a great 
deal easier. The Virgo cluster is already the richest collection of 
galaxies known, replete with spirals and ellipticals and irregulars, 
a jewel box in the sky. But why should we be rushing toward it? 
George Smoot and his colleagues, who made these high-altitude 
observations, suggest that the Milky Way is being gravitationally 
dragged toward the center of the Virgo cluster; that the cluster 
has many more galaxies than have been detected heretofore; and, 
most startling, that the cluster is of immense proportions, 
stretching across one or two billion light-years of space. 

The observable universe itself is only a few tens of billions of 


The Edge of Forever - 257 


light-years across and, if there is a vast super cluster in the Virgo 
group, perhaps there are other such superclusters at much greater 
distances, which are correspondingly more difficult to detect. In 
the lifetime of the universe there has apparently not been enough 
time for an initial gravitational nonuniformity to collect the 
amount of mass that seems to reside in the Virgo supercluster. 
Thus Smoot is tempted to conclude that the Big Bang was much 
less uniform than his other observations suggest, that the original 
distribution of matter in the universe was very lumpy. (Some 
little lumpiness is to be expected, and indeed even needed to 
understand the condensation of galaxies; but a lumpiness on this 
scale is a surprise.) Perhaps the paradox can be resolved by imag¬ 
ining two or more nearly simultaneous Big Bangs. 

If the general picture of an expanding universe and a Big Bang 
is correct, we must then confront still more difficult questions. 
What were conditions like at the time of the Big Bang? What 
happened before that? Was there a tiny universe, devoid of all 
matter, and then the matter suddenly created from nothing? How 
does that happen? In many cultures it is customary to answer that 
God created the universe out of nothing. But this is mere tem¬ 
porizing. If we wish courageously to pursue the question, we 
must, of course ask next where God comes from. And if we 
decide this to be unanswerable, why not save a step and decide 
that the origin of the universe is an unanswerable question? Or, if 
we say that God has always existed, why not save a step and 
conclude that the universe has always existed? 

Every culture has a myth of the world before creation, and of 
the creation of the world, often by the mating of the gods or the 
hatching of a cosmic egg. Commonly, the universe is naively 
imagined to follow human or animal precedent. Here, for exam¬ 
ple, are five small extracts from such myths, at different levels of 
sophistication, from the Pacific Basin: 

In the very beginning everything was resting in perpetual 
darkness: night oppressed everything like an impenetrable 
thicket. 

—The Great Father myth of 
the Aranda people of 
Central Australia 

All was in suspense, all calm, all in silence; all motionless 
and still; and the expanse of the sky was empty. 

—The Popol Vuh of the 
Quiche Maya 

Na Arean sat alone in space as a cloud that floats in noth¬ 
ingness. He slept not, for there was no sleep; he hungered 
not, for as yet there was no hunger. So he remained for a 
great while, until a thought came to his mind. He said to 
himself, “I will make a thing.” 

—A myth from Maiana, 

Gilbert Islands 



An ancient Chinese creation image show¬ 
ing the intertwined double helix, repre¬ 
senting an interaction of opposites, 
resulting in the Creation. Constellation 
images are behind the creator gods. Cour¬ 
tesy Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 



The Tantric Buddhist conception of “pure 
Being” in the form of a “world egg.” At 
fertilization, the egg differentiates into the 
female “life force” at center and the male 
activating energy (the dividing lines). 
Conscious life emerges. Photograph by 
Ajit Mookerjee from Tantra: The Indian 
Cult of Ecstasy by Philip Rawson. Copy¬ 
right © 1973 by Thames & Hudson Ltd. 
Reproduced by permission of Thames &l. 
Hudson, London and New York. 








258 - Cosmos 



A Huichol beeswax-and-yam painting 
from Mexico depicting the Creation. In 
this image, we see the first beings. The 
five serpents are the Mothers of Water 
and represent terrestrial waters. At right 
the first plant appears, bearing both male 
and female flowers. At left the Sun Father 
is flanked by the Morning Star. Courtesy 
Peter Furst, Delmar, New York. 


First there was the great cosmic egg. Inside the egg was 
chaos, and floating in chaos was Pan Ku, the Undeveloped, 
the divine Embryo. And P’an Ku burst out of the egg, four 
times larger than any man today, with a hammer and chisel 
in his hand with which he fashioned the world. 

—The P’an Ku myths, China 
(around third century) 

Before heaven and earth had taken form all was vague and 
amorphous . . . That which was clear and light drifted up to 
become heaven, while that which was heavy and turbid 
solidified to become earth. It was very easy for the pure, 
fine material to come together, but extremely difficult for 
the heavy, turbid material to solidify. Therefore heaven 
was completed first and earth assumed shape after. When 
heaven and earth were joined in emptiness and all was 
unwrought simplicity, then without having been created 
things came into being. This was the Great Oneness. All 
things issued from this Oneness but all became different. . . 

—Huai-nan Tzu, China 
(around first century B.C.) 



The traditional Judeo-Christian view of 
the Creation of the Cosmos. God (top) 
makes the Earth and its inhabitants (the 
first humans, Adam and Eve, at center). 
Surrounding the Earth are birds, clouds, 
the Sun, the Moon and the stars, above 
which are “the waters of the firmament.” 
From Martin Luther’s Biblia, published by 
Hans Lufft, Wittenberg, 153A 


These myths are tributes to human audacity. The chief differ- 
ence between them and our modern scientific myth of the Big 
Bang is that science is self-questioning, and that we can perform 
experiments and observations to test our ideas. But those other 
creation stories are worthy of our deep respect. 

Every human culture rejoices in the fact that there are cycles in 
nature. But how, it was thought, could such cycles come about 
unless the gods willed them? And if there are cycles in the years 
of humans, might there not be cycles in the aeons of the gods? 
The Hindu religion is the only one of the world’s great faiths 
dedicated to the idea that the Cosmos itself undergoes an im¬ 
mense, indeed an infinite, number of deaths and rebirths. It is the 
only religion in which the time scales correspond, no doubt by 
accident, to those of modern scientific cosmology. Its cycles run 
from our ordinary day and night to a day and night of Brahma, 
8.64 billion years long, longer than the age of the Earth or the 
Sun and about half the time since the Big Bang. And there are 
much longer time scales still. 

There is the deep and appealing notion that the universe is but 
the dream of the god who, after a hundred Brahma years, dis¬ 
solves himself into a dreamless sleep. The universe dissolves with 
him—until, after another Brahma century, he stirs, recomposes 
himself and begins again to dream the great cosmic dream. 
Meanwhile, elsewhere, there are an infinite number of other 
universes, each with its own god dreaming the cosmic dream. 
These great ideas are tempered by another, perhaps still greater. 
It is said that men may not be the dreams of the gods, but rather 
that the gods are the dreams of men. 

In India there are many gods, and each god has many 

















The Edge of Forever — 259 


manifestations. The Chola bronzes, cast in the eleventh century, in¬ 
clude several different incarnations of the god Shiva. The most 
elegant and sublime of these is a representation of the creation of 
the universe at the beginning of each cosmic cycle, a motif 
known as the cosmic dance of Shiva. The god, called in this 
manifestation Nataraja, the Dance King, has four hands. In the 
upper right hand is a drum whose sound is the sound of creation. 
In the upper left hand is a tongue of flame, a reminder that the 
universe, now newly created, will billions of years from now be 
utterly destroyed. 

These profound and lovely images are, I like to imagine, a 
kind of premonition of modern astronomical ideas.* Very likely, 
the universe has been expanding since the Big Bang, but it is by 
no means clear that it will continue to expand forever. The 
expansion may gradually slow, stop and reverse itself. If there is 
less than a certain critical amount of matter in the universe, the 
gravitation of the receding galaxies will be insufficient to stop the 
expansion, and the universe will run away forever. But if there is 
more matter than we can see—hidden away in black holes, say, or 
in hot but invisible gas between the galaxies—then the universe 
will hold together gravitationally and partake of a very Indian 
succession of cycles, expansion followed by contraction, universe 
upon universe, Cosmos without end. If we live in such an oscil¬ 
lating universe, then the Big Bang is not the creation of the 
Cosmos but merely the end of the previous cycle, the destruction 
of the last incarnation of the Cosmos. 

Neither of these modern cosmologies may be altogether to our 
liking. In one, the universe is created, somehow, ten or twenty 
billion years ago and expands forever, the galaxies mutually re¬ 
ceding until the last one disappears over our cosmic horizon. 
Then the galactic astronomers are out of business, the stars cool 
and die, matter itself decays and the universe becomes a thin cold 
haze of elementary particles. In the other, the oscillating uni¬ 
verse, the Cosmos has no beginning and no end, and we are in 
the midst of an infinite cycle of cosmic deaths and rebirths with 
no information trickling through the cusps of the oscillation. 
Nothing of the galaxies, stars, planets, life forms or civilizations 
evolved in the previous incarnation of the universe oozes into 
the cusp, flutters past the Big Bang, to be known in our present 
universe. The fate of the universe in either cosmology may seem 
a little depressing, but we may take solace in the time scales 


*The dates on Mayan inscriptions also range deep into the past and 
occasionally far into the future. One inscription refers to a time more 
than a million years ago and another perhaps refers to events of 400 
million years ago, although this is in some dispute among Mayan schol¬ 
ars. The events memorialized may be mythical, but the time scales are 
prodigious. A millennium before Europeans were willing to divest 
themselves of the Biblical idea that the world was a few thousand years 
old, the Mayans were thinking of millions, and the Indians of billions. 



Navajo sand painting, “Father Sky and 
Mother Earth.” Within the black image of 
Father Sky at left are the various constel¬ 
lations, including, middle, the Big Dipper. 
Mother Earth, at right, contains within 
her the Navajos’ four sacred plants: beans, 
com, tobacco and squash. At upper right 
is a bat with a medicine pouch (the small 
yellow diamond) and representing “good.” 
Courtesy Denver Museum of Art, 
Denver, Colorado. 



A Huichol painting showing the origin of 
the Sun. At upper left the as-yet-unborn 
Sun is hailed by the Earth Goddess while 
her son shoots arrows at a solar wheel just 
before his sacrifice and transmogrification 
into the solar deity. The rayed shape 
lower left is the western lagoon into which 
the boy descends on his subterranean 
journey to the east and the first sunrise. 
Courtesy Peter Furst, Delmar, New York. 












260 - Cosmos 



A modern rendering of a common ancient 
Egyptian motif of creation. In this depic- 
tion, Shu, god of light and air (arms 
raised), separates Nut, goddess of the sky, 
from Geb, god of the Earth, reclining 
below. Minor deities assist. The falcon 
figure at left is Horus, god of Lower Egypt 
and later identified with the reigning 
pharaoh. Painting by Brown. 



A Dogon creation image from the Re- 
public of Mali, showing Nommo, a phallic 
creation god, caught at the instant of his 
metamorphosis into a crocodile. Courtesy 
Lester Wunderman, New York, New 
York. 


involved. These events will occupy tens of billions of years, or 
more. Human beings and our descendants, whoever they might 
be, can accomplish a great deal in tens of billions of years, before 
the Cosmos dies. 

If the universe truly oscillates, still stranger questions arise. 
Some scientists think that when expansion is followed by com 
traction, when the spectra of distant galaxies are all blue-shifted, 
causality will be inverted and effects will precede causes. First the 
ripples spread from a point on the water’s surface, then I throw a 
stone into the pond. First the torch bursts into flame and then I 
light it. We cannot pretend to understand what such causality 
inversion means. Will people at such a time be born in the grave 
and die in the womb? Will time flow backwards? Do these ques¬ 
tions have any meaning? 

Scientists wonder about what happens in an oscillating uni¬ 
verse at the cusps, at the transition from contraction to expan¬ 
sion. Some think that the laws of nature are then randomly 
reshuffled, that the kind of physics and chemistry that orders this 
universe represent only one of an infinite range of possible natu¬ 
ral laws. It is easy to see that only a very restricted range of laws 
of nature are consistent with galaxies and stars, planets, life and 
intelligence. If the laws of nature are unpredictably reassorted at 
the cusps, then it is only by the most extraordinary coincidence 
that the cosmic slot machine has this time come up with a 
universe consistent with us.* 

Do we live in a universe that expands forever or in one in 
which there is an infinite set of cycles? There are ways to find out: 
by making an accurate census of the total amount of matter in the 
universe, or by seeing to the edge of the Cosmos. 

Radio telescopes can detect very faint, very distant objects. As 
we look deep into space we also look far back into time. The 
nearest quasar is perhaps half a billion light-years away. The 
farthest may be ten or twelve or more billions. But if we see an 
object twelve billion light-years away, we are seeing it as it was 
twelve billion years ago in time. By looking far out into space we 

* The laws of nature cannot be randomly reshuffled at the cusps. If the 
universe has already gone through many oscillations, many possible laws 
of gravity would have been so weak that, for any given initial expansion, 
the universe would not have held together. Once the universe stumbles 
upon such a gravitational law, it flies apart and has no further opportu¬ 
nity to experience another oscillation and another cusp and another set 
of laws of nature. Thus we can deduce from the fact that the universe 
exists either a finite age, or a severe restriction on the kinds of laws of 
nature permitted in each oscillation. If the laws of physics are not ran¬ 
domly reshuffled at the cusps, there must be a regularity, a set of rules, 
that determines which laws are permissible and which are not. Such a set 
of rules would comprise a new physics standing over the existing physics. 
Our language is impoverished; there seems to be no suitable name for 
such a new physics. Both “paraphysics” and “metaphysics” have been 
preempted by other rather different and, quite possibly, wholly irrele¬ 
vant activities. Perhaps “transphysics” would do. 










The Edge of Forever - 261 



A few of the radio telescopes of the Very 
Large Array, Socorro, New Mexico, 
operated by the National Radio Astron- 
omy Observatory. The telescopes move 
on railway tracks; their separation deter- 
mines the resolution of the resulting radio 
image. 


are also looking far back into time, back toward the horizon of 
the universe, back toward the epoch of the Big Bang. 

The Very Large Array (VLA) is a collection of twenty-seven 
separate radio telescopes in a remote region of New Mexico. It is 
a phased array, the individual telescopes electronically con¬ 
nected, as if it were a single telescope of the same size as its 
remotest elements, as if it were a radio telescope tens of kilome¬ 
ters across. The VLA is able to resolve or discriminate fine detail 
in the radio regions of the spectrum comparable to what the 
largest ground-based telescopes can do in the optical region of 
the spectrum. 

Sometimes such radio telescopes are connected with telescopes 
on the other side of the Earth, forming a baseline comparable to 
the Earth’s diameter—in a certain sense, a telescope as large as the 
planet. In the future we may have telescopes in the Earth’s orbit, 
around toward the other side of the Sun, in effect a radio tele¬ 
scope as large as the inner solar system. Such telescopes may 
reveal the internal structure and nature of quasars. Perhaps a 
quasar standard candle will be found, and the distances to the 
quasars determined independent of their red shifts. By under¬ 
standing the structure and the red shift of the most distant qua¬ 
sars it may be possible to see whether the expansion of the 
universe was faster billions of years ago, whether the expansion is 
slowing down, whether the universe will one day collapse. 

Modern radio telescopes are exquisitely sensitive; a distant 
quasar is so faint that its detected radiation amounts perhaps to a 
quadrillionth of a watt. The total amount of energy from outside 
the solar system ever received by all the radio telescopes on the 
planet Earth is less than the energy of a single snowflake striking 
the ground. In detecting the cosmic background radiation, in 
counting quasars, in searching for intelligent signals from space, 
radio astronomers are dealing with amounts of energy that are 
barely there at all. 

Some matter, particularly the matter in the stars, glows in 


262 - Cosmos 



Conventional two-dimensional represen¬ 
tation of a cube. 




Conventional three-dimensional rep¬ 
resentation of a tesseract or hypercube 
(the three-dimensional model reduced one 
further dimension on this page). 



Radio image of elliptical galaxy NGC 
3266. Imaged in false color by the Very 
Large Array. 


visible light and is easy to see. Other matter, gas and dust in the 
outskirts of galaxies, for example, is not so readily detected. It 
does not give off visible light, although it seems to give off radio 
waves. This is one reason that the unlocking of the cosmological 
mysteries requires us to use exotic instruments and frequencies 
different from the visible light to which our eyes are sensitive. 
Observatories in Earth orbit have found an intense X-ray glow 
between the galaxies. It was first thought to be hot intergalactic 
hydrogen, an immense amount of it never before seen, perhaps 
enough to close the Cosmos and to guarantee that we are trapped 
in an oscillating universe. But more recent observations by Ri¬ 
cardo Giacconi may have resolved the X-ray glow into individ¬ 
ual points, perhaps an immense horde of distant quasars. They 
contribute previously unknown mass to the universe as well. 
When the cosmic inventory is completed, and the mass of all the 
galaxies, quasars, black holes, intergalactic hydrogen, gravita¬ 
tional waves and still more exotic denizens of space is summed 
up, we will know what kind of universe we inhabit. 

In discussing the large-scale structure of the Cosmos, astron¬ 
omers are fond of saying that space is curved, or that there is no 
center to the Cosmos, or that the universe is finite but un¬ 
bounded. Whatever are they talking about? Let us imagine we 
inhabit a strange country where everyone is perfectly flat. Fol¬ 
lowing Edwin Abbott, a Shakespearean scholar who lived in 
Victorian England, we call it Flatland. Some of us are squares; 
some are triangles; some have more complex shapes. We scurry 
about, in and out of our flat buildings, occupied with our flat 
businesses and dalliances. Everyone in Flatland has width and 
length, but no height whatever. We know about left-right and 
forward-back, but have no hint, not a trace of comprehension, 
about up-down—except for flat mathematicians. They say, “Lis¬ 
ten, it’s really very easy. Imagine left-right. Imagine forward- 
back. Okay, so far? Now imagine another dimension, at right 
angles to the other two.” And we say, “What are you talking 
about? ‘At right angles to the other two’! There are only two 
dimensions. Point to that third dimension. Where is it?” So the 
mathematicians, disheartened, amble off. Nobody listens to 
mathematicians. 

Every square creature in Flatland sees another square as merely 
a short line segment, the side of the square nearest to him. He can 
see the other side of the square only by taking a short walk. But 
the inside of a square is forever mysterious, unless some terrible 
accident or autopsy breaches the sides and exposes the interior 
parts. 

One day a three-dimensional creature—shaped like an apple, 
say—comes upon Flatland, hovering above it. Observing a par¬ 
ticularly attractive and congenial-looking square entering its flat 
house, the apple decides, in a gesture of interdimensional amity, 
to say hello. “How are you?” asks the visitor from the third 













The Edge of Forever — 263 


dimension. “I am a visitor from the third dimension.” The 
wretched square looks about his closed house and sees no one. 
What is worse, to him it appears that the greeting, entering from 
above, is emanating from his own flat body, a voice from within. 
A little insanity, he perhaps reminds himself gamely, runs in the 
family. 

Exasperated at being judged a psychological aberration, the 
apple descends into Flatland. Now a three-dimensional creature 
can exist, in Flatland, only partially; only a cross section can be 
seen, only the points of contact with the plane surface of Flat- 
land. An apple slithering through Flatland would appear first as a 
point and then as progressively larger, roughly circular slices. The 
square sees a point appearing in a closed room in his two-dimen¬ 
sional world and slowly growing into a near circle. A creature of 
strange and changing shape has appeared from nowhere. 

Rebuffed, unhappy at the obtuseness of the very flat, the apple 
bumps the square and sends him aloft, fluttering and spinning 
into that mysterious third dimension. At first the square can 
make no sense of what is happening; it is utterly outside his 
experience. But eventually he realizes that he is viewing Flatland 
from a peculiar vantage point: “above.” He can see into closed 
rooms. He can see into his flat fellows. He is viewing his universe 
from a unique and devastating perspective. Traveling through 
another dimension provides, as an incidental benefit, a kind of 
X-ray vision. Eventually, like a falling leaf, our square slowly 
descends to the surface. From the point of view of his fellow 
Flatlanders, he has unaccountably disappeared from a closed 
room and then distressingly materialized from nowhere. “For 
heaven’s sake,” they say, “what’s happened to you?” “I think,” he 
finds himself replying, “I was ‘up.’ ” They pat him on his sides and 
comfort him. Delusions always ran in his family. 

In such interdimensional contemplations, we need not be re¬ 
stricted to two dimensions. We can, following Abbott, imagine a 
world of one dimension, where everyone is a line segment, or 
even the magical world of zero-dimensional beasts, the points. 
But perhaps more interesting is the question of higher dimen¬ 
sions. Could there be a fourth physical dimension?* 

We can imagine generating a cube in the following way: Take 
a line segment of a certain length and move it an equal length at 
right angles to itself. That makes a square. Move the square an 
equal length at right angles to itself, and we have a cube. We 



* . •* 



A deep sky survey in X-rays (top) within 
the constellation Eridanus, performed by 
the Einstein High-Energy Astrophysical 
Observatory in Earth orbit. The same re¬ 
gion in ordinary visible light is shown at 
bottom, with three quasars indicated. 
Courtesy Ricardo Giacconi and NASA. 


* If a fourth-dimensional creature existed it could, in our three-dimen¬ 
sional universe, appear and dematerialize at will, change shape remark¬ 
ably, pluck us out of locked rooms and make us appear from nowhere. It 
could also turn us inside out. There are several ways in which we can be 
turned inside out: the least pleasant would result in our viscera and 
internal organs being on the outside and the entire Cosmos—glowing 
intergalactic gas, galaxies, planets, everything—on the inside. I am not 
sure I like the idea. 



264 - Cosmos 


understand this cube to cast a shadow, which we usually draw as 
two squares with their vertices connected. If we examine the 
shadow of a cube in two dimensions, we notice that not all the 
lines appear equal, and not all the angles are right angles. The 
three-dimensional object has not been perfectly represented in its 
transfiguration into two dimensions. This is the cost of losing a 
dimension in the geometrical projection. Now let us take our 
three-dimensional cube and carry it, at right angles to itself, 
through a fourth physical dimension: not left-right, not forward- 
back, not up-down, but simultaneously at right angles to all those 
directions. I cannot show you what direction that is, but I can 
imagine it to exist. In such a case, we would have generated a 
four-dimensional hypercube, also called a tesseract. I cannot 
show you a tesseract, because we are trapped in three dimen¬ 
sions. But what I can show you is the shadow in three dimensions 
of a tesseract. It resembles two nested cubes, all the vertices 
connected by lines. But for a real tesseract, in four dimensions, all 
the lines would be of equal length and all the angles would be 
right angles. 

Imagine a universe just like Flatland, except that unbeknownst 
to the inhabitants, their two-dimensional universe is curved 
through a third physical dimension. When the Flatlanders take 
short excursions, their universe looks flat enough. But if one of 
them takes a long enough walk along what seems to be a per¬ 
fectly straight line, he uncovers a great mystery: although he has 
not reached a barrier and has never turned around, he has some¬ 
how come back to the place from which he started. His two- 
dimensional universe must have been warped, bent or curved 
through a mysterious third dimension. He cannot imagine that 
third dimension, but he can deduce it. Increase all dimensions in 
this story by one, and you have a situation that may apply to us. 

Where is the center of the Cosmos? Is there an edge to the 
universe? What lies beyond that? In a two-dimensional universe, 
curved through a third dimension, there is no center—at least not 
on the surface of the sphere. The center of such a universe is not 
in that universe; it lies, inaccessible, in the third dimension, inside 
the sphere. While there is only so much area on the surface of 
the sphere, there is no edge to this universe—it is finite but 
unbounded. And the question of what lies beyond is meaning¬ 
less. Flat creatures cannot, on their own, escape their two di¬ 
mensions. 

Increase all dimensions by one, and you have the situation that 
may apply to us: the universe as a four-dimensional hypersphere 
with no center and no edge, and nothing beyond. Why do all the 
galaxies seem to be running away from us? The hypersphere is 
expanding from a point, like a four-dimensional balloon being 
inflated, creating in every instant more space in the universe. 
Sometime after the expansion begins, galaxies condense and are 
carried outward on the surface of the hypersphere. There are 



The Edge of Forever — 2 65 


astronomers in each galaxy, and the light they see is also trapped 
on the curved surface of the hypersphere. As the sphere expands, 
an astronomer in any galaxy will think all the other galaxies are 
running away from him. There are no privileged reference 
frames.* The farther away the galaxy, the faster its recession. The 
galaxies are embedded in, attached to space, and the fabric of 
space is expanding. And to the question, Where in the present 
universe did the Big Bang occur? the answer is clearly, every- 
where. 

If there is insufficient matter to prevent the universe from 
expanding forever, it must have an open shape, curved like a 
saddle with a surface extending to infinity in our three-dimen- 
sional analogy. If there is enough matter, then it has a closed 
shape, curved like a sphere in our three-dimensional analogy. If 
the universe is closed, light is trapped within it. In the 1920’s, in a 
direction opposite to M31, observers found a distant pair of spiral 
galaxies. Was it possible, they wondered, that they were seeing 
the Milky Way and M31 from the other direction—like seeing 
the back of your head with light that has circumnavigated the 
universe? We now know that the universe is much larger than 
they imagined in the 1920’s. It would take more than the age of 
the universe for light to circumnavigate it. And the galaxies are 
younger than the universe. But if the Cosmos is closed and light 
cannot escape from it, then it may be perfectly correct to describe 
the universe as a black hole. If you wish to know what it is like 
inside a black hole, look around you. 

We have previously mentioned the possibility of wormholes 
to get from one place in the universe to another without covering 
the intervening distance—through a black hole. We can imagine 
these wormholes as tubes running through a fourth physical 
dimension. We do not know that such wormholes exist. But if 
they do, must they always hook up with another place in our 
universe? Or is it just possible that wormholes connect with other 
universes, places that would otherwise be forever inaccessible to 
us? For all we know, there may be many other universes. Perhaps 
they are, in some sense, nested within one another. 

There is an idea—strange, haunting, evocative—one of the 
most exquisite conjectures in science or religion. It is entirely 
undemonstrated; it may never be proved. But it stirs the blood. 
There is, we are told, an infinite hierarchy of universes, so that 
an elementary particle, such as an electron, in our universe 
would, if penetrated, reveal itself to be an entire closed universe. 
Within it, organized into the local equivalent of galaxies and 
smaller structures, are an immense number of other, much tinier 
elementary particles, which are themselves universe at the next 


* The view that the universe looks by and large the same no matter from 
where we happen to view it was first proposed, so far as we know, by 
Giordano Bruno. 



266 - Cosmos 



Hi 




The Edge of Forever - 261 


level, and so on forever—an infinite downward regression, unf 
verses within universes, endlessly. And upward as well Our 
familiar universe of galaxies and stars, planets and people, would 
be a single elementary particle in the next universe up, the first 
step of another infinite regress. 

This is the only religious idea I know that surpasses the endless 
number of infinitely old cycling universes in Hindu cosmology. 
What would those other universes be like? Would they be built 
on different laws of physics? Would they have stars and galaxies 
and worlds, or something quite different? Might they be compan 
ible with some unimaginably different form of life? To enter 
them, we would somehow have to penetrate a fourth physical 
dimension—not an easy undertaking, surely, but perhaps a black 
hole would provide a way. There may be small black holes in the 
solar neighborhood. Poised at the edge of forever, we would 
jump off. . . 


Infinite regression. A representation of the passage from one universe to 
the next larger universe in a Cosmos with an infinite regression of nested 
universes. Neither universe is ours. Painting by Jon Lomberg. 




An intelligent being: A humpback whale breaches the surface of the waters, Frederick Sound, Alaska, summer 1979. 
Humpbacks are known for their remarkable leaps and their extraordinary communications. An average humpback 
weighs 50 tons, and is 15 meters long. Their brains are much larger than the brains of humans. Courtesy Dan 
McSweeny. 





Chapter XI 

THE PERSISTENCE 
OF MEMOIY 


Now that the destinies of Heaven and Earth have been fixed; 
Trench and canal have been given their proper course; 

The banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates have been established; 
What else shall we do? 

What else shall we create? 

Oh Anunaki, you great gods of the sky, what else shall we do? 
—The Assyrian account of the creation of Man, 800 B.C. 


When he, whoever of the gods it was, had thus arranged in order and 
resolved that chaotic mass, and reduced it, thus resolved, to cosmic parts, he 
first moulded the Earth into the form of a mighty ball so that it might be of 
like form on every side . . . And, that no region might be without its own 
forms of animate life, the stars and divine forms occupied the floor of 
heaven, the sea fell to the shining fishes for their home, Earth received the 
beasts, and the mobile air the birds . . . Then Man was born: . . . though all 
other animals are prone, and fix their gaze upon the earth, he gave to Man 
an uplifted face and bade him stand erect and turn his eyes to heaven. 

—Ovid, Metamorphoses , first century 




270 - Cosmos 


In THE GREAT COSMIC DARK THERE ARE countless stars and 
planets both younger and older than our solar system. Although 
we cannot yet be certain, the same processes that led on Earth to 
the evolution of life and intelligence should have been operating 
throughout the Cosmos. There may be a million worlds in the 
Milky Way Galaxy alone that at this moment are inhabited by 
beings who are very different from us, and far more advanced. 
Knowing a great deal is not the same as being smart; intelligence 
is not information alone but also judgment, the manner in which 
information is coordinated and used. Still, the amount of infor¬ 
mation to which we have access is one index of our intelligence. 
The measuring rod, the unit of information, is something called 
a bit (for binary digit). It is an answer—either yes or no—to an 
unambiguous question. To specify whether a lamp is on or off 
requires a single bit of information. To designate one letter out of 
the twenty-six in the Latin alphabet takes five bits (2 5 = 
2x2x2x2x2 = 32, which is more than 26). The verbal infor¬ 
mation content of this book is a little less than ten million bits, 
10 7 . The total number of bits that characterizes an hour-long 
television program is about 10 12 . The information in the words 
and pictures of different books in all the libraries on the Earth is 
something like 10 16 or 10 17 bits.* Of course much of it is redun¬ 
dant. Such a number calibrates crudely what humans know. But 
elsewhere, on older worlds, where life has evolved billions of 
years earlier than on Earth, perhaps they know 10 20 bits or 10 30 — 
not just more information but significantly different information. 

Of those million worlds inhabited by advanced intelligences, 
consider a rare planet, the only one in its system with a surface 
ocean of liquid water. In this rich aquatic environment, many 
relatively intelligent creatures live—some with eight appendages 
for grasping; others that communicate among themselves by 
changing an intricate pattern of bright and dark mottling on their 
bodies; even clever little creatures from the land who make brief 
forays into the ocean in vessels of wood or metal. But we seek 
the dominant intelligences, the grandest creatures on the planet, 
the sentient and graceful masters of the deep ocean, the great 
whales. 

They are the largest animals' 1 ' ever to evolve on the planet 
Earth, larger by far than the dinosaurs. An adult blue whale can 
be thirty meters long and weigh 150 tons. Many, especially the 
baleen whales, are placid browsers, straining through vast vol¬ 
umes of ocean for the small animals on which they graze; others 
eat fish and krill. The whales are recent arrivals in the ocean. 
Only seventy million years ago their ancestors were carnivorous 

* Thus all of the books in the world contain no more information than is 
broadcast as video in a single large American city in a single year. Not all 
bits have equal value. 

t Some sequoia trees are both larger and more massive than any whale. 



The Persistence of Memory - 271 





m 


sr- 




r r r t~t r~“ .r 


1 i I j i 

mammals who migrated in slow steps from the land into the 

ocean. Among the whales, mothers suckle and care tenderly for 
their offspring. There is a long childhood in which the adults 

teach the young. Play is a typical pastime. These are all mam- 

malian characteristics, all important for the development of in¬ 
telligent beings. 

The sea is murky. Sight and smell, which work well for mam¬ 
mals on the land, are not of much use in the depths of the ocean. 
Those ancestors of the whales who relied on these senses to 
locate a mate or a baby or a predator did not leave many off¬ 
spring. So another method was perfected by evolution; it works 
superbly well and is central to any understanding of the whales: 
the sense of sound. Some whale sounds are called songs, but we 
are still ignorant of their true nature and meaning. They range 
over a broad band of frequencies, down to well below the lowest 
sound the human ear can detect. A typical whale song lasts for 
perhaps fifteen minutes; the longest, about an hour. Often it is 
repeated, identically, beat for beat, measure for measure, note for 
note. Occasionally a group of whales will leave their winter 
waters in the midst of a song and six months later return to 
continue at precisely the right note, as if there had been no 
interruption. Whales are very good at remembering. More often, 
on their return, the vocalizations have changed. New songs ap¬ 
pear on the cetacean hit parade. 

Very often the members of the group will sing the same song 
together. By some mutual consensus, some collaborative 
song writing, the piece changes month by month, slowly and 
predictably. These vocalizations are complex. If the songs of the 
humpback whale are enunciated as a tonal language, the total 
information content, the number of bits of information in such 
songs, is some 10 6 bits, about the same as the information content 
of the Iliad or the Odyssey . We do not know what whales or 
their cousins the dolphins have to talk or sing about. They have 
no manipulative organs, they make no engineering constructs, 
but they are social creatures. They hunt, swim, fish, browse, 
frolic, mate, play, run from predators. There may be a great deal 
to talk about. 



J ~ -N j 



The “songs” of the humpback whale as 
recorded on a machine spectrograph. On 
each line time runs horizontally and the 
sound frequency, from low notes to high 
notes, runs vertically. The almost vertical 
lines represent glissandos, up the musical 
scale, over several octaves. These hydro- 
phonic recordings were made under water 
by F. Watlington at the Palisades Sofar 
Station, Bermuda, on April 28, 1964- 
Roger Payne comments: “The songs we 
taped in 1964 and 1969 are as different as 
Beethoven [is] from the Beatles.” He 
found the (whale) music of the 1960’s 
more beautiful than that for the 1970’s. 
Courtesy American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. 
































272 - Cosmos 


Transcription: 
4-8 min 


T 


T 




6-15 min 


II 


* 


7 min-lysis 


III 





FUNCTION 

Abolish host restriction 
Nonessential 

Protein kinase 

RNA polymerase 

Start of replication ] 

DNA ligase 

Nonessential 

Inactivate host RNA pol 

Endonuclease 

Lysozyme 

Helicase. primase 


DNA polymerase 

5' exonuclease 
Virion protein 
Head protein 

Head assembly 


Tail protein 


Virion protein 

Head protein 


Tail protein 


DNA maturation 


Right end 


The gene library of the virus T7. This 
single short strand of DNA, containing 
some twenty genes, includes everything 
this organism must know in order to in¬ 
vade a bacterium and entirely take over 
the host cell The information, written in 
the DNA language through the sequence 
of nucleotides, includes instructions for 
duplicating its DNA instructions and its 
protein head and tail, and for using the 
chemical machinery of the host bac¬ 
terium. The bacterial cell is converted 
from a factory for making more bacteria 
into a factory for making more T7. From 
DNA Replication by Arthur Komberg, 
W. H. Freeman and Company, 1980. 
Copyright © 1980. 


The primary danger to the whales is a newcomer, an upstart 
animal, only recently, through technology, become competent in 
the oceans, a creature that calls itself human. For 99.99 percent of 
the history of the whales, there were no humans in or on the 
deep oceans. During this period the whales evolved their ex¬ 
traordinary audio communication system. The finbacks, for ex¬ 
ample, emit extremely loud sounds at a frequency of twenty 
Hertz, down near the lowest octave on the piano keyboard. (A 
Hertz is a unit of sound frequency that represents one sound 
wave, one crest and one trough, entering your ear every second.) 
Such low-frequency sounds are scarcely absorbed in the ocean. 
The American biologist Roger Payne has calculated that using 
the deep ocean sound channel, two whales could communicate 
with each other at twenty Hertz essentially anywhere in the 
world. One might be off the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica and 
communicate with another in the Aleutians. For most of their 
history, the whales may have established a global communica¬ 
tions network. Perhaps when separated by 15,000 kilometers, 
their vocalizations are love songs, cast hopefully into the vastness 
of the deep. 

For tens of millions of years these enormous, intelligent, com¬ 
municative creatures evolved with essentially no natural ene¬ 
mies. Then the development of the steamship in the nineteenth 
century introduced an ominous source of noise pollution. As 
commercial and military vessels became more abundant, the 
noise background in the oceans, especially at a frequency of 
twenty Hertz, became noticeable. Whales communicating across 
the oceans must have experienced increasingly greater difficul¬ 
ties. The distance over which they could communicate must 
have decreased steadily. Two hundred years ago, a typical dis¬ 
tance across which finbacks could communicate was perhaps 
10,000 kilometers. Today, the corresponding number is perhaps 
a few hundred kilometers. Do whales know each other’s names? 
Can they recognize each other as individuals by sounds alone? 
We have cut the whales off from themselves. Creatures that 
communicated for tens of millions of years have now effectively 
been silenced.* 


* There is a curious counterpoint to this story. The preferred radio 
channel for interstellar communication with other technical civilizations 
is near a frequency of 1.42 billion Hertz, marked by a radio spectral line 
of hydrogen, the most abundant atom in the Universe. We are just 
beginning to listen here for signals of intelligent origin. But the frequency 
band is being increasingly encroached upon by civilian and military 
communications traffic on Earth, and not only by the major powers. We 
are jamming the interstellar channel. Uncontrolled growth of terrestrial 
radio technology may prevent us from ready communication with in¬ 
telligent beings on distant worlds. Their songs may go unanswered be¬ 
cause we have not the will to control our radio-frequency pollution and 
listen. 



The Persistence of Memory — 273 


And we have done worse than that, because there persists to 
this day a traffic in the dead bodies of whales. There are humans 
who hunt and slaughter whales and market the products for 
lipstick or industrial lubricant. Many nations understand that the 
systematic murder of such intelligent creatures is monstrous, but 
the traffic continues, promoted chiefly by Japan, Norway and the 
Soviet Union. We humans, as a species, are interested in com¬ 
munication with extraterrestrial intelligence. Would not a good 
beginning be improved communication with terrestrial intelli¬ 
gence, with other human beings of different cultures and lan¬ 
guages, with the great apes, with the dolphins, but particularly 
with those intelligent masters of the deep, the great whales? 

For a whale to live there are many things it must know how to 
do. This knowledge is stored in its genes and in its brains. The 
genetic information includes how to convert plankton into blub¬ 
ber; or how to hold your breath on a dive one kilometer below 
the surface. The information in the brains, the learned informa¬ 
tion, includes such things as who your mother is, or the meaning 
of the song you are hearing just now. The whale, like all the 
other animals on the Earth, has a gene library and a brain library. 

The genetic material of the whale, like the genetic material of 
human beings, is made of nucleic acids, those extraordinary 
molecules capable of reproducing themselves from the chemical 
building blocks that surround them, and of turning hereditary 
information into action. For example, one whale enzyme, identi¬ 
cal to one you have in every cell of your body, is called hexoki- 
nase, the first of more than two dozen enzyme-mediated steps 
required to convert a molecule of sugar obtained from the plank¬ 
ton in the whale’s diet into a little energy—perhaps a contribution 
to a single low-frequency note in the music of the whale. 

The information stored in the DNA double helix of a whale 
or a human or any other beast or vegetable on Earth is written in 
a language of four letters—the four different kinds of nucleotides, 
the molecular components that make up DNA. How many bits 
of information are contained in the hereditary material of various 
life forms? How many yes/no answers to the various biological 
questions are written in the language of life? A virus needs about 
10,000 bits—roughly equivalent to the amount of information on 
this page. But the viral information is simple, exceedingly com¬ 
pact, extraordinarily efficient. Reading it requires very close at¬ 
tention. These are the instructions it needs to infect some other 
organism and to reproduce itself—the only things that viruses are 
any good at. A bacterium uses roughly a million bits of informa¬ 
tion—which is about 100 printed pages. Bacteria have a lot more 
to do than viruses. Unlike the viruses, they are not thoroughgo¬ 
ing parasites. Bacteria have to make a living. And a free-swim¬ 
ming one-celled amoeba is much more sophisticated; with about 
four hundred million bits in its DNA, it would require some 
eighty 500-page volumes to make another amoeba. 



A small region of the Gene Library of a 
human or a whale, if it were available as 
ordinary books rather than encoded in the 
nucleic acids. Each title corresponds to a 
complex set of functions which organisms 
perform expertly without any mediation 
from their brains. The instructions in the 
genes are “how to do it” books. Photo¬ 
graphed by Edwardo Castaneda. 




274 - Cosmos 



+ ATP 


Hexokinase 



Glucose 6-phosphate 


+ ADP + H+ 



Phosphoglucose 0 3 P0H 2 C /Os 
isomerase 


ch 2 oh 





H 

HO H 

Fructose 6-phosphate 


OH 


2 -o,poh 2 c ch 2 oh 

^ 1 

H HO 

OH 

OH H 

Fructose 6-phosphate 


Phosphofructokinase 

+ ATP -» 


2_ 0,P0H,C /Os. CH 
H 



OH 

OH H 

Fructose 1,6-diphosphate 


ch 2 opo 3 2 ~ 

C=0 
HO—C—H 
H—C—OH 
H—C—OH 

CH 2 0P0 3 2 " 

Fructose 

1.6-diphosphate 


Aldolase 


CH 2 0P0 3 2 - 

c=o 

HO—C—H + 

I 

H 


Dihydroxyacetone 

phosphate 


v° 

H—C—OH 

ch 2 opo 3 2 - 


Glyceraldehyde 

3-phosphate 


0. H 

Y 

H—C—OH 
CH 2 0P0 3 2 " 

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 


Triose phosphate 
isomerase 


ch 2 oh 

I 

c=o 

CH 2 0P0 3 2 - 

Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 



The Persistence of Memory - 275 


°W H 

c 

I 

H—C—OH -(- NAD + + Pi 

ch 2 opo 3 2 - 


Glyceraldehyde 

3-phosphate 

dehydrogenase 


O /0 P0,- 

c 

I 

H—C—OH 


ch 2 opo 3 2 - 


+ NADH + H + 


Glyceraldehyde 

3-phosphate 


1,3-Diphosphoglycerate 

(1,3-DPG) 


0 X 

C— 0P0 3 2 - 

Phosphoglycerate 

Vo- 

H—C—OH 

ch 2 opo 3 2 - 

1,3-Diphosphoglycerate 

kinase 

+ ADP — 

H—C—OH 

ch 2 opo 3 2 - 

3-Phosphoglycerate 


+ ATP 


o x o- 

V 

H—C—OH 

I 

H—C—OPO, 2 

I 3 

H 

3 Phosphoglycerate 


Phosphoglyceromutase 


v°- 

I 

H—C—0P 0 3 2 ^ 

I 

H—C—OH 

I 

H 

2-Phosphoglycerate 


V 

H —C—0P0 3 2 ' 

I 

H —C—OH 

I 

H 

2 Phosphoglycerate 


Enolase 


Y 

C—0P0 3 2 - + H 2 0 

H—C 

I 

H 

Phosphoenolpyruvate 


V 

I 

C—OP0 3 2 - 

II 

ch 2 

Phosphoenolpyruvate 


-I- ADP 


Pyruvate 

kinase 


0 0 ~ 

V 

I 

c=o 

I 

ch 3 

Pyruvate 


+ ATP 


A tiny fraction of the information in the gene library: the first steps in the digestion of the sugar glucose. In the 
hexagons representing glucose and the pentagon representing fructose, each apex is occupied by a carbon atom. The 
six-carbon molecule fructose 1,6-diphosphate is broken down into two three-carbon fragments. Each chemical step is 
carefully orchestrated and presided over by a particular enzyme, named above the arrows. Energy to drive this elaborate 
chemistry is provided by the molecule ATP. Two molecules of ATP go in and (because there are two three-carbon 
fragments) four come out; an energy profit is made. Organisms such as whales and humans that breathe air then 
combine pyruvate (lower right ) with oxygen and extract still more energy. This elaborately evolved chemical pump 
drives much of life on Earth. 



276 - Cosmos 



A whale or a human being needs something like five billion 
bits. The 5 * 10 9 bits of information in our encyclopaedia of 
life—in the nucleus of each of our cells—if written out in, say, 
English, would fill a thousand volumes. Every one of your hun¬ 
dred trillion cells contains a complete library of instructions on 
how to make every part of you. Every cell in your body arises by 
successive cell divisions from a single cell, a fertilized egg gen¬ 
erated by your parents. Every time that cell divided, in the many 
embryological steps that went into making you, the original set of 
genetic instructions was duplicated with great fidelity. So your 
liver cells have some unemployed knowledge about how to make 
your bone cells, and vice versa. The genetic library contains 
everything your body knows how to do on its own. The ancient 
information is written in exhaustive, careful, redundant detail- 
how to laugh, how to sneeze, how to walk, how to recognize 
patterns, how to reproduce, how to digest an apple. If it was 
expressed in the language of chemistry, the instructions for the 
first steps in digesting the sugar in an apple would look like the 
scheme on pages 274 and 275. 

Eating an apple is an immensely complicated process. In fact, if 
I had to synthesize my own enzymes, if I consciously had to 
remember and direct all the chemical steps required to get energy 
out of food, I would probably starve. But even bacteria do an¬ 
aerobic glycolysis, which is why apples rot: lunchtime for the 
microbes. They and we and all creatures inbetween possess many 
similar genetic instructions. Our separate gene libraries have 
many pages in common, another reminder of our common evo¬ 
lutionary heritage. Our technology can duplicate only a tiny 
fraction of the intricate biochemistry that our bodies effortlessly 
perform: we have only just begun to study these processes. Evo¬ 
lution, however, has had billions of years of practice. DNA 
knows. 

But suppose what you had to do was so complicated that even 
several billion bits was insufficient. Suppose the environment was 
changing so fast that the precoded genetic encyclopaedia, which 
served perfectly well before, was no longer entirely adequate. 
Then even a gene library of 1,000 volumes would not be 
enough. That is why we have brains. 

Like all our organs, the brain has evolved, increasing in com¬ 
plexity and information content, over millions of years. Its struc¬ 
ture reflects all the stages through which it has passed. The brain 
evolved from the inside out. Deep inside is the oldest part, the 
brainstem, which conducts the basic biological functions, includ¬ 
ing the rhythms of life—heartbeat and respiration. According to a 
provocative insight by Paul MacLean, the higher functions of the 
brain evolved in three successive stages. Capping the brainstem is 
the R-complex, the seat of aggression, ritual, territoriality and 
social hierarchy, which evolved hundreds of millions of years 
ago in our reptilian ancestors. Deep inside the skull of every one 




The Persistence of Memory — 211 


of us there is something like the brain of a crocodile. Surrounding 
the R-complex is the limbic system or mammalian brain, which 
evolved tens of millions of years ago in ancestors who were 
mammals but not yet primates. It is a major source of our moods 
and emotions, of our concern and care for the young. 

And finally, on the outside, living in uneasy truce with the 
more primitive brains beneath, is the cerebral cortex, which 
evolved millions of years ago in our primate ancestors. The 
cerebral cortex, where matter is transformed into consciousness, 
is the point of embarkation for all our cosmic voyages. Comprise 
ing more than two-thirds of the brain mass, it is the realm of both 
intuition and critical analysis. It is here that we have ideas and 
inspirations, here that we read and write, here that we do math¬ 
ematics and compose music. The cortex regulates our conscious 
lives. It is the distinction of our species, the seat of our humanity. 
Civilization is a product of the cerebral cortex. 

The language of the brain is not the DNA language of the 
genes. Rather, what we know is encoded in cells called 
neurons—microscopic electrochemical switching elements, typi¬ 
cally a few hundredths of a millimeter across. Each of us has 
perhaps a hundred billion neurons, comparable to the number of 
stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. Many neurons have thousands of 
connections with their neighbors. There are something like a 
hundred trillion, 10 14 , such connections in the human cerebral 
cortex. 

Charles Sherrington imagined the activities in the cerebral 
cortex upon awakening: 

[The cortex] becomes now a sparkling field of rhythmic 
flashing points with trains of traveling sparks hurrying 
hither and thither. The brain is waking and with it the 
mind is returning. It is as if the Milky Way entered upon 
some cosmic dance. Swiftly the [cortex] becomes an en¬ 
chanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a 
dissolving pattern, always a meaningful pattern though 
never an abiding one; a shifting harmony of sub-patterns. 
Now as the waking body rouses, sub-patterns of this great 
harmony of activity stretch down into the unlit tracks of the 
[lower brain]. Strings of flashing and traveling sparks engage 
the links of it. This means that the body is up and rises to 
meet its waking day. 

Even in sleep, the brain is pulsing, throbbing and flashing with 
the complex business of human life—dreaming, remembering, 
figuring things out. Our thoughts, visions and fantasies have a 
physical reality. A thought is made of hundreds of electrochemi¬ 
cal impulses. If we were shrunk to the level of the neurons, we 
might witness elaborate, intricate, evanescent patterns. One 
might be the spark of a memory of the smell of lilacs on a country 
road in childhood. Another might be part of an anxious all- 
points bulletin: “Where did I leave the keys?” 



The brain library: three views of the 
human brain, in which perhaps a hundred 
trillion bits of information are stored 
within a mass of some 1,400 grams (about 
3 pounds). The top photograph on the 
opposite page shows the two hemispheres 
of the cerebral cortex, connected by a 
broad bundle of nerve fibers. The convo¬ 
lutions in the cerebral cortex serve to in¬ 
crease the brains surface area in a fixed 
volume. Below that is a view of the base 
of the human brain. The cerebral cortex is 
such a major part of the brain that part of 
it is visible even from this view—portions 
of the frontal and temporal lobes in the 
upper part of this picture. The brain com¬ 
ponents mainly visible here are the most 
primitive—those that control heartbeat, 
body temperature, touch, pain and the 
like. On this page is an oblique view. Even 
with this orientation, the R-complex— 
surrounding the brainstem—and the lim¬ 
bic system are mainly hidden in the 
interior of the brain. Photographs from 
studies by Fried, Paul and Scheibel. Pho¬ 
tographed by Peter Duong. Courtesy Ar¬ 
nold Scheibel, Brain Research Institute, 
UCLA. 



278 - Cosmos 



A cluster of neurons in the human brain- 
stem. The magnification in this scanning 
electron micrograph is 15,000 times. In 
such neural connections the brain library 
is stored, processed and accessed. Photo¬ 
graphs from studies by Fried, Paul and 
Scheibel. Photographed by Peter Duong. 
Courtesy Arnold Scheibel, Brain Re¬ 
search Institute, UCLA. 


There are many valleys in the mountains of the mind, con¬ 
volutions that greatly increase the surface area available in the 
cerebral cortex for information storage in a skull of limited size. 
The neurochemistry of the brain is astonishingly busy, the cir¬ 
cuitry of a machine more wonderful than any devised by 
humans. But there is no evidence that its functioning is due to 
anything more than the 10 14 neural connections that build an 
elegant architecture of consciousness. The world of thought is 
divided roughly into two hemispheres. The right hemisphere of 
the cerebral cortex is mainly responsible for pattern recognition, 
intuition, sensitivity, creative insights. The left hemisphere pre¬ 
sides over rational, analytical and critical thinking. These are the 
dual strengths, the essential opposites, that characterize human 
thinking. Together, they provide the means both for generating 
ideas and for testing their validity. A continuous dialogue is 
going on between the two hemispheres, channeled through an 
immense bundle of nerves, the corpus callosum, the bridge be¬ 
tween creativity and analysis, both of which are necessary to 
understand the world. 

The information content of the human brain expressed in bits 
is probably comparable to the total number of connections 
among the neurons—about a hundred trillion, 10 14 , bits. If writ¬ 
ten out in English, say, that information would fill some twenty 
million volumes, as many as in the world’s largest libraries. The 
equivalent of twenty million books is inside the heads of every 
one of us. The brain is a very big place in a very small space. 
Most of the books in the brain are in the cerebral cortex. Down 
in the basement are the functions our remote ancestors mainly 
depended on—aggression, child-rearing, fear, sex, the willingness 
to follow leaders blindly. Of the higher brain functions, some- 
reading, writing, speaking—seem to be localized in particular 
places in the cerebral cortex. Memories, on the other hand, are 
stored redundantly in many locales. If such a thing as telepathy 
existed, one of its glories would be the opportunity for each of us 
to read the books in the cerebral cortices of our loved ones. But 
there is no compelling evidence for telepathy, and the communi¬ 
cation of such information remains the task of artists and writers. 

The brain does much more than recollect. It compares, syn¬ 
thesizes, analyzes, generates abstractions. We must figure out 
much more than our genes can know. That is why the brain 
library is some ten thousand times larger than the gene library. 
Our passion for learning, evident in the behavior of every 
toddler, is the tool for our survival. Emotions and ritualized 
behavior patterns are built deeply into us. They are part of our 
humanity. But they are not characteristically human. Many other 
animals have feelings. What distinguishes our species is thought. 
The cerebral cortex is a liberation. We need no longer be 
trapped in the genetically inherited behavior patterns of lizards 
and baboons. We are, each of us, largely responsible for what 


The Persistence of Memory - 279 


gets put into our brains, for what, as adults, we wind up caring for 
and knowing about. No longer at the mercy of the reptile brain, 
we can change ourselves. 

Most of the world’s great cities have grown haphazardly, little 
by little, in response to the needs of the moment; very rarely is a 
city planned for the remote future. The evolution of a city is like 
the evolution of the brain: it develops from a small center and 
slowly grows and changes, leaving many old parts still function¬ 
ing. There is no way for evolution to rip out the ancient interior 
of the brain because of its imperfections and replace it with 
something of more modern manufacture. The brain must func¬ 
tion during the renovation. That is why the brainstem is sur¬ 
rounded by the R-complex, then the limbic system and finally 
the cerebral cortex. The old parts are in charge of too many 
fundamental functions for them to be replaced altogether. So 
they wheeze along, out-of-date and sometimes counterproduc¬ 
tive, but a necessary consequence of our evolution. 

In New York City, the arrangement of many of the major 
streets dates to the seventeenth century, the stock exchange to 
the eighteenth century, the waterworks to the nineteenth, the 
electrical power system to the twentieth. The arrangement might 
be more efficient if all civic systems were constructed in parallel 
and replaced periodically (which is why disastrous fires—the great 
conflagrations of London and Chicago, for example—are some¬ 
times an aid in city planning). But the slow accretion of new 
functions permits the city to work more or less continuously 
through the centuries. In the seventeenth century you traveled 
between Brooklyn and Manhattan across the East River by ferry. 
In the nineteenth century, the technology became available to 
construct a suspension bridge across the river. It was built pre¬ 
cisely at the site of the ferry terminal, both because the city 
owned the land and because major thoroughfares were already 
converging on the pre-existing ferry service. Later when it was 
possible to construct a tunnel under the river, it too was built in 
the same place for the same reasons, and also because small 
abandoned precursors of tunnels, called caissons, had already 
been emplaced during the construction of the bridge. This use 
and restructuring of previous systems for new purposes is very 
much like the pattern of biological evolution. 

When our genes could not store all the information necessary 
for survival, we slowly invented brains. But then the time came, 
perhaps ten thousand years ago, when we needed to know more 
than could conveniently be contained in brains. So we learned to 
stockpile enormous quantities of information outside our bodies. 
We are the only species on the planet, so far as we know, to have 
invented a communal memory stored neither in our genes nor in 
our brains. The warehouse of that memory is called the library. 

A book is made from a tree. It is an assemblage of flat, flexible 
parts (still called “leaves”) imprinted with dark pigmented squiggles. 



The constellation of the camel. From the 
Abd alRahman al Sufi al Kitab al-Kawa - 
kib Wa’s Suwar Razi (“Book of Stars and 
Constellations”), Persia, 1632. Courtesy 
Spencer Collection, The New York Pub¬ 
lic Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden 
Foundations. 




280 - Cosmos 



diogonalis quadranguli cui* latcra (St diucrfitatcs aTpectus 
longitudinc&laticuoine. Diuerfiras afpcctus luncadfol' 
cxccfTus diucrfiratis alpccf Lun^ flip diucrfiratc afpcctus for 
Si ucra coiuncrio luminariflf fucrit inter gradum cdipticc 
denre & nonagdimu cius ab afccndcnrc: uilibilis coru coiu C * 
crio preedit ucra.Si autc inter cunde nonagefimQ & eradu ° 
cidente fuerir.uiGbilis ucra fcqud. Sed G in code grad u tion* 
gcfimo accidcric rOc (Imul uifibilis coiuctio cG uera fiet nullacs 
diucrfitas afpccTin longirudinc cotingct. NonageGm* nan» 
gradus cclipricp ab afcendctc femp e in circulo g zenith &rpo! 
Jos xodiadpccdctc. Latitudo lune uifa e arcus circuli maoni 

THEOR1CA ECL1PSIS LVNARIS. ^ 




jodiaci & locd lun£ uerfl aut uifi! tranfeilris inter edi/ 



P"|i;namccl.'pf3tf. Minutaafusiedipfilu... „ 

^ -adiaci quf 1 ana pambulat lolc fugando a pnncipio cdy 
r “. ;rJ ~ a j jucdui ciusdi particularis fucrit*. aut uniuerfalis G/ 
P tfU * uc j 3 pnncipio ufqj ad initifl totalis obfeurauonis G 
flC mcrfaii5 cu mora fucrit. Minuta mor$ dimidif (St minuta 
f, ja qu? i U na foie fupando a prindpio totalis obfcuiatiois 
^ ad media cius pambulat. Minuta afus in cdypG folari 
H minuta que luna a prindpio edipGs ufc* ad mediu fugatioc 
utminu H feQmZ A ECL1PS1S SOLARIS 




Four early accessions to the human book library. Top, two pages from Sphaera Mundi by Joannes de Sacro Bosco. 
Published by Erhard Ratdult, Venice, 1485. The origin of lunar and solar eclipses is being discussed. Top opposite, the 
ascent of Mohammed on Buraq. From the sixteenth-century Turkish manuscript Davor Siyar-e Nabi (“Life of the 
Prophet”) by Mustapha ibn Yusuf. Bottom, an illustration of Jain cosmology and cosmography on cloth. Published in 
Gujarat, India, sixteenth century. Bottom opposite, the constellation of Aquarius, the water carrier. From De Sideribus 
Tractatus by Caius Hygnius, Italy, around 1450. All books courtesy Spencer Collection, the New York Public Library, 
Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations. 


BOTH PHOTOS BY BILL RAY 




















The Persistence of Memory - 281 


One glance at it and you hear the voice of another person— 
perhaps someone dead for thousands of years. Across the 
millennia, the author is speaking, clearly and silently, inside your 
head, directly to you. Writing is perhaps the greatest of human 
inventions, binding together people, citizens of distant epochs, 
who never knew one another. Books break the shackles of time, 
proof that humans can work magic. 

Some of the earliest authors wrote on clay. Cuneiform writing, 
the remote ancestor of the Western alphabet, was invented in 
the Near East about 5,000 years ago. Its purpose was to keep 
records: the purchase of grain, the sale of land, the triumphs of 
the king, the statutes of the priests, the positions of the stars, the 
prayers to the gods. For thousands of years, writing was chiseled 
into clay and stone, scratched onto wax or bark or leather; 
painted on bamboo or papyrus or silk—but always one copy at a 
time and, except for the inscriptions on monuments, always for a 
tiny readership. Then in China between the second and sixth 
centuries, paper, ink and printing with carved wooden blocks 
were all invented, permitting many copies of a work to be made 
and distributed. It took a thousand years for the idea to catch on 
in remote and backward Europe. Then, suddenly, books were 
being printed all over the world. Just before the invention of 
movable type, around 1450, there were no more than a few tens 
of thousands of books in all of Europe, all handwritten; about as 
many as in China in 100 B.C., and a tenth as many as in the Great 
Library of Alexandria. Fifty years later, around 1500, there were 
ten million printed books. Learning had become available to 
anyone who could read. Magic was everywhere. 

More recently, books, especially paperbacks, have been 
printed in massive and inexpensive editions. For the price of a 
modest meal you can ponder the decline and fall of the Roman 
Empire, the origin of species, the interpretation of dreams, the 
nature of things. Books are like seeds. They can lie dormant for 
centuries and then flower in the most unpromising soil. 

The great libraries of the world contain millions of volumes, 
the equivalent of about 10 14 bits of information in words, and 
perhaps 10 15 bits in pictures. This is ten thousand times more 
information than in our genes, and about ten times more than in 
our brains. If I finish a book a week, I will read only a few 
thousand books in my lifetime, about a tenth of a percent of the 
contents of the greatest libraries of our time. The trick is to know 
which books to read. The information in books is not prepro- 
grammed at birth but constantly changed, amended by events, 
adapted to the world. It is now twenty-three centuries since the 
founding of the Alexandrian Library. If there were no books, no 
written records, think how prodigious a time twenty-three cen¬ 
turies would be. With four generations per century, twenty-three 
centuries occupies almost a hundred generations of human 
beings. If information could be passed on merely by word of 



„^,ruVmc«Uf - OrnniTio efr fh-ILrunp 
i-Uu'w u<ju«e-eum tf(okqu4V<o eft 

arUjrum ' W <&' 


Cjuf'f 
♦ucvafci^ c 


r.OUlj7* rr i&. C 





P I jccf brum uitrr inohu/rfTrtT- kerfufajjpWU - 
:deo y, unuf extrti-rn am bor?uj'4icitu&tntt* 
^auinoctikltm £>ctfhuurri ctrculurn jot dnjtv 

Alter <£eOx m ^clutco 


BOTH PHOTOS BY BILL RAY 




282 - Cosmos 


• © 

© m 


1 

>- 

CC 


X 




Two pages from a nineteenth-century 
Thai manuscript on astrology and astron- 
omy. Courtesy Spencer Collection, the 
New York Public Library, As tor, Lenox 
and Tilden Foundations. 


mouth, how little we should know of our past, how slow would 
be our progress! Everything would depend on what ancient find¬ 
ings we had accidentally been told about, and how accurate the 
account was. Past information might be revered, but in successive 
retellings it would become progressively more muddled and 
eventually lost. Books permit us to voyage through time, to tap 
the wisdom of our ancestors. The library connects us with the 
insights and knowledge, painfully extracted from Nature, of the 
greatest minds that ever were, with the best teachers, drawn from 
the entire planet and from all of our history, to instruct us with¬ 
out tiring, and to inspire us to make our own contribution to the 
collective knowledge of the human species. Public libraries de¬ 
pend on voluntary contributions. I think the health of our civili¬ 
zation, the depth of our awareness about the underpinnings of 
our culture and our concern for the future can all be tested by 
how well we support our libraries. 

Were the Earth to be started over again with all its physical 
features identical, it is extremely unlikely that anything closely 
resembling a human being would ever again emerge. There is a 
powerful random character to the evolutionary process. A cos¬ 
mic ray striking a different gene, producing a different mutation, 
can have small consequences early but profound consequences 
late. Happenstance may play a powerful role in biology, as it does 
in history. The farther back the critical events occur, the more 
powerfully can they influence the present. 

For example, consider our hands. We have five fingers, in¬ 
cluding one opposable thumb. They serve us quite well. But I 
think we would be served equally well with six fingers including a 
thumb, or four fingers including a thumb, or maybe five fingers 
and two thumbs. There is nothing intrinsically best about our 
particular configuration of fingers, which we ordinarily think of 
as so natural and inevitable. We have five fingers because we 
have descended from a Devonian fish that had five phalanges or 
bones in its fins. Had we descended from a fish with four or six 
phalanges, we would have four or six fingers on each hand and 
would think them perfectly natural. We use base ten arithmetic 
only because we have ten fingers on our hands.* Had the ar¬ 
rangement been otherwise, we would use base eight or base 
twelve arithmetic and relegate base ten to the New Math. The 
same point applies, I believe, to many more essential aspects of 
our being—our hereditary material, our internal biochemistry, 
our form, stature, organ systems, loves and hates, passions and 
despairs, tenderness and aggression, even our analytical pro¬ 
cesses—all of these are, at least in part, the result of apparently 
minor accidents in our immensely long evolutionary history. 


* The arithmetic based on the number 5 or 10 seems so obvious that the 
ancient Greek equivalent of “to count” literally means “to five.” 







The Persistence of Memory — 283 


Perhaps if one less dragonfly had drowned in the Carboniferous 
swamps, the intelligent organisms on our planet today would 
have feathers and teach their young in rookeries. The pattern of 
evolutionary causality is a web of astonishing complexity; the 
incompleteness of our understanding humbles us. 

Just sixty-five million years ago our ancestors were the most 
unprepossessing of mammals—creatures with the size and intelli- 
gence of moles or tree shrews. It would have taken a very auda- 
cious biologist to guess that such animals would eventually 
produce the line that dominates the Earth today. The Earth then 
was full of awesome, nightmarish lizards—the dinosaurs, immense- 
ly successful creatures, which filled virtually every ecological 
niche. There were swimming reptiles, flying reptiles, and rep' 
tiles—some as tall as a six-story building—thundering across the 
face of the Earth. Some of them had rather large brains, an 
upright posture and two little front legs very much like hands, 
which they used to catch small, speedy mammals—probably in¬ 
cluding our distant ancestors—for dinner. If such dinosaurs had 
survived, perhaps the dominant intelligent species on our planet 
today would be four meters tall with green skin and sharp teeth, 
and the human form would be considered a lurid fantasy of 
saurian science fiction. But the dinosaurs did not survive. In one 
catastrophic event all of them and many, perhaps most, of the 
other species on the Earth, were destroyed.* But not the tree 
shrews. Not the mammals. They survived. 

No one knows what wiped out the dinosaurs. One evocative 
idea is that it was a cosmic catastrophe, the explosion of a nearby 
star—a supernova like the one that produced the Crab Nebula. If 
there were by chance a supernova within ten or twenty light- 
years of the solar system some sixty-five million years ago, it 
would have sprayed an intense flux of cosmic rays into space, and 
some of these, entering the Earth’s envelope of air, would have 
burned the atmospheric nitrogen. The oxides of nitrogen thus 
generated would have removed the protective layer of ozone 
from the atmosphere, increasing the flux of solar ultraviolet radi¬ 
ation at the surface and frying and mutating the many organisms 
imperfectly protected against intense ultraviolet light. Some of 
those organisms may have been staples of the dinosaur diet. 

The disaster, whatever it was, that cleared the dinosaurs from 
the world stage removed the pressure on the mammals. Our 
ancestors no longer had to live in the shadow of voracious 
reptiles. We diversified exuberantly and flourished. Twenty mil¬ 
lion years ago, our immediate ancestors probably still lived in the 
trees, later descending because the forests receded during a major 



The constellation Cancer from Julius 
Schillers C oelum Stillatum Christianum 
Concauum (pages 72-73). This book, 
published at the Augusta Vindelicorum 
Monastery in Germany in 1627, was an 
unsuccessful attempt to do away with 
“pagan” mythology in the skies. Here the 
author has replaced Cancer with Saint 
John the Evangelist. Courtesy Spencer 
Collection, the New York Public Library, 
Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations. 


* A recent analysis suggests that 96 percent of all the species in the oceans 
may have died at this time. With such an enormous extinction rate, the 
organisms of today can have evolved from only a small and unrepresen¬ 
tative sampling of the organisms that lived in late Mesozoic times. 




284 - Cosmos 


f M». WILL I AM 

SHAKESPEARtS 

CO MU DIES. 

, MISTOIIII-S, & 

TK AG EDI US. 


ulcr. 4 

' ' 1 | 
tprinx* cut; 4 
1 'lute 3 
> 1 *Ik* life j m 

' •liisvvii J 

’ line -J 

1 f licit ftlllifl 

■ lo 4q| 

(,|is| too|ie® 

o.i, 




ri.M»ll.cl nuoi.lmr; hill,.- 'I hkO ii^mallCopies. 


£ r*UlK\ll,y lUU |4)^;ai I'M. Illdtlltt. , A i } 


First folio title page of Shakespeare’s 
Works , published in London, 1623. 
Courtesy Rare Book Division, the New 
York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and 
Tilden Foundations. 



Indonesian Palintangatan astrological cab 
endar, printed on linen in Bali, nineteenth 
century. Courtesy Spencer Collection, the 
New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox 
and Tilden Foundations. 


ice age and were replaced by grassy savannahs. It is not much 
good to be supremely adapted to life in the trees if there are very 
few trees. Many arboreal primates must have vanished with the 
forests. A few eked out a precarious existence on the ground and 
survived. And one of those lines evolved to become us. No one 
knows the cause of that climatic change. It may have been a small 
variation in the intrinsic luminosity of the Sun or in the orbit of 
the Earth; or massive volcanic eruptions injecting fine dust into 
the stratosphere, reflecting more sunlight back into space and 
cooling the Earth. It may have been due to changes in the general 
circulation of the oceans. Or perhaps the passage of the Sun 
through a galactic dust cloud. Whatever the cause, we see again 
how tied our existence is to random astronomical and geological 
events. 

After we came down from the trees, we evolved an upright 
posture; our hands were free; we possessed excellent binocular 
vision—we had acquired many of the preconditions for making 
tools. There was now a real advantage in possessing a large brain 
and in communicating complex thoughts. Other things being 
equal, it is better to be smart than to be stupid. Intelligent beings 
can solve problems better, live longer and leave more offspring; 
until the invention of nuclear weapons, intelligence powerfully 
aided survival. In our history it was some horde of furry little 
mammals who hid from the dinosaurs, colonized the treetops 
and later scampered down to domesticate fire, invent writing, 
construct observatories and launch space vehicles. If things had 
been a little different, it might have been some other creature 
whose intelligence and manipulative ability would have led to 
comparable accomplishments. Perhaps the smart bipedal dino¬ 
saurs, or the raccoons, or the otters, or the squid. It would be nice 
to know how different other intelligences can be; so we study the 
whales and the great apes. To learn a little about what other 
kinds of civilizations are possible, we can study history and cul¬ 
tural anthropology. But we are all of us—us whales, us apes, us 
people—too closely related. As long as our inquiries are limited to 
one or two evolutionary lines on a single planet, we will remain 
forever ignorant of the possible range and brilliance of other 
intelligences and other civilizations. 

On another planet, with a different sequence of random pro¬ 
cesses to make hereditary diversity and a different environment 
to select particular combinations of genes, the chances of finding 
beings who are physically very similar to us is, I believe, near 
zero. The chances of finding another form of intelligence is not. 
Their brains may well have evolved from the inside out. They 
may have switching elements analogous to our neurons. But the 
neurons may be very different; perhaps superconductors that 
work at very low temperatures rather than organic devices that 
work at room temperature, in which case their speed of thought 
will be 10 7 times faster than ours. Or perhaps the equivalent of 








The Persistence of Memory — 285 



neurons elsewhere would not be in direct physical contact but in 
radio communication so that a single intelligent being could be 
distributed among many different organisms, or even many dif¬ 
ferent planets, each with a part of the intelligence of the whole, 
each contributing by radio to an intelligence much greater than 
itself/ There may be planets where the intelligent beings have 
about 10 14 neural connections, as we do. But there may be places 
where the number is 10 24 or 10 34 . I wonder what they would 
know. Because we inhabit the same universe as they, we and 
they must share some substantial information in common. If we 
could make contact, there is much in their brains that would be 
of great interest to ours. But the opposite is also true. I think 
extraterrestrial intelligence—even beings substantially further 
evolved than we—will be interested in us, in what we know, how 
we think, what our brains are like, the course of our evolution, 
the prospects for our future. 

If there are intelligent beings on the planets of fairly nearby 
stars, could they know about us? Might they somehow have an 
inkling of the long evolutionary progression from genes to brains 
to libraries that has occurred on the obscure planet Earth? If the 
extraterrestrials stay at home, there are at least two ways in 
which they might find out about us. One way would be to listen 
with large radio telescopes. For billions of years they would have 
heard only weak and intermittent radio static caused by lightning 
and the trapped electrons and protons whistling within the 
Earths magnetic field. Then, less than a century ago, the radio 
waves leaving the Earth would become stronger, louder, less like 
noise and more like signals. The inhabitants of Earth had finally 
stumbled upon radio communication. Today there is a vast in¬ 
ternational radio, television and radar communications traffic. At 
some radio frequencies the Earth has become by far the brightest 


The death of the dinosaurs. In one astro- 
nomical hypothesis, it was due to a nearby 
supernova explosion, seen in this painting 
by Don Davis in the sky at top right. In 
another hypothesis a large asteroid strikes 
the Earth; the fine debris from the impact 
persists in the stratosphere, reduces sun¬ 
light available for plants the dinosaurs eat, 
and cools the Earth. Over hundreds of 
millions of years, both events must have 
happened at least once. The extinction of 
bipedal intelligent reptiles cleared the 
stage for the evolution of mammals and 
humans. 


* In some sense such a radio integration of separate individuals is already 
beginning to happen on the planet Earth. 




286 - Cosmos 


object, the most powerful radio source, in the solar system- 
brighter than Jupiter, brighter than the Sun. An extraterrestrial 
civilization monitoring the radio emission from Earth and re- 
ceiving such signals could not fail to conclude that something 
interesting had been happening here lately. 

As the Earth rotates, our more powerful radio transmitters 
slowly sweep the sky. A radio astronomer on a planet of another 
star would be able to calculate the length of the day on Earth 
from the times of appearance and disappearance of our signals. 
Some of our most powerful sources are radar transmitters; a few 
are used for radar astronomy, to probe with radio fingers the 
surfaces of the nearby planets. The size of the radar beam pro- 
jected against the sky is much larger than the size of the planets, 
and much of the signal wafts on, out of the solar system into the 
depths of interstellar space to any sensitive receivers that may be 
listening. Most radar transmissions are for military purposes; they 
scan the skies in constant fear of a massive launch of missiles with 
nuclear warheads, an augury fifteen minutes early of the end of 
human civilization. The information content of these pulses is 
negligible: a succession of simple numerical patterns coded into 
beeps. 

Overall, the most pervasive and noticeable source of radio 
transmissions from the Earth is our television programming. Be- 
cause the Earth is turning, some television stations will appear at 
one horizon of the Earth while others disappear over the other. 
There will be a confused jumble of programs. Even these might 
be sorted out and pieced together by an advanced civilization on 
a planet of a nearby star. The most frequently repeated messages 
will be station call signals and appeals to purchase detergents, 
deodorants, headache tablets, and automobile and petroleum 
products. The most noticeable messages will be those broadcast 
simultaneously by many transmitters in many time zones—for 
example, speeches in times of international crisis by the President 
of the United States or the Premier of the Soviet Union. The 
mindless contents of commercial television and the integuments 
of international crisis and internecine warfare within the human 
family are the principal messages about life on Earth that we 
choose to broadcast to the Cosmos. What must they think of us? 

There is no calling those television programs back. There is no 
way of sending a faster message to overtake them and revise the 
previous transmission. Nothing can travel faster than light. 
Large-scale television transmission on the planet Earth began 
only in the late 1940’s. Thus, there is a spherical wave front 
centered on the Earth expanding at the speed of light and con¬ 
taining Howdy Doody, the “Checkers” speech of then Vice-Pres¬ 
ident Richard M. Nixon and the televised inquisitions by Senator 
Joseph McCarthy. Because these transmissions were broadcast a 
few decades ago, they are only a few tens of light-years away 
from the Earth. If the nearest civilization is farther away than 



The Persistence of Memory — 287 


that, then we can continue to breathe easy for a while. In any 
case, we can hope that they will find these programs incompre¬ 
hensible. 

The two Voyager spacecraft are bound for the stars. Affixed to 
each is a gold-plated copper phonograph record with a cartridge 
and stylus and, on the aluminum record jacket, instructions for 
use. We sent something about our genes, something about our 
brains, and something about our libraries to other beings who 
might sail the sea of interstellar space. But we did not want to 
send primarily scientific information. Any civilization able to 
intercept Voyager in the depths of interstellar space, its transmit¬ 
ters long dead, would know far more science than we do. Instead, 
we wanted to tell those other beings something about what 
seems unique about ourselves. The interests of the cerebral cor¬ 
tex and limbic system are well represented; the R-complex less so. 
Although the recipients may not know any languages of the 
Earth, we included greetings in sixty human tongues, as well as 
the hellos of the humpback whales. We sent photographs of 
humans from all over the world caring for one another, learning, 
fabricating tools and art and responding to challenges. There is 
an hour and a half of exquisite music from many cultures, some 
of it expressing our sense of cosmic loneliness, our wish to end 
our isolation, our longing to make contact with other beings in 
the Cosmos. And we have sent recordings of the sounds that 
would have been heard on our planet from the earliest days 
before the origin of life to the evolution of the human species 
and our most recent burgeoning technology. It is, as much as the 
sounds of any baleen whale, a love song cast upon the vastness of 
the deep. Many, perhaps most, of our messages will be indeci¬ 
pherable. But we have sent them because it is important to try. 

In this spirit we included on the Voyager spacecraft the 
thoughts and feelings of one person, the electrical activity of her 
brain, heart, eyes and muscles, which were recorded for an hour, 
transcribed into sound, compressed in time and incorporated into 
the record. In one sense we have launched into the Cosmos a 
direct transcription of the thoughts and feelings of a single 
human being in the month of June in the year 1977 on the planet 
Earth. Perhaps the recipients will make nothing of it, or think it is 
a recording of a pulsar, which in some superficial sense it resem¬ 
bles. Or perhaps a civilization unimaginably more advanced than 
ours will be able to decipher such recorded thoughts and feelings 
and appreciate our efforts to share ourselves with them. 

The information in our genes is very old—most of it more than 
millions of years old, some of it billions of years old. In contrast, 
the information in our books is at most thousands of years old, 
and that in our brains is only decades old. The long-lived infor¬ 
mation is not the characteristically human information. Because 
of erosion on the Earth, our monuments and artifacts will not, in 
the natural course of things, survive to the distant future. But the 



288 - Cosmos 








The Persistence of Memory - 289 


Voyager record is on its way out of the solar system. The erosion 
in interstellar space—chiefly cosmic rays and impacting dust 
grains—is so slow that the information on the record will last a 
billion years. Genes and brains and books encode information 
differently and persist through time at different rates. But the 
persistence of the memory of the human species will be far longer 
in the impressed metal grooves on the Voyager interstellar re^ 
cord. 

The Voyager message is traveling with agonizing slowness. 
The fastest object ever launched by the human species, it will 
still take tens of thousands of years to go the distance to the 
nearest star. Any television program will traverse in hours the 
distance that Voyager has covered in years. A television trans^ 
mission that has just finished being aired will, in only a few 
hours, overtake the Voyager spacecraft in the region of Saturn 
and beyond and speed outward to the stars. If it is headed that 
way, the signal will reach Alpha Centauri in a little more than 
four years. If, some decades or centuries hence, anyone out there 
in space hears our television broadcasts, I hope they will think 
well of us, a product of fifteen billion years of cosmic evolution, 
the local transmogrification of matter into consciousness. Our 
intelligence has recently provided us with awesome powers. It is 
not yet clear that we have the wisdom to avoid our own self-de^ 
struction. But many of us are trying very hard. We hope that 
very soon in the perspective of cosmic time we will have unified 
our planet peacefully into an organization cherishing the life of 
every living creature on it and will be ready to take that next 
great step, to become part of a galactic society of communicating 
civilizations. 


The Voyager interstellar record. Since, 
after its exploration of the giant planets, 
the two Voyager spacecraft will leave the 
solar system, they bear messages for any 
interstellar civilization that may come 
upon them. The record jacket (top) gives 
in scientific notation instructions for play- 
ing the record and something of the posb 
tion and present epoch of the Earth. 
Inside (below) is the record itself. It will last 
for a billion years. 




The Arecibo Interstellar Message. On 
November 16, 1974, a radio signal was 
transmitted from the Arecibo Observa- 
tory to the globular cluster M13, about 
25,000 light-years distant, far from the 
plane of the Milky Way Galaxy. The sig¬ 
nal contained 1,679 bits of information. 
But 1,679 = 73 x 23, the product of two 
prime numbers, suggesting that the bits be 
arranged in a 73 x 23 array, which yields 
this picture. The top row establishes a bi¬ 
nary counting convention; the second 
specifies the atomic numbers of the 
chemical elements hydrogen, carbon, ni¬ 
trogen, oxygen and phosphorus, of which 
we are made (Chapter 9). In these terms, 
the green and blue blocks represent, re¬ 
spectively and numerically, the nucleo¬ 
tides and the sugar-phosphate backbone 
of DNA (Chapter 2). The vertical white 
block represents the number of nucleo¬ 
tides in the genes of the red creature, of 
which the total population is the number 
to its right; and which is as tall as the 
number to its left (in units of the wave¬ 
length of the transmission, 12.6 centime¬ 
ters). In yellow is the creature’s planetary 
system, the third planet having some par¬ 
ticular significance. In violet is the radio- 
telescope transmitting the message. Its size 
is given between the horizontal lines. 
Courtesy Arecibo Observatory; National 
Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, Cor¬ 
nell University. 




Chapter XII 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA 

GALACTICA 


“What are you? From where did you come? I have never seen anything like 
you/’ The Creator Raven looked at Man and was . . . surprised to find that 
this strange new being was so much like himself. 

—An Eskimo creation myth 

Heaven is founded, 

Earth is founded, 

Who now shall be alive, oh gods? 

—The Aztec chronicle, The History of the Kingdoms 

I know some will say, we are a little too bold in these Assertions of the 
Planets, and that we mounted hither by many Probabilities, one of which, if 
it chanced to be false, and contrary to our Supposition, would, like a bad 
Foundation, ruin the whole Building, and make it fall to the ground. But... 
supposing the Earth, as we did, one of the Planets of equal dignity and 
honor with the rest, who would venture to say, that nowhere else were to 
be found any that enjoy’d the glorious sight of Nature’s Opera? Or if there 
were any Fellow/Bpectators, yet we were the only ones that had dived deep 
to the secrets and knowledge of it? 

—Christiaan Huygens in New Conjectures Concerning the Planetary Worlds , 
Their Inhabitants and Productions , c. 1690 

The author of Nature . . . has made it impossible for us to have any 
communication from this earth with the other great bodies of the universe, 
in our present state; and it is highly possible that he has likewise cut off all 
communication betwixt the other planets, and betwixt the different sys^ 
terns. . . . We observe, in all of them, enough to raise our curiosity, but not 
to satisfy it... It does not appear to be suitable to the wisdom that shines 
throughout all nature, to suppose that we should see so far, and have our 
curiosity so much raised . . . only to be disappointed at the end . . . This, 




292 - Cosmos 



Jean Francois Champollion (1790—1832), 
the decryptor of Egyptian hieroglyphics. 
Portrait by Leon Cogniet, 1831. Courtesy 
The Louvre, Paris, Reunion des musees 
nationaux, Paris. 


therefore, naturally leads us to consider our present state as only 
the dawn or beginning of our existence, and as a state of prepa- 
ration or probation for farther advancement. . . . 

—Colin Maclaurin, 1748 


There cannot be a language more universal and more simple, 
more free from errors and obscurities . . . more worthy to express 
the invariable relations of natural things [than mathematics]. It 
interprets [all phenomena] by the same language, as if to attest 
the unity and simplicity of the plan of the universe, and to make 
still more evident that unchangeable order which presides over 
all natural causes. 

—Joseph Fourier, Analytic Theory of Heat, 1822 


We HAVE LAUNCHED FOUR SHIPS TO THE STARS, Pioneers 
10 and 11 and Voyagers 1 and 2. They are backward and primi- 
tive craft, moving, compared to the immense interstellar dis¬ 
tances, with the slowness of a race in a dream. But in the future 
we will do better. Our ships will travel faster. There will be desig¬ 
nated interstellar objectives, and sooner or later our spacecraft will 
have human crews. In the Milky Way Galaxy there must be many 
planets millions of years older than Earth, and some that are bil¬ 
lions of years older. Should we not have been visited? In all the 
billions of years since the origin of our planet, has there not been 
even once a strange craft from a distant civilization surveying our 
world from above, and slowly settling down to the surface to be 
observed by iridescent dragonflies, incurious reptiles, screeching 
primates or wondering humans? The idea is natural enough. It has 
occurred to everyone who has contemplated, even casually, the 
question of intelligent life in the universe. But has it happened in 
fact? The critical issue is the quality of the purported evidence, 
rigorously and skeptically scrutinized—not what sounds plausible, 
not the unsubstantiated testimony of one or two self-professed 
eyewitnesses. By this standard there are no compelling cases of 
extraterrestrial visitation, despite all the claims about UFOs and 
ancient astronauts which sometimes make it seem that our planet 
is awash in uninvited guests. I wish it were otherwise. There is 
something irresistible about the discovery of even a token, per¬ 
haps a complex inscription, but, best by far, a key to the under¬ 
standing of an alien and exotic civilization. It is an appeal we 
humans have felt before. 

In 1801 a physicist named Joseph Fourier* was the prefect of a 


* Fourier is now famous for his study of the propagation of heat in solids, 
used today to understand the surface properties of the planets, and for 
his investigation of waves and other periodic motion—a branch of 
mathematics known as Fourier analysis. 





Encyclopaedia Galactica - 293 


departement of France called Isere. While inspecting the schools 
in his province, Fourier discovered an eleven-year-old boy 
whose remarkable intellect and flair for oriental languages had 
already earned him the admiring attention of scholars. Fourier 
invited him home for a chat. The boy was fascinated by Fourier’s 
collection of Egyptian artifacts, collected during the Napoleonic 
expedition where he had been responsible for cataloging the 
astronomical monuments of that ancient civilization. The hiero- 
glyphic inscriptions roused the boy’s sense of wonder. “But what 
do they mean?” he asked. “Nobody knows,” was the reply. The 
boy’s name was Jean Francois Champollion. Fired by the mystery 
of the language no one could read, he became a superb linguist 
and passionately immersed himself in ancient Egyptian writing. 
France at that time was flooded with Egyptian artifacts, stolen by 
Napoleon and later made available to Western scholars. The 
description of the expedition was published, and devoured by 
the young Champollion. As an adult, Champollion succeeded; 
fulfilling his childhood ambition, he provided a brilliant deck 
pherment of the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics. But it was not 
until 1828, twenty-seven years after his meeting with Fourier, 
that Champollion first set foot in Egypt, the land of his dreams, 
and sailed upstream from Cairo, following the course of the Nile, 
paying homage to the culture he had worked so hard to unden 
stand. It was an expedition in time, a visit to an alien civilization: 

The evening of the 16th we finally arrived at Dendera. 
There was magnificent moonlight and we were only an 
hour away from the Temples: Could we resist the tempta¬ 
tion? I ask the coldest of you mortals! To dine and leave 
immediately were the orders of the moment: alone and 
without guides, but armed to the teeth we crossed the 
fields . . . the Temple appeared to us at last . . . One could 
well measure it but to give an idea of it would be impossi- 
ble. It is the union of grace and majesty in the highest 
degree. We stayed there two hours in ecstasy, running 
through the huge rooms . . . and trying to read the exterior 
inscriptions in the moonlight. We did not return to the boat 
until three in the morning, only to return to the Temple at 
seven . . . What had been magnificent in the moonlight was 
still so when the sunlight revealed to us all the de- 
tails . . . We in Europe are only dwarfs and no nation, am 
cient or modern, has conceived the art of architecture on 
such a sublime, great, and imposing style, as the ancient 
Egyptians. They ordered everything to be done for people 
who are a hundred feet high. 

On the walls and columns of Karnak, at Dendera, everywhere 
in Egypt, Champollion delighted to find that he could read the 
inscriptions almost effortlessly. Many before him had tried and 
failed to decipher the lovely hieroglyphics, a word that means 
“sacred carvings.” Some scholars had believed them to be a kind 


M 



The ruins of Karnak. Frontispiece from 
Description de L’Egypte, which Napoleon 
arranged to be published in 1809 follow¬ 
ing his expedition to Egypt. Courtesy 
UCLA Special Collections. 



The temple at Dendera, partially inun¬ 
dated by the desert sands. The columns 
display the head of the goddess Hathor. 
From Description de L’Egypte. Courtesy 
UCLA Special Collections. 







294 — Cosmos 





The Rosetta stone, made of black basalt 
and about a meter high (top) shows the 
same inscription in Egyptian hieroglyph' 
ics, Demotic and Greek. Each cartouche 
in the hieroglyphic text (above finger, 
middle ) corresponds to the name Ptolemy 
(Ptolemaios) in the Greek text (above 
finger, bottom ). 


of picture code, rich in murky metaphor, mostly about eyeballs 
and wavy lines, beetles, bumblebees and birds—especially birds. 
Confusion was rampant. There were those who deduced that the 
Egyptians were colonists from ancient China. There were those who 
concluded the opposite. Enormous folio volumes of spurious 
translations were published. One interpreter glanced at the 
Rosetta stone, whose hieroglyphic inscription was then still urn 
deciphered, and instantly announced its meaning. He said that 
the quick decipherment enabled him “to avoid the systematic 
errors which invariably arise from prolonged reflection.” You get 
better results, he argued, by not thinking too much. As with the 
search for extraterrestrial life today, the unbridled speculation of 
amateurs had frightened many professionals out of the field. 

Champollion resisted the idea of hieroglyphs as pictorial met' 
aphors. Instead, with the aid of a brilliant insight by the English 
physicist Thomas Young, he proceeded something like this: The 
Rosetta stone had been uncovered in 1799 by a French soldier 
working on the fortifications of the Nile Delta town of Rashid, 
which the Europeans, largely ignorant of Arabic, called Rosetta. 
It was a slab from an ancient temple, displaying what seemed 
clearly to be the same message in three different writings: in 
hieroglyphics at top, in a kind of cursive hieroglyphic called 
demotic in the middle, and, the key to the enterprise, in Greek at 
the bottom. Champollion, who was fluent in ancient Greek, read that 
the stone had been inscribed to commemorate the coronation 
of Ptolemy V Epiphanes, in the spring of the year 196 B.C. On 
this occasion the king released political prisoners, remitted 
taxes, endowed temples, forgave rebels, increased military pre' 
paredness and, in short, did all the things that modern rulers do 
when they wish to stay in office. 

The Greek text mentions Ptolemy many times. In roughly the 
same positions in the hieroglyphic text is a set of symbols sun 
rounded by an oval or cartouche. This, Champollion reasoned, 
very probably also denotes Ptolemy. If so, the writing could not 
be fundamentally pictographic or metaphorical; rather, most of 
the symbols must stand for letters or syllables. Champollion also 
had the presence of mind to count up the number of Greek 
words and the number of individual hieroglyphs in what were 
presumably equivalent texts. There were many fewer of the 
former, again suggesting that the hieroglyphs were mainly letters 
and syllables. But which hieroglyphs correspond to which letters? 
Fortunately, Champollion had available to him an obelisk, 
which had been excavated at Philae, that included the hiero' 
glyphic equivalent of the Greek name Cleopatra. The two can 
touches for Ptolemy and for Cleopatra, rearranged so they both 
read left to right, are shown on p. 296. Ptolemy begins with P; the 
first symbol in the cartouche is a square. Cleopatra has for its fifth 
letter a P, and in the Cleopatra cartouche in the fifth position is 
the same square. P it is. The fourth letter in Ptolemy is an L. Is it 





































Encyclopaedia Galactica — 295 







The remains of Ancient Egypt. At top 
left, a pharaonic stele, overgrown with 
weeds, in the Valley of the Kings (photo- 
graph by the author). At top right, the 
Colossi of Memnon, the guardians of a 
great mortuary temple of Amenophis III. 

The temple itself was quarried away 1,900 years ago. The watercolors show the nineteenth-century appearance of 
ancient Egyptian edifices, some still partially buried in sand. Watercolors commissioned by the King of Prussia, 
Frederick William IV. From R. Lepsius, Denkmaeler . . . aus Aegypten, 1849-1859. 





296 - Cosmos 



The transliteration of a cartouche of Ptol- 
emy from the Rosetta stone and one of 
Cleopatra from the Philae obelisk. 


represented by the lion? The second letter of Cleopatra is an L 
and, in hieroglyphics, here is a lion again. The eagle is an A, 
appearing twice in Cleopatra, as it should. A clear pattern is 
emerging. Egyptian hieroglyphics are, in significant part, a simple 
substitution cipher. But not every hieroglyph is a letter or sylla- 
ble. Some are pictographs. The end of the Ptolemy cartouche 
means “Ever-living, beloved of the god Ptah.” The semicircle and 
egg at the end of Cleopatra are a conventional ideogram for 
“daughter of Isis.” This mix of letters and pictographs caused 
some grief for earlier interpreters. 

In retrospect it sounds almost easy. But it had taken many 
centuries to figure out, and there was a great deal more to do, 
especially in the decipherment of the hieroglyphs of much earlier 
times. The cartouches were the key within the key, almost as if 
the pharaohs of Egypt had circled their own names to make the 
going easier for the Egyptologists two thousand years in the 
future. Champollion walked the Great Hypostyle Hall at Karnak 
and casually read the inscriptions, which had mystified everyone 
else, answering the question he had posed as a child to Fourier. 
What a joy it must have been to open this one-way communica¬ 
tion channel with another civilization, to permit a culture that 
had been mute for millennia to speak of its history, magic, medi¬ 
cine, religion, politics and philosophy. 

Today we are again seeking messages from an ancient and 
exotic civilization, this time hidden from us not only in time but 
also in space. If we should receive a radio message from an 
extraterrestrial civilization, how could it possibly be understood? 
Extraterrestrial intelligence will be elegant, complex, internally 
consistent and utterly alien. Extraterrestrials would, of course, 
wish to make a message sent to us as comprehensible as possible. 
But how could they? Is there in any sense an interstellar Rosetta 
stone? We believe there is. We believe there is a common lan¬ 
guage that all technical civilizations, no matter how different, 
must have. That common language is science and mathematics. 
The laws of Nature are the same everywhere. The patterns in 
the spectra of distant stars and galaxies are the same as those for 
the Sun or for appropriate laboratory experiments: not only do 
the same chemical elements exist everywhere in the universe, but 
also the same laws of quantum mechanics that govern the ab¬ 
sorption and emission of radiation by atoms apply everywhere as 
well. Distant galaxies revolving about one another follow the 
same laws of gravitational physics as govern the motion of an 
apple falling to Earth, or Voyager on its way to the stars. The 
patterns of Nature are everywhere the same. An interstellar 
message, intended to be understood by an emerging civilization, 
should be easy to decode. 

We do not expect an advanced technical civilization on any 
other planet in our solar system. If one were only a little behind 
us—10,000 years, say—it would have no advanced technology at 




Encyclopaedia Galactica — 297 


all If it were only a little ahead of us—we who are already 
exploring the solar system—its representatives should by now be 
here. To communicate with other civilizations, we require a 
method adequate not merely for interplanetary distances but for 
interstellar distances. Ideally, the method should be inexpensive, 
so that a huge amount of information could be sent and received 
at very little cost; fast, so an interstellar dialogue is rendered 
possible; and obvious, so any technological civilization, no matter 
what its evolutionary path, will discover it early. Surprisingly, 
there is such a method. It is called radio astronomy. 

The largest semi-steerable radio/ radar observatory on the 
planet Earth is the Arecibo facility, which Cornell University 
operates for the National Science Foundation. In the remote 
hinterland of the island of Puerto Rico, it is 305 meters (a thorn 
sand feet) across, its reflecting surface a section of a sphere laid 
down in a pre-existing bowl-shaped valley. It receives radio 
waves from the depths of space, focusing them onto the feed arm 
antenna high above the dish, which is in turn electronically 
connected to the control room, where the signal is analyzed. 
Alternatively, when the telescope is used as a radar transmitter, 
the feed arm can broadcast a signal into the dish, which reflects it 
into space. The Arecibo Observatory has been used both to 
search for intelligent signals from civilizations in space and, just 
once, to broadcast a message—to Ml3, a distant globular cluster 
of stars, so that our technical capability to engage in both sides of 
an interstellar dialogue would be clear, at least to us. 

In a period of a few weeks, the Arecibo Observatory could 
transmit to a comparable observatory on a planet of a nearby star 
all of the Encyclopaedia Britannica . Radio waves travel at the 
speed of light, 10,000 times faster than a message attached to our 
fastest interstellar spaceship. Radio telescopes generate, in narrow 
frequency ranges, signals so intense they can be detected over 
immense interstellar distances. The Arecibo Observatory could 
communicate with an identical radio telescope on a planet 15,000 
light-years away, halfway to the center of the Milky Way Gal¬ 
axy, if we knew precisely where to point it. And radio astronomy 
is a natural technology. Virtually any planetary atmosphere, no 
matter what its composition, should be partially transparent to 
radio waves. Radio messages are not much absorbed or scattered 
by the gas between the stars, just as a San Francisco radio station 
can be heard easily in Fos Angeles even when smog there has 
reduced the visibility at optical wavelengths to a few kilometers. 
There are many natural cosmic radio sources having nothing to 
do with intelligent life—pulsars and quasars, the radiation belts of 
planets and the outer atmospheres of stars; from almost any 
planet there are bright radio sources to discover early in the local 
development of radio astronomy. Moreover, radio represents a 
large fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum. Any technology 
able to detect radiation of any wavelength would fairly soon 



The Arecibo radio/radar observatory in 
Puerto Rico. The hemispherical reflecting 
dish is surmounted by the feed arms, 
which are supported by three large obe¬ 
lisks, two of which are seen distorted in 
the lower picture, taken with a fish-eye 
lens at the level of the panels that make up 
the dish. Courtesy of the National As¬ 
tronomy and Ionosphere Center, Cornell 
University. 


BILL RAY 




298 - Cosmos 


stumble on the radio part of the spectrum. 

There may be other effective methods of communication that 
have substantial merit: interstellar spacecraft; optical or infrared 
lasers; pulsed neutrinos; modulated gravity waves; or some other 
kind of transmission that we will not discover for a thousand 
years. Advanced civilizations may have graduated far beyond 
radio for their own communications. But radio is powerful, 
cheap, fast and simple. They will know that a backward civiliza- 
tion like ours, wishing to receive messages from the skies, is likely 
to turn first to radio technology. Perhaps they will have to wheel 
the radio telescopes out of the Museum of Ancient Technology. 
If we were to receive a radio message we would know that there 
would be at the very least one thing we could talk about: radio 
astronomy. 

But is there anyone out there to talk to? With a third or half a 
trillion stars in our Milky Way Galaxy alone, could ours be the 
only one accompanied by an inhabited planet? How much more 
likely it is that technical civilizations are a cosmic commonplace, 
that the Galaxy is pulsing and humming with advanced societies, 
and, therefore, that the nearest such culture is not so very far 
away—perhaps transmitting from antennas established on a 
planet of a naked-eye star just next door. Perhaps when we look 
up at the sky at night, near one of those faint pinpoints of light is 
a world on which someone quite different from us is then glanc¬ 
ing idly at a star we call the Sun and entertaining, for just a 
moment, an outrageous speculation. 

It is very hard to be sure. There may be severe impediments to 
the evolution of a technical civilization. Planets may be rarer 
than we think. Perhaps the origin of life is not so easy as our 
laboratory experiments suggest. Perhaps the evolution of ad¬ 
vanced life forms is improbable. Or it may be that complex life 
forms evolve readily, but intelligence and technical societies re¬ 
quire an unlikely set of coincidences—just as the evolution of the 
human species depended on the demise of the dinosaurs and the 
ice-age recession of the forests in whose trees our ancestors 
screeched and dimly wondered. Or perhaps civilizations arise 
repeatedly, inexorably, on innumerable planets in the Milky 
Way, but are generally unstable; so all but a tiny fraction are 
unable to survive their technology and succumb to greed and 
ignorance, pollution and nuclear war. 

It is possible to explore this great issue further and make a 
crude estimate of N, the number of advanced technical civiliza¬ 
tions in the Galaxy. We define an advanced civilization as one 
capable of radio astronomy. This is, of course, a parochial if 
essential definition. There may be countless worlds on which the 
inhabitants are accomplished linguists or superb poets but indif¬ 
ferent radio astronomers. We will not hear from them. N can be 
written as the product or multiplication of a number of factors, 



Encyclopaedia Galactica — 299 


each a kind of filter, every one of which must be sizable for there 
to be a large number of civilizations: 

N*, the number of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy; 

f , the fraction of stars that have planetary systems; 

n e , the number of planets in a given system that are ecolo- 
gically suitable for life; 

fj, the fraction of otherwise suitable planets on which life 
actually arises; 

f., the fraction of inhabited planets on which an intelligent 
form of life evolves; 

f c , the fraction of planets inhabited by intelligent beings on 
which a communicative technical civilization develops; 
and 

f L , the fraction of a planetary lifetime graced by a technical 
civilization. 

Written out, the equation reads N = KL^n^f^. All the fs 
are fractions, having values between 0 and 1; they will pare down 
the large value of N*. 

To derive N we must estimate each of these quantities. We 
know a fair amount about the early factors in the equation, the 
numbers of stars and planetary systems. We know very little 
about the later factors, concerning the evolution of intelligence 
or the lifetime of technical societies. In these cases our estimates 
will be little better than guesses. I invite you, if you disagree with 
my estimates below, to make your own choices and see what 
implications your alternative suggestions have for the number of 
advanced civilizations in the Galaxy. One of the great virtues of 
this equation, due originally to Frank Drake of Cornell, is that it 
involves subjects ranging from stellar and planetary astronomy to 
organic chemistry, evolutionary biology, history, politics and ab¬ 
normal psychology. Much of the Cosmos is in the span of the 
Drake equation. 

We know N*, the number of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, 
fairly well, by careful counts of stars in small but representative 
regions of the sky. It is a few hundred billion; some recent esti¬ 
mates place it at 4 x 10 11 . Very few of these stars are of the 
massive short-lived variety that squander their reserves of ther¬ 
monuclear fuel. The great majority have lifetimes of billions or 
more years in which they are shining stably, providing a suitable 
energy source for the origin and evolution of life on nearby 
planets. 

There is evidence that planets are a frequent accompaniment 
of star formation: in the satellite systems of Jupiter, Saturn and 
Uranus, which are like miniature solar systems; in theories of the 
origin of the planets; in studies of double stars; in observations of 
accretion disks around stars; and in some preliminary investiga¬ 
tions of gravitational perturbations of nearby stars. Many, perhaps 



300 - Cosmos 


9 9 




© 


k 

N* 

X 

f P 

X 

lie 

X 

fi 


X 


even most, stars may have planets. We take the fraction of 
stars that have planets, f p , as roughly equal to 1 / 3 . Then the total 
number of planetary systems in the Galaxy would be 
N*f p - 1.3 x 10 11 (the symbol - means “approximately equal 
to”). If each system were to have about ten planets, as ours does, 
the total number of worlds in the Galaxy would be more than a 
trillion, a vast arena for the cosmic drama. 

In our own solar system there are several bodies that may be 
suitable for life of some sort: the Earth certainly, and perhaps 
Mars, Titan and Jupiter. Once life originates, it tends to be very 
adaptable and tenacious. There must be many different environ' 
ments suitable for life in a given planetary system. But conserve 
tively we choose n e = 2. Then the number of planets in the 
Galaxy suitable for life becomes N*f p n e - 3 x 10 11 . 

Experiments show that under the most common cosmic com 
ditions the molecular basis of life is readily made, the building 
blocks of molecules able to make copies of themselves. We are 
now on less certain ground; there may, for example, be impedu 
ments in the evolution of the genetic code, although I think this 
unlikely over billions of years of primeval chemistry. We choose 
fj - x /3 implying a total number of planets in the Milky Way on 
which life has arisen at least once as N*f p n e f! - 1 x 10 11 , a 
hundred billion inhabited worlds. That in itself is a remarkable 
conclusion. But we are not yet finished. 

The choices of f. and f c are more difficult. On the one hand, 
many individually unlikely steps had to occur in biological evo¬ 
lution and human history for our present intelligence and tech' 
nology to develop. On the other hand, there must be many quite 
different pathways to an advanced civilization of specified capa^ 
bilities. Considering the apparent difficulty in the evolution of 
large organisms represented by the Cambrian explosion, let us 
choose x f c = V loo, meaning that only 1 percent of planets 
on which life arises eventually produce a technical civilization. 
This estimate represents some middle ground among the vary' 
ing scientific opinions. Some think that the equivalent of the 
step from the emergence of trilobites to the domestication of fire 
goes like a shot in all planetary systems; others think that, even 
given ten or fifteen billion years, the evolution of technical 





civilizations is unlikely. This is not a subject on which we can do 
much experimentation as long as our investigations are limited 
to a single planet. Multiplying these factors together, we find 
N*f n^f^ - 1 x 10 9 , a billion planets on which technical civ- 
ilizations have arisen at least once. But that is very different from 
saying that there are a billion planets on which technical civiliza- 
tions now exist. For this, we must also estimate f L . 

What percentage of the lifetime of a planet is marked by a 
technical civilization? The Earth has harbored a technical civili¬ 
zation characterized by radio astronomy for only a few decades 
out of a lifetime of a few billion years. So far, then, for our planet 
f L is less than Vio 8 , a millionth of a percent. And it is hardly out 
of the question that we might destroy ourselves tomorrow. Sup¬ 
pose this were to be a typical case, and the destruction so com¬ 
plete that no other technical civilization—of the human or any 
other species—were able to emerge in the five or so billion years 
remaining before the Sun dies. Then N = N*f p n e fjfjf c f L - 10, 
and at any given time there would be only a tiny smattering, a 
handful, a pitiful few technical civilizations in the Galaxy, the 
steady state number maintained as emerging societies replace 
those recently self-immolated. The number N might even be as 
small as 1. If civilizations tend to destroy themselves soon after 
reaching a technological phase, there might be no one for us to 
talk with but ourselves. And that we do but poorly. Civilizations 
would take billions of years of tortuous evolution to arise, and 
then snuff themselves out in an instant of unforgivable neglect. 

But consider the alternative, the prospect that at least some 
civilizations learn to live with high technology; that the contra¬ 
dictions posed by the vagaries of past brain evolution are con¬ 
sciously resolved and do not lead to self-destruction; or that, 
even if major disturbances do occur, they are reversed in the 
subsequent billions of years of biological evolution. Such socie¬ 
ties might live to a prosperous old age, their lifetimes measured 
perhaps on geological or stellar evolutionary time scales. If 1 
percent of civilizations can survive technological adolescence, 
take the proper fork at this critical historical branch point and 
achieve maturity, then f L - Vloo, N - 10 7 , and the number of 
extant civilizations in the Galaxy is in the millions. Thus, for all 



302 - Cosmos 


our concern about the possible unreliability of our estimates of 
the early factors in the Drake equation, which involve astron- 
omy, organic chemistry and evolutionary biology, the principal 
uncertainty comes down to economics and politics and what, on 
Earth, we call human nature. It seems fairly clear that if self 
destruction is not the overwhelmingly preponderant fate of ga- 
lactic civilizations, then the sky is softly humming with messages 
from the stars. 

These estimates are stirring. They suggest that the receipt of a 
message from space is, even before we decode it, a profoundly 
hopeful sign. It means that someone has learned to live with high 
technology; that it is possible to survive technological adoles- 
cence. This alone, quite apart from the contents of the message, 
provides a powerful justification for the search for other civiliza- 
tions. 

If there are millions of civilizations distributed more or less 
randomly through the Galaxy, the distance to the nearest is 
about two hundred light-years. Even at the speed of light it 
would take two centuries for a radio message to get from there to 
here. If we had initiated the dialogue, it would be as if the 
question had been asked by Johannes Kepler and the answer 
received by us. Especially because we, new to radio astronomy, 
must be comparatively backward, and the transmitting civiliza¬ 
tion advanced, it makes more sense for us to listen than to send. 
For a more advanced civilization, the positions are, of course, 
reversed. 

We are at the earliest stages of our radio search for other 
civilizations in space. In an optical photograph of a dense star 
field, there are hundreds of thousands of stars. By our more 
optimistic estimates, one of them is the site of an advanced 
civilization. But which one? Toward which stars should we point 
our radio telescopes? Of the millions of stars that may mark the 
location of advanced civilizations, we have so far examined by 
radio no more than thousands. We have made about one-tenth 
of one percent of the required effort. But a serious, rigorous, 
systematic search will come soon. The preparatory steps are now 
underway, both in the United States and in the Soviet Union. It 
is comparatively inexpensive: the cost of a single naval vessel of 
intermediate size—a modern destroyer, say—would pay for a dec¬ 
ade-long program in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. 

Benevolent encounters have not been the rule in human his¬ 
tory, where transcultural contacts have been direct and physical, 
quite different from the receipt of a radio signal, a contact as light 
as a kiss. Still, it is instructive to examine one or two cases from 
our past, if only to calibrate our expectations: Between the times 
of the American and the French Revolutions, Louis XVI of 
France outfitted an expedition to the Pacific Ocean, a voyage 
with scientific, geographic, economic and nationalistic objectives. 
The commander was the Count of La Perouse, a noted explorer 



Encyclopaedia Galactica -303 


who had fought for the United States in its War of Indepem 
dence. In July 1786, almost a year after setting sail, he reached 
the coast of Alaska, a place now called Lituya Bay. He was 
delighted with the harbor and wrote: “Not a port in the universe 
could afford more conveniences.” In this exemplary location, La 
Perouse 

perceived some savages, who made signs of friendship, by 
displaying and waving white mantles, and different skins. 
Several of the canoes of these Indians were fishing in the 
Bay. . . . [We were] continually surrounded by the canoes 
of the savages, who offered us fish, skins of otters and other 
animals, and different little articles of their dress in ex^ 
change for our iron. To our great surprise, they appeared 
well accustomed to traffic, and bargained with us with as 
much skill as any tradesman of Europe. 

The Native Americans drove increasingly harder bargains. To 
La Perouse’s annoyance, they also resorted to pilferage, largely of 
iron objects, but once of the uniforms of French naval officers 
hidden under their pillows as they were sleeping one night sun 
rounded by armed guards—a feat worthy of Harry Houdini. La 
Perouse followed his royal orders to behave peaceably but conn 
plained that the natives “believed our forbearance inexhaustible.” 
He was disdainful of their society. But no serious damage was 
done by either culture to the other. After reprovisioning his two 
ships La Perouse sailed out of Lituya Bay, never to return. The 
expedition was lost in the South Pacific in 1788; La Perouse and 
all but one of the members of his crew perished.* 

Exactly a century later Cowee, a chief of the Tlingit, related to 
the Canadian anthropologist G. T. Emmons a story of the first 
meeting of his ancestors with the white man, a narrative handed 
down by word of mouth only. The Tlingit possessed no written 
records, nor had Cowee ever heard of La Perouse. This is a 
paraphrase of Cowee’s story: 

Late one spring a large party of Tlingit ventured North to 
Yakutat to trade for copper. Iron was even more precious, 
but it was unobtainable. In entering Lituya Bay four canoes 
were swallowed by the waves. As the survivors made camp 
and mourned for their lost companions two strange objects 
entered the Bay. No one knew what they were. They 
seemed to be great black birds with immense white wings. 
The Tlingit believed the world had been created by a great 

* When La Perouse was mustering the ship’s company in France, there 
were many bright and eager young men who applied but were turned 
down. One of them was a Corsican artillery officer named Napoleon 
Bonaparte. It was an interesting branch point in the history of the world. 
If La Perouse had accepted Bonaparte, the Rosetta stone might never 
have been found, Champollion might never have decrypted Egyptian 
hieroglyphics, and in many more important respects our recent history 
might have been changed significantly. 



304 - Cosmos 



The Tlingit inhabitants of Port Frangais 
(now Lituya Bay, Alaska), where Jean 
Francois de Galaup, Comte de La Perouse 
(1741—c. 1788), landed in 1786. From 
L.M.A.D. Milet'Mureau’s Voyage de La 
Perouse autour du monde, 1797. 


bird which often assumed the form of a raven, a bird which 
had freed the Sun, the Moon, and the stars from boxes in 
which they had been imprisoned. To look upon the Raven 
was to be turned to stone. In their fright, the Tlingit fled 
into the forest and hid. But after a while, finding that no 
harm had come to them, a few more enterprising souls crept 
out and rolled leaves of the skunk cabbage into crude tele' 
scopes, believing that this would prevent being turned to 
stone. Through the skunk cabbage, it seemed that the great 
birds were folding their wings and that flocks of small black 
messengers arose from their bodies and crawled upon their 
feathers. 

Now one nearly blind old warrior gathered the people 
together and announced that his life was far behind him; for 
the common good he would determine whether the Raven 
would turn his children into stone. Putting on his robe of 
sea otter fur, he entered his canoe and was paddled seaward 
to the Raven. He climbed upon it and heard strange voices. 
With his impaired vision he could barely make out the 
many black forms moving before him. Perhaps they were 
crows. When he returned safely to his people they crowded 
about him, surprised to see him alive. They touched him 
and smelled him to see if it was really he. After much 
thought the old man convinced himself that it was not the 
god^raven that he had visited, but rather a giant canoe 
made by men. The black figures were not crows but people 
of a different sort. He convinced the Tlingit, who then 
visited the ships and exchanged their furs for many strange 
articles, chiefly iron. 

The Tlingit had preserved in oral tradition an entirely recog' 
nizable and accurate account of their first, almost fully peaceable 


Encyclopaedia Galactica — 305 



Aztec view of the conquest of Mexico, 
sixteenth century. Horses and firearms, 
including “the great Lombard gun,” were 
important factors in their utter defeat by 
Cortes. From the Lienco Tlaxcala. Cour- 
tesy UCLA Special Collection. 


encounter with an alien culture.* If someday we make contact 
with a more advanced extraterrestrial civilization, will the en- 
counter he largely peaceable, even if lacking a certain rapport, 
like that of the French among the Tlingit, or will it follow some 
more ghastly prototype, where the society that was a little more 
advanced utterly destroyed the society that was technically more 
backward? In the early sixteenth century a high civilization 
flourished in central Mexico. The Aztecs had monumental ar¬ 
chitecture, elaborate record-keeping, exquisite art and an astro¬ 
nomical calendar superior to that of any in Europe. Upon 
viewing the Aztec artifacts returned by the first Mexican treasure 
ships, the artist Albrecht Durer wrote in August 1520: “I have 
never seen anything heretofore that has so rejoiced my heart. I 
have seen ... a sun entirely of gold a whole fathom broad [in 
fact, the Aztec astronomical calendar]; likewise a moon entirely 
of silver, equally large . . . also two chambers full of all sorts of 
weapons, armor, and other wonderous arms, all of which is fairer 
to see than marvels.” Intellectuals were stunned at the Aztec 
books, “which,” one of them said, “almost resemble those of the 
Egyptians.” Hernan Cortes described their capital Tenochtitlan as 
“one of the most beautiful cities in the world . . . The people’s 


*The account of Cowee, the Tlingit chief, shows that even in a preli¬ 
terate culture a recognizable account of contact with an advanced civili¬ 
zation can be preserved for generations. If the Earth had been visited 
hundreds or thousands of years ago by an advanced extraterrestrial 
civilization, even if the contacted culture was preliterate, we might well 
expect to have some recognizable form of the encounter preserved. But 
there is not a single case in which a legend reliably dated from earlier 
pretechnological times can be understood only in terms of contact with 
an extraterrestrial civilization. 





































306 - Cosmos 


The Sun watches impassively as the com 
quistadores and their Mexican allies—one 
in the ceremonial headdress of a water 
bird—slaughter the poorly armed and dis¬ 
heartened Aztecs. From the Lienco Tlax - 
cala. Courtesy UCLA Special Collection. 



activities and behavior are on almost as high a level as in Spain, 
and as well-organized and orderly. Considering that these people 
are barbarous, lacking knowledge of God and communication 
with other civilized nations, it is remarkable to see all that they 
have.” Two years after writing these words, Cortes utterly de¬ 
stroyed Tenochtitlan along with the rest of the Aztec civiliza¬ 
tion. Here is an Aztec account: 

Moctezuma [the Aztec Emperor] was shocked, terrified by 
what he heard. He was much puzzled by their food, but 
what made him almost faint away was the telling of how 
the great Lombard gun, at the Spaniards’ command, ex¬ 
pelled the shot which thundered as it went off. The noise 
weakened one, dizzied one. Something like a stone came 
out of it in a shower of fire and sparks. The smoke was foul; 
it had a sickening, fetid smell. And the shot, which struck a 
mountain, knocked it to bits—dissolved it. It reduced a tree 
to sawdust—the tree disappeared as if they had blown it 
away . . . When Moctezuma was told all this, he was ter¬ 
ror-struck. He felt faint. His heart failed him. 

Reports continued to arrive: “We are not as strong as they,” 
Moctezuma was told. “We are nothing compared to them.” The 
Spaniards began to be called “the Gods come from the Heavens.” 
Nevertheless, the Aztecs had no illusions about the Spaniards, 
whom they described in these words: 

They seized upon the gold as if they were monkeys, their 
faces gleaming. For clearly their thirst for gold was insatia¬ 
ble; they starved for it; they lusted for it; they wanted to 
stuff themselves with it as if they were pigs. So they went 
about fingering, taking up the streamers of gold, moving 



Encyclopaedia Galactica — 307 


them back and forth, grabbing them to themselves, bab¬ 
bling, talking gibberish among themselves. 

But their insight into the Spanish character did not help them 
defend themselves. In 1517 a great comet had been seen in 
Mexico. Moctezuma, captured by the legend of the return of the 
Aztec god Quetzalcoatl as a white-skinned man arriving across 
the Eastern sea, promptly executed his astrologers. They had not 
predicted the comet, and they had not explained it. Certain of 
forthcoming disaster, Moctezuma became distant and gloomy. 
Aided by the superstition of the Aztecs and their own superior 
technology, an armed party of 400 Europeans and their native 
allies in the year 1521 entirely vanquished and utterly destroyed 
a high civilization of a million people. The Aztecs had never seen 
a horse; there were none in the New World. They had not 
applied iron metallurgy to warfare. They had not invented 
firearms. Yet the technological gap between them and the Span¬ 
iards was not very great, perhaps a few centuries. 

We must be the most backward technical society in the Gal¬ 
axy. Any society still more backward would not have radio 
astronomy at all. If the doleful experience of cultural conflict on 
Earth were the galactic standard, it seems we would already have 
been destroyed, perhaps with some passing admiration expressed 
for Shakespeare, Bach and Vermeer. But this has not happened. 
Perhaps alien intentions are uncompromisingly benign, more like 
La Perouse than Cortes. Or might it be, despite all the preten¬ 
sions about UFOs and ancient astronauts, that our civilization 
has not yet been discovered? 

On the one hand, we have argued that if even a small fraction 
of technical civilizations learn to live with themselves and with 
weapons of mass destruction, there should now be an enormous 
number of advanced civilizations in the Galaxy. We already 

have slow interstellar flight, and think fast interstellar flight a 
possible goal for the human species. On the other hand, we 

maintain that there is no credible evidence for the Earth being 
visited, now or ever. Is this not a contradiction? If the nearest 
civilization is, say, 200 light-years away, it takes only 200 years to 
get from there to here at close to the speed of light. Even at 1 
percent or a tenth of a percent of the speed of light, beings from 
nearby civilizations could have come during the tenure of hu¬ 
manity on Earth. Why are they not here? There are many possi¬ 
ble answers. Although it runs contrary to the heritage of 

Aristarchus and Copernicus, perhaps we are the first. Some 

technical civilization must be the first to emerge in the history of 
the Galaxy. Perhaps we are mistaken in our belief that at least 
occasional civilizations avoid self-destruction. Perhaps there is 
some unforeseen problem to interstellar spaceflight—although, at 
speeds much less than the velocity of light it is difficult to see 
what such an impediment might be. Or perhaps they are here, 



308 - Cosmos 



A schematic representation of an ad' 
vanced technical civilization which re- 
builds its solar system into a spherical shell 
of matter surrounding the local Sun, so 
the valuable starlight is not mainly lost to 
space. Painting by Jon Lomberg. 


but in hiding because of some Lex Galactica , some ethic of 
noninterference with emerging civilizations. We can imagine 
them, curious and dispassionate, observing us, as we would 
watch a bacterial culture in a dish of agar, to determine whether, 
this year again, we manage to avoid self'destruction. 

But there is another explanation that is consistent with every' 
thing we know. If a great many years ago an advanced interstellar 
spacefaring civilization emerged 200 light-years away, it would 
have no reason to think there was something special about the 
Earth unless it had been here already. No artifact of human 
technology, not even our radio transmissions, has had time, even 
traveling at the speed of light, to go 200 light-years. From their 
point of view, all nearby star systems are more or less equally 
attractive for exploration or colonization.* 

An emerging technical civilization, after exploring its home 
planetary system and developing interstellar spaceflight, would 
slowly and tentatively begin exploring the nearby stars. Some 
stars would have no suitable planets—perhaps they would all be 
giant gas worlds, or tiny asteroids. Others would carry an entoU' 
rage of suitable planets, but some would be already inhabited, or 
the atmosphere would be poisonous or the climate uncomfort' 
able. In many cases the colonists might have to change—or as we 
would parochially say, terraform—a world to make it adequately 
clement. The re'engineering of a planet will take time. Occa' 
sionally, an already suitable world would be found and colom 
ized. The utilization of planetary resources so that new 
interstellar spacecraft could be constructed locally would be a 
slow process. Eventually a second'generation mission of explora' 
tion and colonization would take off toward stars where no one 
had yet been. And in this way a civilization might slowly wend 
its way like a vine among the worlds. 

It is possible that at some later time with third and higher 
orders of colonies developing new worlds, another independent 
expanding civilization would be discovered. Very likely mutual 
contact would already have been made by radio or other remote 
means. The new arrivals might be a different sort of colonial 
society. Conceivably two expanding civilizations with different 
planetary requirements would ignore each other, their filigree 
patterns of expansion intertwining, but not conflicting. They 
might cooperate in the exploration of a province of the Galaxy. 
Even nearby civilizations could spend millions of years in such 


* There may be many motivations to go to the stars. If our Sun or a 
nearby star were about to go supernova, a major program of interstellar 
spaceflight might suddenly become attractive. If we were very advanced, 
the discovery that the galactic core was imminently to explode might 
even generate serious interest in transgalactic or intergalactic spaceflight. 
Such cosmic violence occurs sufficiently often that nomadic spacefaring 
civilizations may not be uncommon. Even so, their arrival here remains 
unlikely. 





A great star cloud in the constellation Sagittarius, looking towards the center of the Milky Way Galaxy. The obscuring 
lanes of dust contain organic molecules; some of them contain stars in the earliest stages of formation. In this 
photograph there are about a million stars. According to the estimates of this chapter, one of them is the sun of a 
civilization more advanced than ours. Courtesy Hale Observatories. 




310 - Cosmos 



Three frames from a motion picture 
showing the diffusion, through a small re¬ 
gion of the Galaxy, of an interstellar 
spacefaring civilization—able to travel 
only in steps of a few light-years per mis¬ 
sion. It then establishes a local colony that 
eventually outfits further such missions. 
Animation by Dov Jacobson. 


separate or joint colonial ventures without ever stumbling upon 
our obscure solar system. 

No civilization can possibly survive to an interstellar spacefar¬ 
ing phase unless it limits its numbers. Any society with a marked 
population explosion will be forced to devote all its energies and 
technological skills to feeding and caring for the population on its 
home planet. This is a very powerful conclusion and is in no way 
based on the idiosyncrasies of a particular civilization. On any 
planet, no matter what its biology or social system, an exponen¬ 
tial increase in population will swallow every resource. Con¬ 
versely, any civilization that engages in serious interstellar explo¬ 
ration and colonization must have exercised zero population 
growth or something very close to it for many generations. But a 
civilization with a low population growth rate will take a long 
time to colonize many worlds, even if the strictures on rapid 
population growth are eased after reaching some lush Eden. 

My colleague William Newman and I have calculated that if a 
million years ago a spacefaring civilization with a low population 
growth rate emerged two hundred light-years away and spread 
outward, colonizing suitable worlds along the way, their survey 
starships would be entering our solar system only about now. But 
a million years is a very long period of time. If the nearest 
civilization is younger than this, they would not have reached us 
yet. A sphere two hundred light-years in radius contains 200,000 
suns and perhaps a comparable number of worlds suitable for 
colonization. It is only after 200,000 other worlds have been 
colonized that, in the usual course of things, our solar system 
would be accidentally discovered to harbor an indigenous civili¬ 
zation. 

What does it mean for a civilization to be a million years old? 
We have had radio telescopes and spaceships for a few decades; 
our technical civilization is a few hundred years old, scientific 
ideas of a modern cast a few thousand, civilization in general a 
few tens of thousands of years; human beings evolved on this 
planet only a few million years ago. At anything like our present 
rate of technical progress, an advanced civilization millions of 
years old is as much beyond us as we are beyond a bush baby or a 
macaque. Would we even recognize its presence? Would a soci¬ 
ety a million years in advance of us be interested in colonization 
or interstellar spaceflight? People have a finite lifespan for a rea¬ 
son. Enormous progress in the biological and medical sciences 
might uncover that reason and lead to suitable remedies. Could it 
be that we are so interested in spaceflight because it is a way of 
perpetuating ourselves beyond our own lifetimes? Might a civili¬ 
zation composed of essentially immortal beings consider inter¬ 
stellar exploration fundamentally childish? It may be that we 
have not been visited because the stars are strewn abundantly in 
the expanse of space, so that before a nearby civilization arrives, 



Encyclopaedia Galactica — 311 


it has altered its exploratory motivations or evolved into forms 
indetectable to us. 

A standard motif in science fiction and UFO literature assumes 
extraterrestrials roughly as capable as we. Perhaps they have a 
different sort of spaceship or ray gun, but in battle—and science 
fiction loves to portray battles between civilizations—they and we 
are rather evenly matched. In fact, there is almost no chance that 
two galactic civilizations will interact at the same level. In any 
confrontation, one will always utterly dominate the other. A 
million years is a great many. If an advanced civilization were to 
arrive in our solar system, there would be nothing whatever we 
could do about it. Their science and technology would be far 
beyond ours. It is pointless to worry about the possible malevo- 
lent intentions of an advanced civilization with whom we might 
make contact. It is more likely that the mere fact they have 
survived so long means they have learned to live with them¬ 
selves and others. Perhaps our fears about extraterrestrial contact 
are merely a projection of our own backwardness, an expression 
of our guilty conscience about our past history: the ravages that 
have been visited on civilizations only slightly more backward 
than we. We remember Columbus and the Arawaks, Cortes and 
the Aztecs, even the fate of the Tlingit in the generations after La 
Perouse. We remember and we worry. But if an interstellar 
armada appears in our skies, I predict we will be very accommo¬ 
dating. 

A very different kind of contact is much more likely—the case 
we have already discussed in which we receive a rich, complex 
message, probably by radio, from another civilization in space, 
but do not make, at least for a while, physical contact with them. 
In this case there is no way for the transmitting civilization to 
know whether we have received the message. If we find the 
contents offensive or frightening, we are not obliged to reply. But 
if the message contains valuable information, the consequences 
for our own civilization will be stunning—insights on alien sci¬ 
ence and technology, art, music, politics, ethics, philosophy and 
religion, and most of all, a profound deprovincialization of the 
human condition. We will know what else is possible. 

Because we will share scientific and mathematical insights with 
any other civilization, I believe that understanding the interstel¬ 
lar message will be the easiest part of the problem. Convincing 
the U.S. Congress and the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. 
to fund a search for extraterrestrial intelligence is the hard part.* 
In fact, it may be that civilizations can be divided into two great 



An interstellar colonial civilization, dif¬ 
fusing from star system to star system in 
comparatively short hops (green) encoun¬ 
ters another such civilization (red), capable 
of longer journeys. Animation by Dov Ja¬ 
cobson. 


* Or other national organs. Consider this pronouncement from a British 
Defence Department spokesman as reported in the London Observer for 
February 26, 1978: “Any messages transmitted from outer space are the 
responsibility of the BBC and the Post Office. It is their responsibility to 
track down illegal broadcasts.” 







312- Cosmos 



Hypothetical worlds from the Encyclopaedia Galactica. Top left and right: A planet and its two moons, their surfaces 
destroyed by a nearby supernova explosion. Middle left and right: An oceanic Earthdike world with two large moons. 
Lower left: A terrestrial planet with major engineering work visible on its night side. Somewhat more advanced than 
we, it is a candidate transmitting civilization for our first interstellar radio message. Lower right: A still more advanced 
civilization, constructing a habitable ring system about its home planet. Paintings, respectively, by Rick Sternbach. 
David Egge, Rick Sternbach, David Egge, John Allison and Jon Lomberg. 



Civilization Type: 1.8 L. 

Society Code: 2A11, 

“We Who Survived” 

Star: FOV, spectrum variable, 
r=9.717 kpc, 0 = 00°07 51" 

<p = 210°20'37 M 

Planet: sixth, a = 2.4x10 13 cm, 

M = 7 x 10 18 g, R = 2.1 xIO 9 cm, 
p = 2.7x10 6 s, P = 4.5x10 7 s. 
Extraplanetary colonies: none. 
Planet age: 1.14 xIO 17 s. 

First locally initiated contact: 

2.6040 x 10 8 s ago. 

Receipt first galactic nested 
code: 2.6040 x 10 8 s ago. 
Biology: C,N,0,H,S,Se,CI,Br, 

H 2 0, S 8 , polyaromatic sulfonyl 
halides. Mobile photochemo- 
synthetic autotrophs in weakly 
reducing atmosphere. 

Polytaxic, monochromatic, 
m » 3x10 12 g, t a 5x10 10 s. 

No genetic prosthesis. 

Genomes: ~6x10 7 (nonredundant 
bits/genome: ~2x10 12 ). 
Technology: exponentiating, 
approaching asymptotic limit. 
Culture: global, nongregarious, 
polyspecific (2 genera, 41 
species); arithmetic poetry. 
Prepartum/postpartum: 0.52 [30], 
Individual/communal: 0.73 [14], 
Artistic/technological: 0.81 [18]. 
Probability of survival 
(per 100 yr): 80%. 


Encyclopaedia Galactica -313 


Civilization Type: 2.3 R. 

Society Code: 1H1, 

“We Who Became One” 

Interstellar civilization, no 
planetary communities, 
utilizes 1504 supergiants, 

OV, BV, AV stars and pulsars. 

Civilization Age: 6.09 xIO 15 s. 

First locally initiated contact: 

6.09 xIO 15 s ago. 

Receipt first galactic nested 
code: 6.09 xIO 15 s ago. 

Source civilization, neutrino 
channel. 

Local Group polylogue. 

Biology: C,H,0,Be,Fe,Ge,He. 

4 K metal-chelated organic 
semiconductors, types various. 
Cryogenic superconducting 
electrovores with neutron 
crystal dense packing and 
modular starminers; polytaxic. 
m various, t ~ 5x10 15 s. 
Genomes: 6x10 17 (nonredundant 
bits/mean genome: ~3x10 17 ). 

Probability of survival 
(per 10 6 yr): 99%. _ 


Hypothetical computer summaries of two advanced civili- 
zations from the Encyclopaedia Galactica . By Jon Lomberg 
and the author. 



314 - Cosmos 


Civilization Type: 1.0 J. 

Society Code: 4G4, “Humanity” 

Star: G2V, r = 9.844 kpc, 0 = 
00°05'24" 0=2O6°28'49" 

Planet: third, a = 1.5x10 13 cm, 

M = 6 x 10 27 g, R = 6.4 x 10 8 cm, 
p = 8.6x10 4 s, P = 3.2x10 7 s. 
Extraplanetary colonies: none. 
Planet age: 1.45x10 17 s. 

First locally initiated contact: 

1.21 xIO 9 s ago. 

Receipt first galactic nested 
code: application pending. 
Biology: C,N,0,S,H 2 0,P0 4 . 
Deoxyribonucleic acid. 

No genetic prosthesis. 

Mobile heterotrophs, symbionts 
with photosynthetic autotrophs. 
Surface dwellers, monospecific, 
polychromatic 0 2 breathers. 
Fe-chelated tetraoyroles in 
circulatory fluid. Sexual mammals, 
m » 7x10 4 g,t~s2 xIO 9 s. 
Genomes: 4x10 9 . 

Technology: exponentiating/ 
fossil fuels/nuclear weapons/ 
organized warfare/ 
environmental pollution. 

Culture: ~200 nation states, 

- 6 global powers; cultural 
and technological homogen- 
iety underway. 

Prepartum/postpartum: 0.21 [18], 
Individual/communal: 0.31 [17], 
Artistic/technological: 0.14 [11]. 
Probability of survival 
(per 100 yr): 40%. _ 


Hypothetical summary of a newly 
emerged technical civilization from the 
Encyclopaedia Galactica. By Jon Lomberg 
and the author. 


categories: one in which the scientists are unable to convince 
nonscientists to authorize a search for extraplanetary intelligence, 
in which energies are directed exclusively inward, in which com 
ventional perceptions remain unchallenged and society falters 
and retreats from the stars; and another category in which the 
grand vision of contact with other civilizations is shared widely, 
and a major search is undertaken. 

This is one of the few human endeavors where even a failure 
is a success. If we were to carry out a rigorous search for extras 
terrestrial radio signals encompassing millions of stars and heard 
nothing, we would conclude that galactic civilizations were at 
best extremely rare, a calibration of our place in the universe. It 
would speak eloquently of how rare are the living things of our 
planet, and would underscore, as nothing else in human history 
has, the individual worth of every human being. If we were to 
succeed, the history of our species and our planet would be 
changed forever. 

It would be easy for extraterrestrials to make an unambig¬ 
uously artificial interstellar message. For example, the first ten 
prime numbers—numbers divisible only by themselves and by 
one—are 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23. It is extremely unlikely 
that any natural physical process could transmit radio messages 
containing prime numbers only. If we received such a message we 
would deduce a civilization out there that was at least fond of 
prime numbers. But the most likely case is that interstellar com¬ 
munication will be a kind of palimpsest, like the palimpsests of 
ancient writers short of papyrus or stone who superimposed their 
messages on top of preexisting messages. Perhaps at an adjacent 
frequency or a faster timing, there would be another message, 
which would turn out to be a primer, an introduction to the 
language of interstellar discourse. The primer would be repeated 
again and again because the transmitting civilization would have 
no way to know when we tuned in on the message. And then, 
deeper in the palimpsest, underneath the announcement signal 
and the primer, would be the real message. Radio technology 
permits that message to be inconceivably rich. Perhaps when we 
tuned in, we would find ourselves in the midst of Volume 3,267 
of the Encyclopaedia Galactica . 

We would discover the nature of other civilizations. There 
would be many of them, each composed of organisms astonish¬ 
ingly different from anything on this planet. They would view 
the universe somewhat differently. They would have different 
arts and social functions. They would be interested in things we 
never thought of. By comparing our knowledge with theirs, we 
would grow immeasurably. And with our newly acquired infor¬ 
mation sorted into a computer memory, we would be able to see 
which sort of civilization lived where in the Galaxy. Imagine a 
huge galactic computer, a repository, more or less up-to-date, of 
information on the nature and activities of all the civilizations in 



Encyclopaedia Galactica — 315 


the Milky Way Galaxy, a great library of life in the Cosmos. 
Perhaps among the contents of the Encyclopaedia Galactica will 
be a set of summaries of such civilizations, the information enig¬ 
matic, tantalizing, evocative—even after we succeed in translating 
it. 

Eventually, taking as much time as we wished, we would 
decide to reply. We would transmit some information about 
ourselves—just the basics at first—as the start of a long interstellar 
dialogue which we would begin but which, because of the vast 
distances of interstellar space and the finite velocity of light, 
would be continued by our remote descendants. And someday, 
on a planet of some far distant star, a being very different from 
any of us would request a printout from the latest edition of the 
Encyclopaedia Galactica and acquire a little information about 
the newest society to join the community of galactic civilizations. 




An emissary from Earth: Apollo 14 poised before its night launch to the Moon. The same rocket and nuclear 
technology which, misused, can bring about a global holocaust can also carry us to the planets and the stars. Photo by 
Dennis Milon. 






Chapter XIII 

WHO SPEAKS 
FOR EARTH? 


To what purpose should I trouble myself in searching out the secrets of the 
stars, having death or slavery continually before my eyes? 

—A question put to Pythagoras by Anaximenes (c. 600 B.C.), according to 

Montaigne 

How vast those Orbs must be, and how inconsiderable this Earth, the 
Theatre upon which all our mighty Designs, all our Navigations, and all our 
Wars are transacted, is when compared to them. A very fit consideration, 
and matter of Reflection, for those Kings and Princes who sacrifice the Lives 
of so many People, only to flatter their Ambition in being Masters of some 
pitiful corner of this small Spot. 

—Christiaan Huygens, New Conjectures Concerning the Planetary Worlds, 

Their Inhabitants and Productions , c. 1690 

“To the entire world,” added our Father the Sun, “I give my light and my 
radiance; I give men warmth when they are cold; I cause their fields to 
fructify and their cattle to multiply; each day that passes I go around the 
world to secure a better knowledge of men’s needs and to satisfy those 
needs. Follow my example .” 

—An Inca myth recorded in “The Royal Commentaries” of Garcilaso de la 

Vega, 1556 

We look back through countless millions of years and see the great will to 
live struggling out of the intertidal slime, struggling from shape to shape and 
from power to power, crawling and then walking confidently upon the land, 
struggling generation after generation to master the air, creeping down into 
the darkness of the deep; we see it turn upon itself in rage and hunger and 
reshape itself anew, we watch it draw nearer and more akin to us, expand^ 
ing, elaborating itself, pursuing its relentless inconceivable purpose, until at 


318 - Cosmos 


last it reaches us and its being beats through our brains and 
arteries . . . It is possible to believe that all the past is but the 
beginning of a beginning, and that all that is and has been is but 
the twilight of the dawn. It is possible to believe that all that the 
human mind has ever accomplished is but the dream before the 
awakening . . . Out of our . . . lineage, minds will spring, that will 
reach back to us in our littleness to know us better than we know 
ourselves. A day will come, one day in the unending succession 
of days, when beings, beings who are now latent in our thoughts 
and hidden in our loins, shall stand upon this earth as one stands 
upon a footstool, and shall laugh and reach out their hands 
amidst the stars. 

—H. G. Wells, “The Discovery of the Future,” Nature 65, 326 

(1902) 

The cosmos was DISCOVERED ONLY YESTERDAY. For a 
million years it was clear to everyone that there were no other 
places than the Earth. Then in the last tenth of a percent of the 
lifetime of our species, in the instant between Aristarchus and 
ourselves, we reluctantly noticed that we were not the center and 
purpose of the Universe, but rather lived on a tiny and fragile 
world lost in immensity and eternity, drifting in a great cosmic 
ocean dotted here and there with a hundred billion galaxies and 
a billion trillion stars. We have bravely tested the waters and 
have found the ocean to our liking, resonant with our nature. 
Something in us recognizes the Cosmos as home. We are made 
of stellar ash. Our origin and evolution have been tied to distant 
cosmic events. The exploration of the Cosmos is a voyage of 
self-discovery. 

As the ancient mythmakers knew, we are the children equally 
of the sky and the Earth. In our tenure on this planet we have 
accumulated dangerous evolutionary baggage, hereditary pro- 
pensities for aggression and ritual, submission to leaders and 
hostility to outsiders, which place our survival in some question. 
But we have also acquired compassion for others, love for our 
children and our children’s children, a desire to learn from his- 
tory, and a great soaring passionate intelligence—the clear tools 
for our continued survival and prosperity. Which aspects of our 
nature will prevail is uncertain, particularly when our vision and 
understanding and prospects are bound exclusively to the 
Earth—or, worse, to one small part of it. But up there in the 
immensity of the Cosmos, an inescapable perspective awaits us. 
There are not yet any obvious signs of extraterrestrial intelli¬ 
gence and this makes us wonder whether civilizations like ours 
always rush implacably, headlong, toward self-destruction. 
National boundaries are not evident when we view the Earth from 
space. Fanatical ethnic or religious or national chauvinisms are a 
little difficult to maintain when we see our planet as a fragile blue 
crescent fading to become an inconspicuous point of light against 
the bastion and citadel of the stars. Travel is broadening. 



Who Speaks for Earth ? - 319 



The Great Chain of Being. Between atoms and snowflakes on the scale of the very small, and suns and galaxies on the 
scale of the very large, humans are growing to consciousness of our place in the Cosmos. Painting by Jon Lomberg. 
















320 - Cosmos 


There are worlds on which life has never arisen. There are 
worlds that have been charred and ruined by cosmic catastn> 
phes. We are fortunate: we are alive; we are powerful; the welfare 
of our civilization and our species is in our hands. If we do not 
speak for Earth, who will? If we are not committed to our own 
survival, who will be? 

The human species is now undertaking a great venture that if 
successful will be as important as the colonization of the land or 
the descent from the trees. We are haltingly, tentatively breaking 
the shackles of Earth—metaphorically, in confronting and taming 
the admonitions of those more primitive brains within us; physk 
cally, in voyaging to the planets and listening for the messages 
from the stars. These two enterprises are linked indissolubly. 
Each, I believe, is a necessary condition for the other. But our 
energies are directed far more toward war. Hypnotized by mutual 
mistrust, almost never concerned for the species or the planet, 
the nations prepare for death. And because what we are doing is 
so horrifying, we tend not to think of it much. But what we do 
not consider we are unlikely to put right. 

Every thinking person fears nuclear war, and every technology 
ical state plans for it. Everyone knows it is madness, and every 
nation has an excuse. There is a dreary chain of causality: The 
Germans were working on the bomb at the beginning of World 
War II; so the Americans had to make one first. If the Americans 
had one, the Soviets had to have one, and then the British, the 
French, the Chinese, the Indians, the Pakistanis ... By the end of 
the twentieth century many nations had collected nuclear weapy 
ons. They were easy to devise. Fissionable material could be 
stolen from nuclear reactors. Nuclear weapons became almost a 
home handicraft industry. 

The conventional bombs of World War II were called block' 
busters. Filled with twenty tons of TNT, they could destroy a 
city block. All the bombs dropped on all the cities in World War 
II amounted to some two million tons, two megatons, of TNT— 
Coventry and Rotterdam, Dresden and Tokyo, all the death that 
rained from the skies between 1939 and 1945: a hundred thorn 
sand blockbusters, two megatons. By the late twentieth century, 
two megatons was the energy released in the explosion of a single 
more or less humdrum thermonuclear bomb: one bomb with the 
destructive force of the Second World War. But there are tens of 
thousands of nuclear weapons. By the ninth decade of the twem 
tieth century the strategic missile and bomber forces of the Soviet 
Union and the United States were aiming warheads at over 
15,000 designated targets. No place on the planet was safe. The 
energy contained in these weapons, genies of death patiently 
awaiting the rubbing of the lamps, was far more than 10,000 
megatons—but with the destruction concentrated efficiently, not 
over six years but over a few hours, a blockbuster for every 



Who Speaks for Earth ? - 321 


I New York 



family on the planet, a World War II every second for the length 
of a lazy afternoon. 

The immediate causes of death from nuclear attack are the 
blast wave, which can flatten heavily reinforced buildings many 
kilometers away, the firestorm, the gamma rays and the neutrons, 
which effectively fry the insides of passersby. A school girl who 
survived the American nuclear attack on Hiroshima, the event 
that ended the Second World War, wrote this first-hand account: 

Through a darkness like the bottom of hell, I could hear 
the voices of the other students calling for their mothers. 
And at the base of the bridge, inside a big cistern that had 
been dug out there, was a mother weeping, holding above 
her head a naked baby that was burned bright red all over 
its body. And another mother was crying and sobbing as 
she gave her burned breast to her baby. In the cistern the 
students stood with only their heads above the water, and 
their two hands, which they clasped as they imploringly 
cried and screamed, calling for their parents. But every 
single person who passed was wounded, all of them, and 
there was no one, there was no one to turn to for help. And 
the singed hair on the heads of the people was frizzled and 
whitish and covered with dust. They did not appear to be 
human, not creatures of this world. 


Fallout in a nuclear war. Of the 15,000 
targets in a full nuclear exchange, these 
Titan and Minuteman intercontinental 
ballistic missile sites in the American 
Midwest are likely targets for surface 
bursts by a pair of one-megaton thermo¬ 
nuclear weapons. The energy released by 
these two explosions alone would equal all 
the destruction caused all over the world 
by all the aircraft in World War II. The 
cloud of radioactive debris would be 
blown by prevailing winds towards the 
East Coast of the United States, the same 
path followed by the Mount St. Helens 
volcanic debris after its eruptions in 1980. 
The outer contour curve shows the area 
within which casualties would exceed 50 
percent from radioactive fallout alone. 
Comparable horrors would be visited on 
the Soviet Union by two one-megaton 
bursts on, say, the Western Ukraine. 
Courtesy Scientific American. From Lim¬ 
ited Nuclear War by Sidney D. Drell and 
Frank Von Hippel. Copyright © 1976 by 
Scientific American. All rights reserved. 


The Hiroshima explosion, unlike the subsequent Nagasaki ex¬ 
plosion, was an air burst high above the surface, so the fallout 
was insignificant. But on March 1, 1954, a thermonuclear weap¬ 
ons test at Bikini in the Marshall Islands detonated at higher yield 








322 - Cosmos 


than expected. A great radioactive cloud was deposited on the 
tiny atoll of Rongalap, 150 kilometers away, where the inhabi- 
tants likened the explosion to the Sun rising in the West. A few 
hours later, radioactive ash fell on Rongalap like snow. The 
average dose received was only about 175 rads, a little less than 
half the dose needed to kill an average person. Being far from the 
explosion, not many people died. Of course, the radioactive 
strontium they ate was concentrated in their bones, and the 
radioactive iodine was concentrated in their thyroids. Two- 
thirds of the children and one-third of the adults later developed 
thyroid abnormalities, growth retardation or malignant tumors. 
In compensation, the Marshall Islanders received expert medical 
care. 

The yield of the Hiroshima bomb was only thirteen kilotons, 
the equivalent of thirteen thousand tons of TNT. The Bikini test 
yield was fifteen megatons. In a full nuclear exchange, in the 
paroxysm of thermonuclear war, the equivalent of a million 
Hiroshima bombs would be dropped all over the world. At the 
Hiroshima death rate of some hundred thousand people killed 
per equivalent thirteen-kiloton weapon, this would be enough to 
kill a hundred billion people. But there were less than five billion 
people on the planet in the late twentieth century. Of course, in 
such an exchange, not everyone would be killed by the blast and 
the firestorm, the radiation and the fallout—although fallout does 
last for a longish time: 90 percent of the strontium 90 will decay 
in 96 years; 90 percent of the cesium 137, in 100 years; 90 percent 
of the iodine 131 in only a month . 

The survivors would witness more subtle consequences of the 
war. A full nuclear exchange would burn the nitrogen in the 
upper air, converting it to oxides of nitrogen, which would in 
turn destroy a significant amount of the ozone in the high atmo- 
sphere, admitting an intense dose of solar ultraviolet radiation.* 
The increased ultraviolet flux would last for years. It would 
produce skin cancer preferentially in light-skinned people. Much 
more important, it would affect the ecology of our planet in an 
unknown way. Ultraviolet light destroys crops. Many microor- 
ganisms would be killed; we do not know which ones or how 
many, or what the consequences might be. The organisms killed 
might, for all we know, be at the base of a vast ecological 
pyramid at the top of which totter we. 

The dust put into the air in a full nuclear exchange would 
reflect sunlight and cool the Earth a little. Even a little cooling 
can have disastrous agricultural consequences. Birds are more 
easily killed by radiation than insects. Plagues of insects and 

* The process is similar to, but much more dangerous than, the destruc- 
tion of the ozone layer by the fluorocarbon propellants in aerosol spray 
cans, which have accordingly been banned by a number of nations; and 
to that invoked in the explanation of the extinction of the dinosaurs by a 
supernova explosion a few dozen light-years away. 



Who Speaks for Earth? -323 


consequent further agricultural disorders are a likely consequence 
of nuclear war. There is also another kind of plague to worry 
about: the plague bacillus is endemic all over the Earth. In the 
late twentieth century humans did not much die of plague—not 
because it was absent, but because resistance was high. However, 
the radiation produced in a nuclear war, among its many other 
effects, debilitates the body’s immunological system, causing a 
deterioration of our ability to resist disease. In the longer term, 
there are mutations, new varieties of microbes and insects, that 
might cause still further problems for any human survivors of a 
nuclear holocaust; and perhaps after a while, when there has 
been enough time for the recessive mutations to recombine and 
be expressed, new and horrifying varieties of humans. Most of 
these mutations, when expressed, would be lethal. A few would 
not. And then there would be other agonies: the loss of loved 
ones; the legions of the burned, the blind and the mutilated; 
disease, plague, longdived radioactive poisons in the air and 
water; the threat of tumors and stillbirths and malformed chih 
dren; the absence of medical care; the hopeless sense of a civilk 
zation destroyed for nothing; the knowledge that we could have 
prevented it and did not. 

L. F. Richardson was a British meteorologist interested in war. 
He wished to understand its causes. There are intellectual parah 
lels between war and weather. Both are complex. Both exhibit 
regularities, implying that they are not implacable forces but 
natural systems that can be understood and controlled. To um 
derstand the global weather you must first collect a great body of 
meteorological data; you must discover how the weather actually 
behaves. Our approach must be the same, Richardson decided, if 
we are to understand warfare. So, for the years between 1820 and 
1945, he collected data on the hundreds of wars that had then 
been fought on our poor planet. 

Richardson’s results were published posthumously in a book 
called The Statistics of Deadly Quarrels . Because he was inten 
ested in how long you had to wait for a war that would claim a 
specified number of victims, he defined an index, M, the magnk 
tude of a war, a measure of the number of immediate deaths it 
causes. A war of magnitude M = 3 might be merely a skirmish, 
killing only a thousand people (10 3 ). M = 5 or M = 6 denote 
more serious wars, where a hundred thousand (10 5 ) or a million 
(10 6 ) people are killed. World Wars 1 and II had larger magnk 
tudes. He found that the more people killed in a war, the less 
likely it was to occur, and the longer before you would witness it, 
just as violent storms occur less frequently than cloudbursts. 
From his data we can construct a graph (p. 327), which shows 
how long on the average during the past century and a half you 
would have to wait to witness a war of magnitude M. 

Richardson proposed that if you continue the curve to very 
small values of M, all the way to M = 0, it roughly predicts the 



324 - Cosmos 







Who Speaks for Earth ? — 325 



The ominous shape of nuclear war: two nuclear explosions. Left: A high-speed photograph of the expanding blast 
wave of a fission nuclear weapon. Note the silhouetted trees. Courtesy Harold Edgerton, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. Right: The mushroom cloud of a thermonuclear explosion sends radioactive fallout into the stratosphere, 
where it persists for years. Courtesy U.S. Department of Energy. 







326 - Cosmos 


worldwide incidence of murder; somewhere in the world some¬ 
one is murdered every five minutes. Individual killings and wars 
on the largest scale are, he said, two ends of a continuum, an 
unbroken curve. It follows, not only in a trivial sense but also I 
believe in a very deep psychological sense, that war is murder 
writ large. When our well-being is threatened, when our illusions 
about ourselves are challenged, we tend—some of us at least—to 
fly into murderous rages. And when the same provocations are 
applied to nation states, they, too, sometimes fly into murderous 
rages, egged on often enough by those seeking personal power or 
profit. But as the technology of murder improves and the penal¬ 
ties of war increase, a great many people must be made to fly into 
murderous rages simultaneously for a major war to be mustered. 
Because the organs of mass communication are often in the 
hands of the state, this can commonly be arranged. (Nuclear war 
is the exception. It can be triggered by a very small number of 
people.) 

We see here a conflict between our passions and what is 
sometimes called our better natures; between the deep, ancient 
reptilian part of the brain, the R-complex, in charge of murder¬ 
ous rages, and the more recently evolved mammalian and human 
parts of the brain, the limbic system and the cerebral cortex. 
When humans lived in small groups, when our weapons were 
comparatively paltry, even an enraged warrior could kill only a 
few. As our technology improved, the means of war also im¬ 
proved. In the same brief interval, we also have improved. We 
have tempered our anger, frustration and despair with reason. 
We have ameliorated on a planetary scale injustices that only 
recently were global and endemic. But our weapons can now kill 
billions. Have we improved fast enough? Are we teaching reason 
as effectively as we can? Have we courageously studied the causes 
of war? 

What is often called the strategy of nuclear deterrence is re¬ 
markable for its reliance on the behavior of our nonhuman 
ancestors. Henry Kissinger, a contemporary politician, wrote: 
“Deterrence depends, above all, on psychological criteria. For 
purposes of deterrence, a bluff taken seriously is more useful than 
a serious threat interpreted as a bluff.” Truly effective nuclear 
bluffing, however, includes occasional postures of irrationality, a 
distancing from the horrors of nuclear war. Then the potential 
enemy is tempted to submit on points of dispute rather than 
unleash a global confrontation, which the aura of irrationality 
has made plausible. The chief danger of adopting a credible pose 
of irrationality is that to succeed in the pretense you have to be 
very good. After a while, you get used to it. It becomes pretense 
no longer. 

The global balance of terror, pioneered by the United States 
and the Soviet Union, holds hostage the citizens of the Earth. 
Each side draws limits on the permissible behavior of the other. 



Who Speaks for Earth1 - 327 


1000 yr 

100 yr 

lOyr 



i= 

£ 

•5 1mo 


8hrs 


5 min 


War Magnitude, M-> 



The Richardson diagram. The horizontal 
axis shows the magnitude of a war (M = 5 
means 10 5 people killed; M = 10 means 
10 10 , i.e., every human on the planet). The 
vertical axis shows the time to wait until a 
war of magnitude M erupts. The curve is 
based on Richardsons data for wars be¬ 
tween 1820 and 1945. Simple extrapola¬ 
tion suggests that M = 10 will not be 
reached for about a thousand years (1820 
+ 1,000 = 2820). But the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons has probably moved the 
curve into the shaded area, and the wait¬ 
ing time to Doomsday may be ominously 
short. The shape of the Richardson curve 
is within our control, but only if humans 
are willing to embrace nuclear disarma¬ 
ment and restructure dramatically the 
planetary community. 


The potential enemy is assured that if the limit is transgressed, 
nuclear war will follow. However, the definition of the limit 
changes from time to time. Each side must be quite confident that 
the other understands the new limits. Each side is tempted to 
increase its military advantage, but not in so striking a way as 
seriously to alarm the other. Each side continually explores the 
limits of the other’s tolerance, as in flights of nuclear bombers 
over the Arctic wastes; the Cuban missile crisis; the testing of 
anti-satellite weapons; the Vietnam and Afghanistan wars—a few 
entries from a long and dolorous list. The global balance of terror 
is a very delicate balance. It depends on things not going wrong, 
on mistakes not being made, on the reptilian passions not being 
seriously aroused. 

And so we return to Richardson. In the diagram the solid line 
is the waiting time for a war of magnitude M—that is, the average 
time we would have to wait to witness a war that kills 10 M people 
(where M represents the number of zeroes after the one in our 
usual exponential arithmetic). Also shown, as a vertical bar at the 
right of the diagram, is the world population in recent years, 
which reached one billion people (M = 9) around 1835 and is 
now about 4.5 billion people (M = 9.7). When the Richardson 
curve crosses the vertical bar we have specified the waiting time 
to Doomsday: how many years until the population of the Earth 
is destroyed in some great war. With Richardson’s curve and the 
simplest extrapolation for the future growth of the human popu¬ 
lation, the two curves do not intersect until the thirtieth century 
or so, and Doomsday is deferred. 

But World War II was of magnitude 7.7: some fifty million 
military personnel and noncombatants were killed. The technology 



328 - Cosmos 


of death advanced ominously. Nuclear weapons were used 
for the first time. There is little indication that the motivations 
and propensities for warfare have diminished since, and both 
conventional and nuclear weaponry has become far more deadly. 
Thus, the top of the Richardson curve is shifting downward by 
an unknown amount. If its new position is somewhere in the 
shaded region of the figure, we may have only another few 
decades until Doomsday. A more detailed comparison of the 
incidence of wars before and after 1945 might help to clarify this 
question. It is of more than passing concern. 

This is merely another way of saying what we have known for 
decades: the development of nuclear weapons and their delivery 
systems will, sooner or later, lead to global disaster. Many of the 
American and European emigre scientists who developed the 
first nuclear weapons were profoundly distressed about the 
demon they had let loose on the world. They pleaded for the 
global abolition of nuclear weapons. But their pleas went un- 
heeded; the prospect of a national strategic advantage galvanized 
both the U.S.S.R. and the United States, and the nuclear arms 
race began. 

In the same period, there was a burgeoning international trade 
in the devastating non-nuclear weapons coyly called “conven¬ 
tional.” In the past twenty-five years, in dollars corrected for 
inflation, the annual international arms trade has gone from $300 
million to much more than $20 billion. In the years between 
1950 and 1968, for which good statistics seem to be available, 
there were, on the average, worldwide several accidents involv¬ 
ing nuclear weapons per year, although perhaps no more than 
one or two accidental nuclear explosions. The weapons estab¬ 
lishments in the Soviet Union, the United States and other na¬ 
tions are large and powerful. In the United States they include 
major corporations famous for their homey domestic manufac¬ 
tures. According to one estimate, the corporate profits in military 
weapons procurement are 30 to 50 percent higher than in an 
equally technological but competitive civilian market. Cost 
overruns in military weapons systems are permitted on a scale 
that would be considered unacceptable in the civilian sphere. In 
the Soviet Union the resources, quality, attention and care given 
to military production is in striking contrast to the little left for 
consumer goods. According to some estimates, almost half the 
scientists and high technologists on Earth are employed full- or 
part-time on military matters. Those engaged in the development 
and manufacture of weapons of mass destruction are given sala¬ 
ries, perquisites of power and, where possible, public honors at 
the highest levels available in their respective societies. The 
secrecy of weapons development, carried to especially extrava¬ 
gant lengths in the Soviet Union, implies that individuals so 
employed need almost never accept responsibility for their ac¬ 
tions. They are protected and anonymous. Military secrecy 



Who Speaks for Earth ? - 329 



makes the military the most difficult sector of any society for the 
citizens to monitor. If we do not know what they do, it is very 
hard for us to stop them. And with the rewards so substantial, 
with the hostile military establishments beholden to each other 
in some ghastly mutual embrace, the world discovers itself drift? 
ing toward the ultimate undoing of the human enterprise. 

Every major power has some widely publicized justification for 
its procurement and stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction, 
often including a reptilian reminder of the presumed character 
and cultural defects of potential enemies (as opposed to us stout 
fellows), or of the intentions of others, but never ourselves, to 
conquer the world. Every nation seems to have its set of forbid¬ 
den possibilities, which its citizenry and adherents must not at 
any cost be permitted to think seriously about. In the Soviet 
Union these include capitalism, God, and the surrender of na¬ 
tional sovereignty; in the United States, socialism, atheism, and 
the surrender of national sovereignty. It is the same all over the 
world. 

How would we explain the global arms race to a dispassionate 
extraterrestrial observer? How would we justify the most recent 
destabilizing developments of killer-satellites, particle beam 
weapons, lasers, neutron bombs, cruise missiles, and the pro¬ 
posed conversion of areas the size of modest countries to the 
enterprise of hiding each intercontinental ballistic missile among 
hundreds of decoys? Would we argue that ten thousand targeted 
nuclear warheads are likely to enhance the prospects for our 
survival? What account would we give of our stewardship of the 
planet Earth? We have heard the rationales offered by the nu¬ 
clear superpowers. We know who speaks for the nations. But 
who speaks for the human species? Who speaks for Earth? 


The upper atmosphere of the planet 
Earth, seen at twilight. In a full nuclear 
war, the protective ozone layer would be 
partially destroyed and the stratosphere 
would be filled with radioactive debris. A 
visitor from another world might be 
tempted to move on. Courtesy NASA. 



330 — Cosmos 



Surrogate monkey mothers. Given a 
choice of two surrogate mothers—a wire 
structure equipped with a milk bottle, or 
the same structure covered with cloth and 
with a milk bottle—infant monkeys unhe¬ 
sitatingly choose the latter. Humans and 
other primates have genetically deter¬ 
mined needs for social interaction and for 
physical affection and warmth. Courtesy, 
Harry F. Harlow, University of Wisconsin 
Primate Laboratory. 


About two-thirds of the mass of the human brain is in the 
cerebral cortex, devoted to intuition and reason. Humans have 
evolved gregariously. We delight in each other’s company; we 
care for one another. We cooperate. Altruism is built into us. 
We have brilliantly deciphered some of the patterns of Nature. 
We have sufficient motivation to work together and the ability 
to figure out how to do it. If we are willing to contemplate 
nuclear war and the wholesale destruction of our emerging global 
society, should we not also be willing to contemplate a wholesale 
restructuring of our societies? From an extraterrestrial perspec¬ 
tive, our global civilization is clearly on the edge of failure in the 
most important task it faces: to preserve the lives and well-being 
of the citizens of the planet. Should we not then be willing to 
explore vigorously, in every nation, major changes in the tradi¬ 
tional ways of doing things, a fundamental redesign of economic, 
political, social and religious institutions? 

Faced with so disquieting an alternative, we are always 
tempted to minimize the seriousness of the problem, to argue 
that those who worry about doomsdays are alarmists; to hold 
that fundamental changes in our institutions are impractical or 
contrary to “human nature,” as if nuclear war were practical, or as 
if there were only one human nature. Full-scale nuclear war has 
never happened. Somehow this is taken to imply that it never 
will. But we can experience it only once. By then it will be too 
late to reformulate the statistics. 

The United States is one of the few governments that actually 
supports an agency devoted to reversing the arms race. But the 
comparative budgets of the Department of Defense (153 billion 
dollars per year in 1980) and of the Arms Control and Disar¬ 
mament Agency (0.018 billion dollars per year) remind us of the 
relative importance we have assigned to the two activities. 
Would not a rational society spend more on understanding and 
preventing, than on preparing for, the next war? It is possible to 
study the causes of war. At present our understanding is mea¬ 
ger—probably because disarmament budgets have, since the time 
of Sargon of Akkad, been somewhere between ineffective and 
nonexistent. Microbiologists and physicians study diseases mainly 
to cure people. Rarely are they rooting for the pathogen. Let us 
study war as if it were, as Einstein aptly called it, an illness of 
childhood. We have reached the point where proliferation of 
nuclear arms and resistance to nuclear disarmament threaten 
every person on the planet. There are no more special interests or 
special cases. Our survival depends on committing our intelli¬ 
gence and resources on a massive scale to take charge of our own 
destiny, to guarantee that Richardson’s curve does not veer to 
the right. 

We, the nuclear hostages—all the peoples of the Earth—must 
educate ourselves about conventional and nuclear warfare. Then 
we must educate our governments. We must learn the science 


Who Speaks for Earth ? — 331 


and technology that provide the only conceivable tools for our 
survival We must be willing to challenge courageously the com 
ventional social, political, economic and religious wisdom. We 
must make every effort to understand that our fellow humans, all 
over the world, are human. Of course, such steps are difficult. 
But as Einstein many times replied when his suggestions were 
rejected as impractical or as inconsistent with “human nature”: 
What is the alternative? 

Mammals characteristically nuzzle, fondle, hug, caress, pet, 
groom and love their young, behavior essentially unknown 
among the reptiles. If it is really true that the R-complex and 
limbic systems live in an uneasy truce within our skulls and still 
partake of their ancient predelictions, we might expect affectiom 
ate parental indulgence to encourage our mammalian natures, 
and the absence of physical affection to prod reptilian behavior. 
There is some evidence that this is the case. In laboratory ex- 
periments, Harry and Margaret Harlow found that monkeys 
raised in cages and physically isolated—even though they could 
see, hear and smell their simian fellows—developed a range of 
morose, withdrawn, self-destructive and otherwise abnormal 
characteristics. In humans the same is observed for children 
raised without physical affection—usually in institutions—where 
they are clearly in great pain. 

The neuropsychologist James W. Prescott has performed a 
startling cross-cultural statistical analysis of 400 preindustrial so¬ 
cieties and found that cultures that lavish physical affection on 
infants tend to be disinclined to violence. Even societies without 
notable fondling of infants develop nonviolent adults, provided 
sexual activity in adolescents is not repressed. Prescott believes 
that cultures with a predisposition for violence are composed of 
individuals who have been deprived—during at least one of two 
critical stages in life, infancy and adolescence—of the pleasures of 
the body. Where physical affection is encouraged, theft, orga¬ 
nized religion and invidious displays of wealth are inconspicuous; 
where infants are physically punished, there tends to be slavery, 
frequent killing, torturing and mutilation of enemies, a devotion 
to the inferiority of women, and a belief in one or more super¬ 
natural beings who intervene in daily life. 

We do not understand human behavior well enough to be 
sure of the mechanisms underlying these relationships, although 
we can conjecture. But the correlations are significant. Prescott 
writes: “The percent likelihood of a society becoming physically 
violent if it is physically affectionate toward its infants and toler¬ 
ant of premarital sexual behavior is 2 percent. The probability of 
this relationship occurring by chance is 125,000 to one. I am not 
aware of any other developmental variable that has such a high 
degree of predictive validity.” Infants hunger for physical affec¬ 
tion; adolescents are strongly driven to sexual activity. If youngsters 



332 - Cosmos 


had their way, societies might develop in which adults have 
little tolerance for aggression, territoriality, ritual and social hier- 
archy (although in the course of growing up the children might 
well experience these reptilian behaviors). If Prescott is right, in 
an age of nuclear weapons and effective contraceptives, child 
abuse and severe sexual repression are crimes against humanity. 
More work on this provocative thesis is clearly needed. Mean- 
while, we can each make a personal and noncontroversial com 
tribution to the future of the world by hugging our infants 
tenderly. 

If the inclinations toward slavery and racism, misogyny and 
violence are connected—as individual character and human his- 
tory, as well as cross-cultural studies, suggest—then there is room 
for some optimism. We are surrounded by recent fundamental 
changes in society. In the last two centuries, abject slavery, with 
us for thousands of years or more, has been almost eliminated in 
a stirring planet-wide revolution. Women, patronized for mil¬ 
lennia, traditionally denied real political and economic power, 
are gradually becoming, even in the most backward societies, 
equal partners with men. For the first time in modern history, 
major wars of aggression were stopped partly because of the 
revulsion felt by the citizens of the aggressor nations. The old 
exhortations to nationalist fervor and jingoist pride have begun 
to lose their appeal. Perhaps because of rising standards of living, 
children are being treated better worldwide. In only a few dec¬ 
ades, sweeping global changes have begun to move in precisely 
the directions needed for human survival. A new consciousness 
is developing which recognizes that we are one species. 

“Superstition [is] cowardice in the face of the Divine,” wrote 
Theophrastus, who lived during the founding of the Library of 
Alexandria. We inhabit a universe where atoms are made in the 
centers of stars; where each second a thousand suns are born; 
where life is sparked by sunlight and lightning in the airs and 
waters of youthful planets; where the raw material for biological 
evolution is sometimes made by the explosion of a star halfway 
across the Milky Way; where a thing as beautiful as a galaxy is 
formed a hundred billion times—a Cosmos of quasars and quarks, 
snowflakes and fireflies, where there may be black holes and 
other universes and extraterrestrial civilizations whose radio 
messages are at this moment reaching the Earth. How pallid by 
comparison are the pretensions of superstition and pseudoscience; 
how important it is for us to pursue and understand science, that 
characteristically human endeavor. 

Every aspect of Nature reveals a deep mystery and touches our 
sense of wonder and awe. Theophrastus was right. Those afraid 
of the universe as it really is, those who pretend to nonexistent 
knowledge and envision a Cosmos centered on human beings 
will prefer the fleeting comforts of superstition. They avoid 



Who Speaks for Earth ? - 333 



A reconstruction of the armaria of the 
Great Library of Alexandria. At its peak, 
it contained more than half a million voL 
umes, almost all of which have been ir¬ 
revocably lost. 


rather than confront the world. But those with the courage to 
explore the weave and structure of the Cosmos, even where it 
differs profoundly from their wishes and prejudices, will pene¬ 
trate its deepest mysteries. 

There is no other species on Earth that does science. It is, so 
far, entirely a human invention, evolved by natural selection in 
the cerebral cortex for one simple reason: it works. It is not 
perfect. It can be misused. It is only a tool. But it is by far the best 
tool we have, self-correcting, ongoing, applicable to everything. 
It has two rules. First: there are no sacred truths; all assumptions 
must be critically examined; arguments from authority are 
worthless. Second: whatever is inconsistent with the facts must 
be discarded or revised. We must understand the Cosmos as it is 
and not confuse how it is with how we wish it to be. The 
obvious is sometimes false; the unexpected is sometimes true. 
Humans everywhere share the same goals when the context is 
large enough. And the study of the Cosmos provides the largest 
possible context. Present global culture is a kind of arrogant 
newcomer. It arrives on the planetary stage following four and a 
half billion years of other acts, and after looking about for a few 
thousand years declares itself in possession of eternal truths. But 
in a world that is changing as fast as ours, this is a prescription for 
disaster. No nation, no religion, no economic system, no body of 
knowledge, is likely to have all the answers for our survival. 
There must be many social systems that would work far better 
than any now in existence. In the scientific tradition, our task is to 
find them. 


Only once before in our history was there the promise of a 
brilliant scientific civilization. Beneficiary of the Ionian Awaken¬ 
ing, it had its citadel at the Library of Alexandria, where 2,000 
years ago the best minds of antiquity established the foundations 
for the systematic study of mathematics, physics, biology, as¬ 
tronomy, literature, geography and medicine. We build on those 








334 - Cosmos 


foundations still The Library was constructed and supported by 
the Ptolemys, the Greek kings who inherited the Egyptian 
portion of the empire of Alexander the Great. From the time of 
its creation in the third century B.C. until its destruction seven 
cen-turies later, it was the brain and heart of the ancient world. 

Alexandria was the publishing capital of the planet. Of course, 
there were no printing presses then. Books were expensive; every 
one of them was copied by hand. The Library was the repository 
of the most accurate copies in the world. The art of critical 
editing was invented there. The Old Testament comes down to 
us mainly from the Greek translations made in the Alexandrian 
Library. The Ptolemys devoted much of their enormous wealth 
to the acquisition of every Greek book, as well as works from 
Africa, Persia, India, Israel and other parts of the world. Ptolemy 
III Euergetes wished to borrow from Athens the original manu- 
scripts or official state copies of the great ancient tragedies of 
Sophocles, Aeschylus and Euripides. To the Athenians, these 
were a kind of cultural patrimony—something like the original 
handwritten copies and first folios of Shakespeare might be in 
England. They were reluctant to let the manuscripts out of their 
hands even for a moment. Only after Ptolemy guaranteed their 
return with an enormous cash deposit did they agree to lend the 
plays. But Ptolemy valued those scrolls more than gold or silver. 
He forfeited the deposit gladly and enshrined, as well he might, 
the originals in the Library. The outraged Athenians had to 
content themselves with the copies that Ptolemy, only a little 
shamefacedly, presented to them. Rarely has a state so avidly 
supported the pursuit of knowledge. 

The Ptolemys did not merely collect established knowledge; 
they encouraged and financed scientific research and so generated 
new knowledge. The results were amazing: Eratosthenes accu- 
rately calculated the size of the Earth, mapped it, and argued that 
India could be reached by sailing westward from Spain. Hippar- 
chus anticipated that stars come into being, slowly move during 
the course of centuries, and eventually perish; it was he who first 
catalogued the positions and magnitudes of the stars to detect 
such changes. Euclid produced a textbook on geometry from 
which humans learned for twenty-three centuries, a work that 
was to help awaken the scientific interest of Kepler, Newton and 
Einstein. Galen wrote basic works on healing and anatomy which 
dominated medicine until the Renaissance. There were, as we 
have noted, many others. 

Alexandria was the greatest city the Western world had ever 
seen. People of all nations came there to live, to trade, to learn. 
On any given day, its harbors were thronged with merchants, 
scholars and tourists. This was a city where Greeks, Egyptians, 
Arabs, Syrians, Hebrews, Persians, Nubians, Phoenicians, Ital¬ 
ians, Gauls and Iberians exchanged merchandise and ideas. It is 
probably here that the word cosmopolitan realized its true meaning— 



Who Speaks for Earth? -335 


citizen, not just of a nation, but of the Cosmos.* To be a 
citizen of the Cosmos . . . 

Here clearly were the seeds of the modern world. What pre- 
vented them from taking root and flourishing? Why instead did 
the West slumber through a thousand years of darkness until 
Columbus and Copernicus and their contemporaries redisco- 
vered the work done in Alexandria? 1 cannot give you a simple 
answer. But 1 do know this: there is no record, in the entire 
history of the Library, that any of its illustrious scientists and 
scholars ever seriously challenged the political, economic and 
religious assumptions of their society. The permanence of the 
stars was questioned; the justice of slavery was not. Science and 
learning in general were the preserve of a privileged few. The 
vast population of the city had not the vaguest notion of the 
great discoveries taking place within the Library. New findings 
were not explained or popularized. The research benefited them 
little. Discoveries in mechanics and steam technology were ap¬ 
plied mainly to the perfection of weapons, the encouragement of 
superstition, the amusement of kings. The scientists never 
grasped the potential of machines to free peopled The great 
intellectual achievements of antiquity had few immediate practi¬ 
cal applications. Science never captured the imagination of the 
multitude. There was no counterbalance to stagnation, to pessi¬ 
mism, to the most abject surrenders to mysticism. When, at long 
last, the mob came to burn the Library down, there was nobody 
to stop them. 

The last scientist who worked in the Library was a mathema¬ 
tician, astronomer, physicist and the head of the Neoplatonic 
school of philosophy—an extraordinary range of accomplish¬ 
ments for any individual in any age. Her name was Hypatia. She 
was born in Alexandria in 370. At a time when women had few 
options and were treated as property, Hypatia moved freely and 
unselfconsciously through traditional male domains. By all ac¬ 
counts she was a great beauty. She had many suitors but rejected 
all offers of marriage. The Alexandria of Hypatia’s time—by then 
long under Roman rule—was a city under grave strain. Slavery 
had sapped classical civilization of its vitality. The growing 
Christian Church was consolidating its power and attempting to 
eradicate pagan influence and culture. Hypatia stood at the epi¬ 
center of these mighty social forces. Cyril, the Archbishop of 
Alexandria, despised her because of her close friendship with the 


* The word cosmopolitan was first invented by Diogenes, the rationalist 
philosopher and critic of Plato. 


t With the single exception of Archimedes, who during his stay at the 
Alexandrian Library invented the water screw, which is used in Egypt to 
this day for the irrigation of cultivated fields. But even he considered 
such mechanical contrivances far beneath the dignity of science. 


500 H 


Thales 

Pythagoras 


— Democritus 
Plato 


BC 






AD 



Aristarchus of Samos 
Eratosthenes 



Antikythera machine 

Heron of Alexandria 
Ptolemy 


<-Destruction of 

Alexandrian Library 
death of Hypatia, onset 
of "Dark Ages" 


1000 H 



Columbus, Leonardo 

Copernicus 

Kepler 

Huygens 

Newton 

La Perouse 

Champollion 



Einstein 
Humason 
Viking and Voyager 


A time line of some of the people, ma¬ 
chines and events described in this book. 
The Antikythera machine was an astro¬ 
nomical computer developed in ancient 
Greece. Heron of Alexandria experi¬ 
mented with steam engines. The millen¬ 
nium gap in the middle of the diagram 
represents a poignant lost opportunity for 
the human species. 



336 - Cosmos 


Roman governor, and because she was a symbol of learning and 
science, which were largely identified by the early Church with 
paganism. In great personal danger, she continued to teach and 
publish, until, in the year 415, on her way to work she was set 
upon by a fanatical mob of Cyril’s parishioners. They dragged 
her from her chariot, tore off her clothes, and, armed with 
abalone shells, flayed her flesh from her bones. Her remains were 
burned, her works obliterated, her name forgotten. Cyril was 
made a saint. 

The glory of the Alexandrian Library is a dim memory. Its last 
remnants were destroyed soon after Hypatia’s death. It was as if 
the entire civilization had undergone some self-inflicted brain 
surgery, and most of its memories, discoveries, ideas and passions 
were extinguished irrevocably. The loss was incalculable. In 
some cases, we know only the tantalizing titles of the works that 
were destroyed. In most cases, we know neither the titles nor the 
authors. We do know that of the 123 plays of Sophocles in the 
Library, only seven survived. One of those seven is Oedipus Rex. 
Similar numbers apply to the works of Aeschylus and Euripides. 
It is a little as if the only surviving works of a man named 
William Shakespeare were Coriolanus and A Winter’s Tale , but 
we had heard that he had written certain other plays, unknown 
to us but apparently prized in his time, works entitled Hamlet , 
Macbeth , Julius Caesar , King Lear , Romeo and Juliet . 

Of the physical contents of that glorious Library not a single 
scroll remains. In modern Alexandria few people have a keen 
appreciation, much less a detailed knowledge, of the Alexandrian 
Library or of the great Egyptian civilization that preceded it for 
thousands of years. More recent events, other cultural impera- 
tives have taken precedence. The same is true all over the world. 
We have only the most tenuous contact with our past. And yet 
just a stone’s throw from the remains of the Serapaeum are 
reminders of many civilizations: enigmatic sphinxes from 
pharaonic Egypt; a great column erected to the Roman Emperor 
Diocletian by a provincial flunky for not altogether permitting 
the citizens of Alexandria to starve to death; a Christian 
church; many minarets; and the hallmarks of modern industrial 
civilization—apartment houses, automobiles, streetcars, urban 
slums, a microwave relay tower. There are a million threads from 
the past intertwined to make the ropes and cables of the modern 
world. 

Our achievements rest on the accomplishments of 40,000 
generations of our human predecessors, all but a tiny fraction of 
whom are nameless and forgotten. Every now and then we 
stumble on a major civilization, such as the ancient culture of 
Ebla, which flourished only a few millennia ago and about which 
we knew nothing. How ignorant we are of our own past! Inscrip' 
tions, papyruses, books time-bind the human species and permit 
us to hear those few voices and faint cries of our brothers and 



Who Speaks for Earth ? — 337 


sisters, our ancestors. And what a joy of recognition when we 
realize how like us they were! 

We have in this book devoted attention to some of our am 
cestors whose names have not been lost: Eratosthenes, Democri¬ 
tus, Aristarchus, Hypatia, Leonardo, Kepler, Newton, Huygens, 
Champollion, Humason, Goddard, Einstein—all from Western 
culture because the emerging scientific civilization on our planet 
is mainly a Western civilization; but every culture—China, India, 
West Africa, Mesoamerica—has made its major contributions to 
our global society and had its seminal thinkers. Through tech¬ 
nological advances in communication our planet is in the final 
stages of being bound up at a breakneck pace into a single global 
society. If we can accomplish the integration of the Earth without 
obliterating cultural differences or destroying ourselves, we will 
have accomplished a great thing. 

Near the site of the Alexandrian Library there is today a 
headless sphinx sculpted in the time of the pharoah Horemheb, 
in the Eighteenth Dynasty, a millennium before Alexander. 
Within easy view of that leonine body is a modern microwave 
relay tower. Between them runs an unbroken thread in the his¬ 
tory of the human species. From sphinx to tower is an instant of 
cosmic time—a moment in the fifteen or so billion years that have 
elapsed since the Big Bang. Almost all record of the passage of 
the universe from then to now has been scattered by the winds of 
time. The evidence of cosmic evolution has been more 
thoroughly ravaged than all the papyrus scrolls in the Alexan¬ 
drian Library. And yet through daring and intelligence we have 
stolen a few glimpses of that winding path along which our 
ancestors and we have traveled: 

For unknown ages after the explosive outpouring of matter 
and energy of the Big Bang, the Cosmos was without form. 
There were no galaxies, no planets, no life. Deep, impenetrable 
darkness was everywhere, hydrogen atoms in the void. Here and 
there denser accumulations of gas were imperceptibly growing, 
globes of matter were condensing—hydrogen raindrops more 
massive than suns. Within these globes of gas was first kindled 
the nuclear fire latent in matter. A first generation of stars was 
born, flooding the Cosmos with light. There were in those times 
not yet any planets to receive the light, no living creatures to 
admire the radiance of the heavens. Deep in the stellar furnaces 
the alchemy of nuclear fusion created heavy elements, the ashes 
of hydrogen burning, the atomic building materials of future 
planets and lifeforms. Massive stars soon exhausted their stores 
of nuclear fuel. Rocked by colossal explosions, they returned 
most of their substance back into the thin gas from which they 
had once condensed. Here in the dark lush clouds between the 
stars, new raindrops made of many elements were forming, later 
generations of stars being born. Nearby, smaller raindrops grew, 
bodies far too little to ignite the nuclear fire, droplets in the 



338 - Cosmos 


interstellar mist on their way to form the planets. Among them 
was a small world of stone and iron, the early Earth. 

Congealing and warming, the Earth released the methane, 
ammonia, water and hydrogen gases that had been trapped 
within, forming the primitive atmosphere and the first oceans. 
Starlight from the Sun bathed and warmed the primeval Earth, 
drove storms, generated lightning and thunder. Volcanoes over¬ 
flowed with lava. These processes disrupted molecules of the 
primitive atmosphere; the fragments fell back together again into 
more and more complex forms, which dissolved in the early 
oceans. After a time the seas achieved the consistency of a warm, 
dilute soup. Molecules were organized, and complex chemical 
reactions driven, on the surface of clays. And one day a molecule 
arose that quite by accident was able to make crude copies of 
itself out of the other molecules in the broth. As time passed, 
more elaborate and more accurate self-replicating molecules 
arose. Those combinations best suited to further replication were 
favored by the sieve of natural selection. Those that copied 
better produced more copies. And the primitive oceanic broth 
gradually grew thin as it was consumed by and transformed into 
complex condensations of self-replicating organic molecules. 
Gradually, imperceptibly, life had begun. 

Single-celled plants evolved, and life began to generate its own 
food. Photosynthesis transformed the atmosphere. Sex was in¬ 
vented. Once free-living forms banded together to make a com¬ 
plex cell with specialized functions. Chemical receptors evolved, 
and the Cosmos could taste and smell. One-celled organisms 
evolved into multicellular colonies, elaborating their various 
parts into specialized organ systems. Eyes and ears evolved, and 
now the Cosmos could see and hear. Plants and animals discov¬ 
ered that the land could support life. Organisms buzzed, crawled, 
scuttled, lumbered, glided, flapped, shimmied, climbed and 
soared. Colossal beasts thundered through the steaming jungles. 
Small creatures emerged, born live instead of in hard-shelled 
containers, with a fluid like the early oceans coursing through 
their veins. They survived by swiftness and cunning. And then, 
only a moment ago, some small arboreal animals scampered 
down from the trees. They became upright and taught them¬ 
selves the use of tools, domesticated other animals, plants and 
fire, and devised language. The ash of stellar alchemy was now 
emerging into consciousness. At an ever-accelerating pace, it in¬ 
vented writing, cities, art and science, and sent spaceships to the 
planets and the stars. These are some of the things that hydrogen 
atoms do, given fifteen billion years of cosmic evolution. 

It has the sound of epic myth, and rightly. But it is simply a 
description of cosmic evolution as revealed by the science of our 
time. We are difficult to come by and a danger to ourselves. But 
any account of cosmic evolution makes it clear that all the crea¬ 
tures of the Earth, the latest manufactures of the galactic 



Who Speaks for Earth ? -339 


hydrogen industry, are beings to be cherished. Elsewhere there 
may be other equally astonishing transmutations of matter, so 
wistfully we listen for a humming in the sky. 

We have held the peculiar notion that a person or society that 
is a little different from us, whoever we are, is somehow strange 
or bizarre, to be distrusted or loathed. Think of the negative 
connotations of words like alien or outlandish. And yet the 
monuments and cultures of each of our civilizations merely rep' 
resent different ways of being human. An extraterrestrial visitor, 
looking at the differences among human beings and their socie^ 
ties, would find those differences trivial compared to the similar' 
ities. The Cosmos may be densely populated with intelligent 
beings. But the Darwinian lesson is clear: There will be no 
humans elsewhere. Only here. Only on this small planet. We are 
a rare as well as an endangered species. Every one of us is, in the 
cosmic perspective, precious. If a human disagrees with you, let 
him live. In a hundred billion galaxies, you will not find another. 

Human history can be viewed as a slowly dawning awareness 
that we are members of a larger group. Initially our loyalties were 
to ourselves and our immediate family, next, to bands of warn 
dering huntengatherers, then to tribes, small settlements, city' 
states, nations. We have broadened the circle of those we love. 
We have now organized what are modestly described as super' 
powers, which include groups of people from divergent ethnic 
and cultural backgrounds working in some sense together—surely 
a humanizing and charactenbuilding experience. If we are to 
survive, our loyalties must be broadened further, to include the 
whole human community, the entire planet Earth. Many of those 
who run the nations will find this idea unpleasant. They will fear 
the loss of power. We will hear much about treason and disloy' 
alty. Rich natiomstates will have to share their wealth with poor 
ones. But the choice, as H. G. Wells once said in a different 
context, is clearly the universe or nothing. 

A few million years ago there were no humans. Who will be 
here a few million years hence? In all the 4.6'billion'year history 
of our planet, nothing much ever left it. But now, tiny unmanned 
exploratory spacecraft from Earth are moving, glistening and 
elegant, through the solar system. We have made a preliminary 
reconnaissance of twenty worlds, among them all the planets 
visible to the naked eye, all those wandering nocturnal lights that 
stirred our ancestors toward understanding and ecstasy. If we 
survive, our time will be famous for two reasons: that at this 
dangerous moment of technological adolescence we managed to 
avoid self'destruction; and because this is the epoch in which we 
began our journey to the stars. 

The choice is stark and ironic. The same rocket boosters used 
to launch probes to the planets are poised to send nuclear war 
heads to the nations. The radioactive power sources on Viking 



340 - Cosmos 



180 
75 


240 


300 ° 


120 ° 


180 ° 
75 ° 


- 30 ' 


- 60 ° 


- 70 ° 
180 


240 ° 


120 ° 



Radar exploration of two worlds. The surface of Venus, perpetually shrouded in clouds, is revealed on a global scale 
for the first time in these maps. The data were obtained by the Pioneer Venus Orbiter, transmitting a radar signal from 
just above the Venus clouds to the surface below; the reflected signal is then detected. The planet shows mountains, 
craters and two large raised continents (in orange), Ishtar Terra and Aphrodite Terra. An artist’s conception of Ishtar 
Terra is shown top right. The Venera 9 and 10 spacecraft landed near Beta Regio. The black gores are regions still 
under radar exploration. A similar radar device, designed for the exploration of Venus, was tested over the cloud' 
covered jungles of Guatemala and Belize, on Earth. To his surprise, the archeologist R. E. W. Adams discovered (right, 
middle ) an intricate network of straight and curved lines, previously unknown, which subsequent field work proved to 







Who Speaks for Earth ? - 341 





be the canal system of the ancient Mayas (250 B.C. to 900). They are invisible in ordinary photographs of the same area 
(right, bottom ). This answers the mystery of how the Mayas supported a high civilization of several million people. 
Some historians believe that all high civilizations on Earth began with the construction of a canal network (cf. Chapter 
5). In many ways, the exploration of other worlds permits us to better understand our own. Courtesy NASA. 





342 - Cosmos 


The annual budget for space sciences in 
the United States since the founding of 
NASA. Amounts have been corrected for 
inflation by converting to 1967 dollars. 
The surge in the early 1970’s reflects the 
development of the Viking mission to 
Mars. A vigorous program of planetary 
exploration and the radio search for ex¬ 
traterrestrial intelligence would cost, in 
these units, about a dollar a year for every 
American. 



and Voyager derive from the same technology that makes nu¬ 
clear weapons. The radio and radar techniques employed to track 
and guide ballistic missiles and defend against attack are also used 
to monitor and command the spacecraft on the planets and to 
listen for signals from civilizations near other stars. If we use 
these technologies to destroy ourselves, we surely will venture no 
more to the planets and the stars. But the converse is also true. If 
we continue to the planets and the stars, our chauvinisms will be 
shaken further. We will gain a cosmic perspective. We will rec¬ 
ognize that our explorations can be carried out only on behalf of 
all the people of the planet Earth. We will invest our energies in 
an enterprise devoted not to death but to life: the expansion of 
our understanding of the Earth and its inhabitants and the search 
for life elsewhere. Space exploration—unmanned and manned- 
uses many of the same technological and organizational skills and 
demands the same commitment to valor and daring as does the 
enterprise of war. Should a time of real disarmament arrive be¬ 
fore nuclear war, such exploration would enable the military-in¬ 
dustrial establishments of the major powers to engage at long last 
in an untainted enterprise. Interests vested in preparations for war 
can relatively easily be reinvested in the exploration of the 
Cosmos. 

A reasonable—even an ambitious—program of unmanned ex¬ 
ploration of the planets is inexpensive. The budget for space 
sciences in the United States is shown in the table above. Com¬ 
parable expenditures in the Soviet Union are a few times larger. 
Together these sums represent the equivalent of two or three 
nuclear submarines per decade, or the cost overruns on one of 
many weapon systems in a single year. In the last quarter of 1979, 
the program cost of the U.S. F/A-18 aircraft increased by $5.1 
billion, and the F-16 by $3.4 billion. Since their inceptions, sig¬ 
nificantly less has been spent on the unmanned planetary pro¬ 
grams of both the United States and the Soviet Union than has 
been washed shamefully—for example, between 1970 and 1975, 
in the U.S. bombing of Cambodia, an application of national 
policy that cost $7 billion. The total cost of a mission such as 
Viking to Mars, or Voyager to the outer solar system, is less than 




Two human footprints. Above, from Tanzania, 3.6 million years ago. Below, from Mare Tranquilitatis. 
Courtesy Mary Leakey and the National Geographic Society; and NASA. 





344 - Cosmos 




Who Speaks for Earth? -345 


that of the 1979-80 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Through 
technical employment and the stimulation of high technology, 
money spent on space exploration has an economic multiplier 
effect. One study suggests that for every dollar spent on the 
planets, seven dollars are returned to the national economy. And 
yet there are many important and entirely feasible missions that 
have not been attempted because of lack of funds—including 
roving vehicles to wander across the surface of Mars, a comet 
rendezvous, Titan entry probes and a fulhscale search for radio 
signals from other civilizations in space. 

The cost of major ventures into space—permanent bases on 
the Moon or human exploration of Mars, say—is so large that 
they will not, I think, be mustered in the very near future unless 
we make dramatic progress in nuclear and “conventional” disar¬ 
mament. Even then there are probably more pressing needs here 
on Earth. But I have no doubt that if we avoid self-destruction, 
we will sooner or later perform such missions. It is almost impos¬ 
sible to maintain a static society. There is a kind of psychological 
compound interest: even a small tendency toward retrenchment, 
a turning away from the Cosmos, adds up over many generations 
to a significant decline. And conversely, even a slight commit¬ 
ment to ventures beyond the Earth—to what we might call, after 
Columbus, “the enterprise of the stars”—builds over many gener¬ 
ations to a significant human presence on other worlds, a rejoic¬ 
ing in our participation in the Cosmos. 

Some 3.6 million years ago, in what is now northern Tanzania, 
a volcano erupted, the resulting cloud of ash covering the sur¬ 
rounding savannahs. In 1979, the paleoanthropologist Mary 
Leakey found in that ash footprints—the footprints, she believes, 
of an early hominid, perhaps an ancestor of all the people on the 
Earth today. And 380,000 kilometers away, in a flat dry plain 
that humans have in a moment of optimism called the Sea of 
Tranquility, there is another footprint, left by the first human to 
walk another world. We have come far in 3.6 million years, and 
in 4.6 billion and in 15 billion. 

For we are the local embodiment of a Cosmos grown to self- 
awareness. We have begun to contemplate our origins: starstuff 
pondering the stars; organized assemblages of ten billion billion 
billion atoms considering the evolution of atoms; tracing the long 
journey by which, here at least, consciousness arose. Our loyal¬ 
ties are to the species and the planet. We speak for Earth. Our 
obligation to survive is owed not just to ourselves but also to that 
Cosmos, ancient and vast, from which we spring. 


The home planet of an emerging technical civilization, struggling to avoid self-destruction. This world is observed 
from a temporary outpost near its lone natural satellite. The Earth travels some 2Vz million kilometers every day 
around the Sun; eight times faster than that around the center of the Milky Way Galaxy; and, perhaps, twice faster still 
as the Milky Way falls towards the Virgo cluster of galaxies. We have always been space travelers. Courtesy NASA. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


Besides those thanked in the introduction, I am very grateful to the many people who generously contributed their 
time and expertise to this book, including Carol Lane, Myrna Talman, and Jenny Arden; David Oyster, Richard 
Wells, Tom Weidlinger, Dennis Gutierrez, Rob McCain, Nancy Kinney, Janelle Balnicke, Judy Flannery, and Susan 
Racho of the Cosmos television staff; Nancy Inglis, Peter Mollman, Marylea O’Reilly, and Jennifer Peters of Random 
House; Paul West for generously lending me the title of Chapter 5; and George Abell, James Allen, Barbara Amago, 
Lawrence Anderson, Jonathon Arons, Halton Arp, Asma El Bakri, James Blinn, Ban Bok, Zeddie Bowen, John C. 
Brandt, Kenneth Brecher, Frank Bristow, John Callendar, Donald B. Campbell, Judith Campbell, Elof Axel Carlson, 
Michael Carra, John Cassani, Judith Castagno, Catherine Cesarsky, Martin Cohen, JudyTynn del Rey, Nicholas 
Devereux, Michael Devirian, Stephen Dole, Frank D. Drake, Frederick C. Durant III, Richard Epstein, Von R. 
Eshleman, Ahmed Fahmy, Herbert Friedman, Robert Frosch, Jon Fukuda, Richard Gammon, Ricardo Giacconi, 
Thomas Gold, Paul Goldenberg, Peter Goldreich, Paul Goldsmith, J. Richard Gott III, Stephen Jay Gould, Bruce 
Hayes, Raymond Heacock, Wulff Heintz, Arthur Hoag, Paul Hodge, Dorrit Hoffleit, William Hoyt, Icko Iben, 
Mikhail Jaroszynski, Paul Jepsen, Tom Karp, Bishun N. Khare, Charles Kohlhase, Edwin Krupp, Arthur Lane, Paul 
MacLean, Bruce Margon, Harold Masursky, Linda Morabito, Edmond Momjian, Edward Moreno, Bruce Murray, 
William Murnane, Thomas A. Mutch, Kenneth Norris, Tobias Owen, Linda Paul, Roger Payne, Vahe Petrosian, 
James B. Pollack, George Preston, Nancy Priest, Boris Ragent, Dianne Rennell, Michael Rowton, Allan Sandage, 
Fred Scarf, Maarten Schmidt, Arnold Scheibel, Eugene Shoemaker, Frank Shu, Nathan Sivin, Bradford Smith, 
Laurence A. Soderblom, Hyron Spinrad, Edward Stone, Jeremy Stone, Ed Taylor, Kip S. Thome, Norman 
Thrower, O. Brian Toon, Barbara Tuchman, Roger Ulrich, Richard Underwood, Peter van de Kamp, Jurrie J. Van 
der Woude, Arthur Vaughn, Joseph Veverka, Helen Simpson Vishniac, Dorothy Vitaliano, Robert Wagoner, Pete 
Waller, Josephine Walsh, Kent Weeks, Donald Yeomans, Stephen Yerazunis, Louise Gray Young, Harold Zirin, and 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I am also grateful for special photographic help by Edwardo 
Castaneda and Bill Ray. 



Appendix 1 

Reductio ad Absurdum and the Square Root of Two 

The original Pythagorean argument on the irrationality of the square root of 2 depended on a kind of 
argument called reductio ad absurdum , a reduction to absurdity: we assume the truth of a statement, follow 
its consequences and come upon a contradiction, thereby establishing its falsity. To take a modern 
example, consider the aphorism by the great twentieth-century physicist, Niels Bohr: “The opposite of 
every great idea is another great idea.” If the statement were true, its consequences might be at least a little 
perilous. For example, consider the opposite of the Golden Rule, or proscriptions against lying or “Thou 
shalt not kill.” So let us consider whether Bohr’s aphorism is itself a great idea. If so, then the converse 
statement, “The opposite of every great idea is not a great idea,” must also be true. Then we have reached 
a reductio ad absurdum . If the converse statement is false, the aphorism need not detain us long, since it 
stands self-confessed as not a great idea. 

We present a modern version of the proof of the irrationality of the square root of 2 using a reductio ad 
absurdum , and simple algebra rather than the exclusively geometrical proof discovered by the Pytha- 
goreans. The style of argument, the mode of thinking, is at least as interesting as the conclusion: 


Consider a square in which the sides are 1 unit long (1 centimeter, 1 inch, 1 light-year, it does not matter). 
The diagonal line BC divides the square into two triangles, each containing a right angle. In such right 

triangles, the Pythagorean theorem holds: l 2 + l 2 = x 2 . But l 2 + l 2 = 1 + 1 = 2, so x 2 = 2 and we write 

x = V2, the square root of two. We assume VT is a rational number: V2 = p/q, where p and q are 

integers, whole numbers. They can be as big as we like and can stand for any integers we like. We can 

certainly require that they have no common factors. If we were to claim VT = 14/10, for example, we 

would of course cancel out the factor 2 and write p = 7 and q = 5, not p = 14, q = 10. Any common 

factor in numerator or denominator would be canceled out before we start. There are an infinite number 
of p’s and q’s we can choose. From if2 = p/q, by squaring both sides of the equation, we find that 2 = 
p 2 /q 2 , or, by multiplying both sides of the equation by q 2 , we find 

p 2 = 2q 2 . (Equation 1) 

p 2 is then some number multiplied by 2. Therefore p 2 is an even number. But the square of any odd 
number is odd (l 2 = 1, 3 2 = 9, 5 2 = 25, 7 2 = 49, etc.). So p itself must be even, and we can write p = 2s, 

where s is some other integer. Substituting for p in Equation (1), we find 

p 2 = (2s) 2 = 4s 2 = 2q 2 

Dividing both sides of the last equality by 2, we find 

q 2 = 2s 2 

Therefore q 2 is also an even number, and, by the same argument as we just used for p, it follows that q is 
even too. But if p and q are both even, both divisible by 2, then they have not been reduced to their 
lowest common factor, contradicting one of our assumptions. Reductio ad absurdum . But which assump¬ 
tion? The argument cannot be telling us that reduction to common factors is forbidden, that 14/10 is 
permitted and 7/5 is not. So the initial assumption must be wrong; p and q cannot be whole numbers; and 
if2 is irrational. In fact, VT = 1.4142135 . . . 

What a stunning and unexpected conclusion! How elegant the proof! But the Pythagoreans felt 
compelled to suppress this great discovery. 





Appendix 2 

The Five Pythagorean Solids 


A regular polygon (Greek for “many-angled”) is a two-dimensional figure with some number, n, of equal 
sides. So n = 3 is an equilateral triangle, n = 4 is a square, n = 5 is a pentagon, and so on. A polyhedron 
(Greek for “many-sided”) is a three-dimensional figure, all of whose faces are polygons: a cube, for 
example, with 6 squares for faces. A simple polyhedron, or regular solid, is one with no holes in it. 
Fundamental to the work of the Pythagoreans and of Johannes Kepler was the fact that there can be 5 and 
only 5 regular solids. The easiest proof comes from a relationship discovered much later by Descartes and 
by Leonhard Euler which relates the number of faces, F, the number of edges, E, and the number of 
corners or vertices V of a regular solid: 


V — E + F = 2 (Equation 2) 

So for a cube, there are 6 faces (F = 6) and 8 vertices (V = 8), and 8 — E + 6 = 2, 14 — E = 2, and E = 
12; Equation (2) predicts that the cube has 12 edges, as it does. A simple geometric proof of Equation (2) 
can be found in the book by Courant and Robbins in the Bibliography. From Equation (2) we can prove 
that there are only five regular solids: 

Every edge of a regular solid is shared by the sides of two adjacent polygons. Think again of the cube, 
where every edge is a boundary between two squares. If we count up all the sides of all the faces of a 
polyhedron, n F, we will have counted every edge twice. So 

n F = 2 E (Equation 3) 

Let r represent how many edges meet at each vertex. For a cube, r = 3. Also, every edge connects two 
vertices. If we count up all the vertices, r V, we will similarly have counted every edge twice. So 


rV = 2 E 

Substituting for V and F in Equation (2) from Equations (3) and (4), we find 

2 E Ci 2E - 
r n 


(Equation 4) 


If we divide both sides of this equation by 2 E, we have 

1 + 1 - 1 + 1 

n r 2 E (Equation 5) 

We know that n is 3 or more, since the simplest polygon is the triangle, with three sides. We also know 
that r is 3 or more, since at least 3 faces meet at a given vertex in a polyhedron. If both n and r were 
simultaneously more than 3, the left-hand side of Equation (5) would be less than 2 /3 and the equation 
could not be satisfied for any positive value of E. Thus, by another reductio ad absurdum argument, either 
n = 3 and r is 3 or more, or r = 3 and n is 3 or more. 


If n = 3, Equation (5) becomes O/3) + 0 /r) = O/2) + 0/e), or 


1 

r 



1 _ 

6 


(Equation 6) 


So in this case r can equal 3, 4, or 5 only. (If E were 6 or more, the equation would be violated.) Now n = 
3, r = 3 designates a solid in which 3 triangles meet at each vertex. By Equation (6) it has 6 edges; by 
Equation (3) it has 4 faces; by Equation (4) it has 4 vertices. Clearly it is the pyramid or tetrahedron; n = 3, 
r = 4 is a solid with 8 faces in which 4 triangles meet at each vertex, the octahedron; and n = 3, r = 5 



represents a solid with 20 faces in which 5 triangles meet at each vertex, the icosahedron (see figures on 
p. 58). 


If r = 3, Equation (5) becomes 



and by similar arguments n can equal 3, 4, or 5 only, n = 3 is the tetrahedron again; n = 4 is a solid whose 
faces are 6 squares, the cube; and n = 5 corresponds to a solid whose faces are 12 pentagons, the 
dodecahedron (see figures on p. 184)- 


There are no other integer values of n and r possible, and therefore there are only 5 regular solids, a 
conclusion from abstract and beautiful mathematics that has had, as we have seen, the most profound 
impact on practical human affairs. 



FOR FURTHER READING 


(The more technical scientific works are asterisked.) 

CHAPTER 1 

Boeke, Kees. Cosmic View: The Universe in Forty Jumps. New York: John Day, 1957. 

Fraser, Peter Marshall. Ptolemaic Alexandria. Three volumes. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972. 

Morison, Samuel Eliot. Admiral of the Ocean Sea: A Life of Christopher Columbus. Boston: Little, Brown, 1942. 

Sagan, Carl. Broca’s Brain: Reflections on the Romance of Science. New York: Random House, 1979. 

CHAPTER 2 

Attenborough, David. Life on Earth: A Natural History. London: British Broadcasting Corporation, 1979. 

* Dobzhansky, Theodosius, Ayala, Francisco J., Stebbins, G. Ledyard and Valentine, James. Evolution. San Francisco: W.H. 
Freeman, 1978. 

Evolution. A Scientific American Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1978. 

Gould, Stephen Jay. Ever Since Darwin: Reflections on Natural History. New York: W.W. Norton, 1977. 

Handler, Philip (ed.). Biology and the Future of Man. Committee on Science and Public Policy, National Academy of Sciences. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1970. 

Huxley, Julian. New Bottles for New Wine: Essays. London: Chatto and Windus, 1957. 

Kennedy, D. (ed.). Cellular and Organismal Biology. A Scientific American Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1974. 

*Kornberg, A. DNA Replication. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1980. 

* Miller, S.L. and Orgel, L. The Origins of Life on Earth. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall, 1974. 

Orgel, L. Origins of Life. New York: Wiley, 1973. 

*Roemer, A.S. “Major Steps inVertebrate Evolution.” Science, Vol. 158, p. 1629, 1967. 

* Roland, Jean Claude. Atlas of Cell Biology. Boston: Little, Brown, 1977. 

Sagan, Carl. “Life.” Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1970 and later printings. 

* Sagan, Carl and Salpeter, E.E. “Particles, Environments and Hypothetical Ecologies in the Jovian Atmosphere.” A strophysical 
Journal Supplement, Vol. 32, p. 737, 1976. 

Simpson, G.G. The Meaning of Evolution. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960. 

Thomas, Lewis. Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher. New York: Bantam Books, 1974. 

* Watson, J.D. Molecular Biology of the Gene. New York: W.A. Benjamin, 1965. 

Wilson, E.O., Eisner, T., Briggs, W.R., Dickerson, R.E., Metzenberg, R.L., O’Brien, R.D., Susman, M., and Boggs, W.E. Life on 
Earth. Stamford: Sinauer Associates, 1973. 

CHAPTER 3 

Abell, George and Singer, B. (eds.). Science and the Paranormal. New York: Scribner’s, 1980. 

*Beer, A. (ed.). Vistas in Astronomy: Kepler, Vol. 18. London: Pergamon Press, 1975. 

Caspar, Max. Kepler. London: Abelard'Schuman, 1959. 

Cumont, Franz. Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans. New York: Dover, 1960. 

Koestler, Arthur. The Sleepwalkers. New York:Grosset and Dunlap, 1963. 

Krupp, E.C. (ed.). In Search of Ancient Astronomies. New York: Doubleday, 1978. 

Pannekoek, Anton. A History of Astronomy. London: George Allen, 1961. 

Rey, H.A. The Stars: A New Way to See Them, third edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970. 

Rosen, Edward. Kepler’s Somnium. Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967' 

Standen, A. Forget Your Sun Sign. Baton Rouge: Legacy, 1977' 

Vivian, Gordon and Raiter, Paul. The Great Kivas of Chaco Canyon. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1965. 

CHAPTER 4 

Chapman, C. The Inner Planets. New York: Scribner’s, 1977. 

Charney, J.G. (ed.). Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences, 
1979. 

Cross, Charles A. and Moore, Patrick. The Atlas of Mercury. New York: Crown Publishers, 1977. 

*Delsemme, A.H. (ed.). Comets, Asteroids, Meteorites. Toledo: University of Ohio Press, 1977. 



Ehrlich, Paul R., Ehrlich, Anne EL and Holden, John P. E coscience: Population, Resources, Environment. San Francisco: W.H. 
Freeman, 1977 * 

* Dunne, James A. and Burgess, Eric. The Voyage of Mariner 10. NASA SP-424' Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 1978. 

* EEBaz, Farouk. “The Moon After Apollo.” Icarus, Vol. 25, p. 495, 1975. 

Goldsmith, Donald (ed.). Scientists Confront Velikovsky. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977. 

Kaufmann, William J. Planets and Moons. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1979. 

* Keldysh, M.V. “Venus Exploration with the Venera 9 and Venera 10 Spacecraft.” Icarus, Vol. 30, p. 605, 1977. 

* Kresak, F. “The Tunguska Object: A Fragment of Comet Encke?” Bulletin of the Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovakia, Vol. 

29, p. 129, 1978. 

Krinov, E.F. Giant Meteorites. New York: Pergamon Press, 1966. 

Fovelock, F. Gaia. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979. 

* Marov, M. Ya. “Venus: A Perspective at the Beginning of Planetary Exploration.” Icarus, Vol. 16, p. 115, 1972. 

Masursky, Harold, Colton, C.W. and ELBaz, Farouk (eds.). Apollo Over the Moon: A View from Orbit. NASA SP'362. 

Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978. 

* Mulholland, J.D. and Calame, O. “Funar Crater Giordano Bruno: AD 1178 Impact Observations Consistent with Baser 
Ranging Results.” Science, Vol. 199, p. 875, 1978. 

‘Murray, Bruce and Burgess, Eric. Flight to Mercury. New York:Columbia University Press, 1977. 

* Murray, Bruce, Greeley, R. and Malin, M. Earthlike Planets. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1980. 

Nicks, Oran W. (ed.). This Island Earth. NASA SP-250. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970. 

Oberg, James. “Tunguska: Collision with a Comet.” Astronomy, Vol. 5, No. 12, p. 18, December 1977. 

* Pioneer Venus Results. Science, Vol. 203, No. 4382, p. 743, February 23, 1979. 

* Pioneer Venus Results. Science, Vol. 205, No. 4401, p. 41, July 6, 1979. 

Press, Frank and Siever, Raymond. Earth, second edition. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1978. 

Ryan, Peter and Pesek, F. Solar System. New York: Viking, 1979. 

* Sagan, Carl, Toon, O.B. and Pollack, J.B. “Anthropogenic Albedo Changes and the Earth’s Climate.’’Science, Vol. 206, p. 1363, 

1979. 

Short, Nicholas M., Bowman, Paul D., Freden, Stanley C. and Finsh, William A. Mission to Earth: LANDSAT Views the World. 

NASA SP-360. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976. 

Skylab Explores the Earth. NASA SP-380. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977. 

The Solar System. A Scientific American Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1975. 

Urey, H.C. “Cometary Collisions in Geological Periods.” Nature, Vol. 242, p. 32, March 2, 1973. 

Vitaliano, Dorothy B. Legends of the Earth. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973. 

‘Whipple, F.F. Comets. New York:John Wiley, 1980. 


CHAPTER 5 

* American Geophysical Union. Scientific Results of the Viking Project. Reprinted from the Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 

82, p. 3959, 1977. 

Batson, R.M., Bridges, T.M. and Inge, J.F. Atlas of Mars: The 1:5,000,000 Map Series. NASA SP-438. Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1979. 

Bradbury, Ray, Clarke, Arthur C., Murray, Bruce, Sagan, Carl, and Sullivan, Walter. Mars and the Mind of Man. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1973. 

Burgess, Eric. To the Red Planet. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978. 

Gerster, Georg. Grand Design: The Earth from Above. New York: Paddington Press, 1976. 

Glasstone, Samuel. Book of Mars. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1968. 

Goddard, Robert H. Autobiography. Worcester, Mass.: A.]. St. Onge, 1966. 

* Goddard, Robert H. Papers. Three volumes. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. 

Hartmann, W.H. and Raper, O. The New Mars: The Discoveries of Mariner 9. NASA SP-337. Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1974 - 

Hoyt, William G. Lowell and Mars. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1976. 

Fowell, Percival. Mars. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1896. 

Fowell, Percival. Mars and Its Canals. New York: Macmillan, 1906. 

Fowell, Percival. Mars as an Abode of Life. New York: Macmillan, 1908. 

Mars as Viewed by Mariner 9. NASA SP-329. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1974' 



352 —For Further Reading 


Morowitz, Harold. The Wine of Life. New York: St. Martin’s, 1979. 

* Mutch, Thomas A., Arvidson, Raymond E., Head, James W., Jones, Kenneth L. and Saunders, R. Stephen. The Geology of 
Mars. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976. 

* Pittendrigh, Colin S., Vishniac, Wolf and Pearman, J.P.T. (eds.). Biology and the Exploration of Mars. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, 1966. 

The Martian Landscape. Viking Lander Imaging Team, NASA SP-425. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1978. 

* Viking 1 Mission Results. Science , Vol. 193, No. 4255, August 1976. 

* Viking 1 Mission Results. Science , Vol. 194, No. 4260, October 1976. 

* Viking 2 Mission Results. Science , Vol. 194, No. 4271, December 1976. 

*“The Viking Mission and the Question of Life on Mars.” Journal of Molecular Evolution, Vol. 14, Nos. T3. Berlin: Springer- 
Verlag, December 1979. 

Wallace, Alfred Russel. Is Mars Habitable? London: Macmillan, 1907. 

Washburn, Mark. Mars At Last! New York: G.P. Putnam, 1977- 

chapter 6 

* Alexander, A.L.O. The Planet Saturn. New York: Dover, 1980. 

Bell, Arthur E. Christiaan Huygens and the Development of Science in the Seventeenth Century. New York: Longman’s Green, 1947- 
Dobell, Clifford. Anton Van Leeuwenhoek and His “Little Animals.” New York: Russell and Russell, 1958. 

Duyvendak, J.J.I Cliina’s Discovery of Africa. London: Probsthain, 1949. 

* Gehrels, T. (ed.). Jupiter: Studies of the Interior, Atmosphere, Magnetosphere and Satellites. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 

1976. 

Haley, K.H. The Dutch in the Seventeenth Century. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1972. 

Huizinga, Johan. Dutch Civilization in the Seventeenth Century. New York: F. Ungar, 1968. 

* Hunten, Donald (ed.). The Atmosphere of Titan. NASA SP-340. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973. 

* Hunten, Donald and Morrison, David (eds.). The Saturn System. NASA Conference Publication 2068. Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1978. 

Huygens, Christiaan. The Celestial Worlds Discover’d: Conjectures Concerning the Inhabitants, Planets and Productions of the 
Worlds in the Planets. London: Timothy Childs, 1798. 

* “First Scientific Results from Voyager 1.” Science, Vol. 204, No. 4396, June 1, 1979. 

* “First Scientific Results from Voyager 2.” Science, Vol. 206, No. 4421, p. 927, November 23, 1979. 

Manuel, Frank E. A Portrait of Isaac Newton. Washington: New Republic Books, 1968. 

Morrison, David and Samz, Jane. Voyager to Jupiter. NASA SP-439. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980. 
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilization in China, Vol. 4, Part 3, pp. 468-553. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1970. 

* Palluconi, F.D. and Pettengill, G.H. (eds.). The Rings of Saturn. NASA SP-343. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 1974- 

Rimmel, Richard O., Swindell, William and Burgess, Eric. Pioneer Odyssey. NASA SP- 349. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1977- 

* “Voyager 1 Encounter with Jupiter and Io.” Nature, Vol. 280, p. 727, 1979. 

Wilson, Charles H. The Dutch Republic and the Civilization of the Seventeenth Century. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1968. 
Zumthor, Paul. Daily Life in Rembrandt’s Holland. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1962. 

CHAPTER 7 

Baker, Howard. Persephone’s Cave. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1979. 

Berendzen, Richard, Hart, Richard and Seeley, Daniel. Man Discovers the Galaxies. New York: Science History Publications, 

1977. 

Farrington, Benjamin. Greek Science. London: Penguin, 1953. 

Finley, M.I. Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology. London: Chatto, 1980. 

Frankfort, H., Frankfort, H.A., Wilson, J.A. and Jacobsen, T. Before Philosophy: The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man. 

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946. 

Heath, T. Aristarchus of Samos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1913. 

Heidel, Alexander. The Babylonian Genesis. Chicago; University of Chicago Press, 1942. 

Hodges, Henry. Technology in the Ancient World. London: Allan Lane, 1970. 

Jeans, James. The Growth of Physical Science, second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951. 



For Further Reading — 353 


Lucretius. The Nature of the Universe. New York: Penguin, 195 L 

Murray, Gilbert. Five Stages of Greek Religion. New York: Anchor Books, 1952. 

Russell, Bertrand, A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1945. 

Sarton, George. A History of Science, Vols. 1 and 2. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1952, 1959. 

Schrodinger, Erwin. Nature and the Greeks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1954' 

Vlastos, Gregory. Plato’s Universe. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1975. 

CHAPTER 8 

Barnett, Lincoln. The Universe and Dr. Einstein. New York: Sloane, 1956. 

Bernstein, Jeremy. Einstein. New York: Viking, 1973. 

Borden, M. and Graham, O. L. Speculations on American History. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1977. 

* Bussard, R.W. “Galactic Matter and Interstellar Flight.” A stronautica Acta, Vol. 6, p. 179, 1960. 

Cooper, Margaret. The Inventions of Leonardo Da Vinci. New York: Macmillan, 1965. 

* Dole, S.H. “Formation of Planetary Systems by Aggregation: A Computer Simulation.” Icarus, Vol. 13, p. 494, 1970. 

Dyson, F.J. “Death of a Project.” [Orion.] Science, Vol. 149, p. 141, 1965. 

Gamow, George. Mr. Tompkins in Paperback. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965. 

Hart, Ivor B. Mechanical Investigations of Leonardo Da Vinci. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963. 

Hoffman, Banesh. Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel. New York: New American Library, 1972. 

* Isaacman, R. and Sagan, Carl. “Computer Simulation of Planetary Accretion Dynamics: Sensitivity to Initial Conditions.” 
Icarus, Vol. 31, p.510, 1977' 

Lieber, Lillian R. and Lieber, Hugh Gray. The Einstein Theory of Relativity. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1961. 
MacCurdy, Edward (ed.). Notebooks of Leonardo. Two volumes. New York: Reynal and Hitchcock, 1938. 

* Martin, A.R. (ed.). “Project Daedalus: Final Report of the British Interplanetary Society Starship Study.” Journal of the British 

Interplanetary Society, Supplement, 1978. 

McPhee, John A. The Curve of Binding Energy. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974' 

* Mermin, David. Space and Time and Special Relativity. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968. 

Richter, Jean-Paul. Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci. New York: Dover, 1970. 

Schlipp, Paul A. (ed.). Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, third edition. Two volumes. La Salle, 111.: Open Court, 1970. 

CHAPTER 9 

Eddy, John A. The New Sun: The Solar Results from Skylab. NASA SP'402. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 1979. 

* Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R.B. and Sands, M. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1963. 
Gamow, George. One, Two, Three... Infinity. New York: Bantam Books, 1971. 

Kasner, Edward and Newman, James R. Mathematics and the Imagination. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1953. 

Kaufmann, William J. Stars and Nebulas. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1978. 

Maffei, Paolo. Monsters in the Sky. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1980. 

Murdin, P. and Allen, D. Catalogue of the Universe, New York: Crown Publishers, 1979. 

*Shklovskii, I.S. Stars: Their Birth, Life and Death San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1978. 

Sullivan, Walter. Black Holes: The Edge of Space, The End of Time. New York: Doubleday, 1979. 

Weisskopf, Victor. Knowledge and Wonder, second edition. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1979. 

Excellent introductory college textbooks on astronomy include: 

Abell, George. The Realm of the Universe. Philadelphia: Saunders College, 1980. 

Berman, Louis and Evans, J.C. Expltmng the Cosmos. Boston: Little, Brown, 1980. 

Hartmann, William K. Astronomy: The Cosmic Journey. Belmont, Cal.: Wadsworth, 1978. 

Jastrow, Robert and Thompson, Malcolm H. A stnmomy: Fundamentals and Frontiers, third edition. New York: Wiley, 1977. 
Pasachoff, Jay M. and Kutner, M.L. University Astronomy. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1978. 

Zeilik, Michael. Astronomy: The Evolving Universe. New York: Harper and Row, 1979. 

CHAPTER 10 


Abbott, E. Flatland, New York: Barnes and Noble, 1963. 

* Arp, Halton. “Peculiar Galaxies and Radio Sources.” Science, Vol. 151, p. 1214, 1966. 

Bok, Bart and Bok, Priscilla. The Milky Way, fourth edition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1974' 



354 — For Further Reading 


Campbell, Joseph. The Mythic Image. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974. 

Ferris, Timothy. Galaxies. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1980. 

Ferris, Timothy. The Red Limit: The Searchby Astronomers for the Edge of the Universe. New York: William Morrow, 1977. 

Gingerich, Owen (ed.). Cosmology + 1. A Scientific American Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1977. 

* Jones, B. “The Origin of Galaxies: A Review of Recent Theoretical Developments and Their Confrontation with Observa- 

tion.” Reviews of Modem Physics, Vol. 48, p. 107, 1976. 

Kaufmann, William J. Black Holes and Warped Space-Time. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1979. 

Kaufmann, William J. Galaxies and Quasars. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1979. 

Rothenberg, Jerome (ed.). Technicians of the Sacred. New York: Doubleday, 1968. 

Silk, Joseph. The Big Bang: The Creation and Evolution of the Universe. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1980. 

Sproul, Barbara C. Primal Myths: Creating the World. New York: Harper and Row, 1979. 

* Stockton, A.N. “The Nature of QSO Red Shifts.” AstrophysicalJournal Vol. 223, p. 747, 1978. 

Weinberg, Steven. The First Three Minutes: A Modem View of the Origin of the Universe. New York: Basic Books, 1977. 

* White, S.D.M. and Rees, M.J. “Core Condensation in Heavy Halos: A Two-Stage Series for Galaxy Formation and 

Clustering.” MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSociety, Vol. 183, p. 341, 1978. 

CHAPTER 11 

Human Ancestors. Readings from Scientific American. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1979. 

Koestler, Arthur. The Act of Creation. New York: Macmillan, 1964. 

Leaky, Richard E. and Lewin, Roger. Origins. New York: Dutton, 1977. 

* Lehninger, Albert L. Biochemistry. New York: Worth Publishers, 1975. 

* Norris, Kenneth S. (ed.). Whales, Dolphins and Porpoises. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. 

* Payne, Roger and McVay, Scott. “Songs of Humpback Whales.” Science, Vol. 173, p. 585, August 1971. 

Restam, Richard M. The Brain. New York: Doubleday, 1979. 

Sagan, Carl. The Dragons of Eden: Speculations on the Evolution of Human Intelligence. New York: Random House, 1977. 

Sagan, Carl, Drake, F.D., Druyan, A., Ferris, T., Lomberg, J., and Sagan, L.S. Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar 
Record. New York: Random House, 1978. 

* Stryer, Lubert. Biochemistry. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1975. 

The Brain. A Scientific American Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1979. 

* Winn, Howard E. and Olla, Bori L. (eds.). Behavior of Marine Animals, Vol. 3: Cetaceans. New York: Plenum, 1979. 

CHAPTER 12 

Asimov, Isaac. Extraterrestrial Civilizations. New York: Fawcett, 1979. 

Budge, E. A. Wallis. Egyptian Language: Easy Lessons in Egyptian Hieroglyphics. New York: Dover Publications, 1976. 
de Laguna, Frederica. Under Mount St. Elias: History and Culture ofYacutatTlingit. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1972. 

Emmons, G.T. The Chilkat Blanket New York: Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, 1907. 

Goldsmith, D. and Owen, T. The Search for Life in the Universe. Menlo Park: Benjamin/Cummings, 1980. 

Klass, Philip. UFOs Explained. New York: Vintage, 1976. 

Krause, Aurel. The Tkngit Indians. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1956. 

La Perouse, Jean F. de G., comte de. Voyage de la PerouseAutourdu Monde (four volumes). Paris: Imprimerie de la 
Republique, 1797. 

Mallove, E., Forward, R.L., Paprotny, Z., and Lehmann, J. “Interstellar Travel and Communication: A Bibliography.” 

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, Vol. 33, No. 6, 1980. 

* Morrison, P., Billingham, J. andWolfe, J. (eds.). The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. New York: Dover, 1979. 

* Sagan, Carl (ed.). Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence (CETI). Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1973. 

Sagan, Carl and Page, Thornton (eds.). UFOs: A Scientific Debate. New York: W.W. Norton, 1974. 

Shklovskii, I. S. and Sagan, Carl. Intelligent Life in the Universe. New York: Dell, 1967. 

Story, Ron. The Space-Gods Revealed: A Close Look at the Theories of Erich von Daniken. New York: Harper and Row, 1976. 

Vaillant, George C. Aztecs of Mexico. New York: Pelican Books, 1965. 

CHAPTER 13 

Drell, Sidney D. and Von Hippel, Frank. “Limited Nuclear War.” Scientific American, Vol. 235, p. 2737, 1976. 



For Further Reading - 355 


Dyson, F. Disturbing the Universe. New York: Harper and Row, 1979* 

Glasstone, Samuel (ed.). The Effects of Nuclear Weapons. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1964' 
Humboldt, Alexander von. Cosmos. Five volumes. London: Bell, 1871 - 
Murchee, G. The Seven Mysteries of Life. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1978. 

Nathan, Otto and Norden, Heinz (eds.). Einstein on Peace. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1960. 

Perrin, Noel. Giving Up the Gun: Japan s Reversion to the Sword 1543G879. Boston: David Godine, 1979. 

Prescott, James W. “Body Pleasure and the Origins of Violence.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, p. 10, November 1975. 

* Richardson, Lewis F. The Statistics of Deadly Quarrels. Pittsburgh: Boxwood Press, 1960. 

Sagan, Carl. The Cosmic Connection. An Extraterrestrial Perspective. New York: Doubleday, 1973. 

World Armaments and Disarmament. SIPRI Yearbook, 1980 and previous years, Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute. New York: Crane Russak and Company, 1980 and previous years. 

APPENDICES 

Courant, Richard and Robbins, Herbert. What Is Mathematics ? An Elementary Approach to Ideas and Methods. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1969. 



INDEX 


Abbott, Edwin, 262, 263 
Abu Simbel, 47 

Adams, R. E. W., Maya canals discov- 
ered, illus. 3404 
Aeschylus, 336 
Affection, need for, 3304 
Africa: circumnavigated by Phoeni- 
cians, 15, 183 n.; Dutch voyages 
around, 141 

Air: atoms in, 221; Empedocles’ experi¬ 
ment with, 179-80 

Aircraft, Leonardo’s designs, 203, 207, 
illus. 203 

Air pollution, 98, 102 

Alaska, La Perouse visits, 303, illus. 304 

Albedo effect, 103 n., 133 

Albertus Magnus, 137 

Alchemy, 65 n., 220-1 

Alcmaeon, 183-4 n. 

Alexander the Great, 18, illus. 20 
Alexandria, 15, 18; Eratosthenes’ ob¬ 
servations at, 14-15, illus. 16; Li¬ 
brary, 14, 18-20, 50, 62, 188, 281, 
333-7, illus. 20, 21, 333; science in, 
14-16, 19-20 
Algae, blue-green, 32 
Alice in Wonderland , influence of grav¬ 
ity on matter and light, example, 248, 
illus. 236 

Aliens (science fiction), 40, 41, illus. 40, 

41 

Allison, John: cells, paintings, illus. 
36-7; hypothetical world, painting, 
illus. 312; nebula (gas cloud sur¬ 
rounding supernova explosion, 
painting, illus. 11; Orion Nebula, 
paintings, illus. 12,13; Orion Nebula, 
interior, painting, illus. 13; Orion 
Nebula, Trapezium, painting, illus. 
13; Pluto and Charon, painting, illus. 
14; pulsar at center of supernova 
remnant, painting, illus. 11 
Allison, John, and Adolf Schaller, 
black dust cloud and stars embedded 
in gaseous nebulosities, painting, 
illus. 10; red giant star and spiral arm, 
painting, illus. 10 

Allison, John, Adolf Schaller, and Rick 
Sternbach, Saturn, model, illus. 14 
Alpha Centauri, 198, 203, 210 
Amalthea, satellite of Jupiter, 158, illus. 
156 

Amino acids, 39 

Amsterdam Town Hall, 140-1; sculp¬ 
ture, illus. 140 

Anasazi people: astronomical knowl¬ 
edge, 47; buildings, illus. 48, 49; rock 
painting of supernova, 237, illus. 232 


Anatomy, Alcmaeon’s discoveries, 

183-4 m 

Anaxagoras, 181-3, 225 
Anaximander of Miletus, 177'9, 317 
Ancient astronauts, see Extraterrestrial 
visitors 

Andromeda, constellation, 8, 191, 198, 
207; Great Galaxy in, see M31 
Angkor Wat, 47 

Animals: domestication of, 26, 27; in¬ 
telligence of, 284 

Antarctica, Vishniac’s studies of mi¬ 
crobiology, 123-4 
Antoku, legend of, 24-5 
Antoniadi, E. M., Mars, drawing, illus. 
109 

Apianus, Petrus, Astronomicum Cae- 
sarium , illus. 44, 55 
Apollo 11, illus. 113 
Apollo 14, illus. 316 
Apollo 16, astronauts, 86, illus. 86 
Apollonius of Perga, 19, 62 
Aquarius, constellation, illus. 232, 281 
Aranda people, Great Father myth, 257 
Archimedes, 19,52 n., 167,181 n., 219, 
335 n. 

Arecibo Interstellar Message, 297, illus. 

290 

Arecibo Observatory, 297, illus. 297 
Argon atoms, 230 

Aristarchus of Samos, 20, 188-90, 193, 
200, 307, 337 

Aristotle, 18, 53,79,177,184 m, 186-8 
Arithmetic base 5 or 10, 282 
Armitage, Frank, cells, paintings, illus. 
36-7 

Arp, Halton, 255, 256 
Artificial selection, 26-7 
Assyrian account of the creation of 
Man, 269 
Asteroids, 87 

Astrology, 48-51, 57, 179 n., illus. 54, 
55,282, 284; Brahe’s interest in, 65-6 
n.; Newton’s interest in, 68 
Astronomers, amateur, epitaph, 195 
Astronomy, 51-3, 56-71; Chinese, 

186-7; early, 47-8, illus. 54, 55; 
Greek, 178, 182-3, 188-9; symbols 
on flags, 50 

Atmosphere of Earth: carbon dioxide 
in, 102; greenhouse effect in, 133; 
oxygen and nitrogen in, 32; pollu¬ 
tion, 98, 102; upper, illus. 329 
Atomic theory of Democritus, 180 
Atomic weapons, see Nuclear weapons 
Atoms, 218-21, 223-4, illus. 218; in in¬ 
terstellar gas, 233; of marcasite, mag¬ 
nified, illus. 220; nature of, 218; 


nuclei of, 218, 223-4, 239; in stars, 
233 

Augustine, Saint, 178 
Australia, Dutch expeditions to, 141 
Aztec chronicle, The History of the 
Kingdoms , 291 

Aztecs, 175, 187, 231-2 n.; Spanish 
conquest of, 305-7, 311, illus. 305, 
306; sun worship, 243 n. 

Babylonia: astronomy and astrology, 
49, 79; creation myth, 177 
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 307 
Bacilli in oxygen-free environment, 52 
Banin, A., 125, 126 
Barnard’s Star, 207, 210-11 
Barrow, Isaac, 69 
Bayeux Tapestry, illus. 76 
Behavior, see Human behavior 
Bernoulli, Johann, 70-1 
Bernstein, People’s Book of Natural Sci¬ 
ence , 199 
Berossus, 20 
Beta Andromedae, 198 
Beta T aurid meteor shower, 78 
Bhagavad Gita , 73 

Big Bang, 21, 218, 247, 252, 254, 337; 
formation of universe, 246,247,256, 
257, 259 

Big Dipper: computer-generated 

images, 196-7, illus. 196, 197; inter¬ 
pretations of, illus. 46, 47 
Bikini, thermonuclear weapons test, 
321-2 

Bits of information (binary digits), 270; 
used by bacteria and amoebae, 273; 
used by whales, 271; in brains, 278; 
in libraries, 281 

Black-body background radiation, 256 
Black dust clouds, illus. 10, 11; see also 
Interstellar dust 
Black dwarf stars, 232 
Black holes, 10, 239, 241-2, 265, 267, 
illus. 238; in galaxies, 249, 255; qua¬ 
sars related to, 250 

Blood cells, 31,34, illus. 34, 35; red, 35, 
illus. 34, 35; white, illus. 34, 35 
Blue-shift spectra, 255, 260 
Bohr, Niels, 347 
Book of Prince Huai Nan, 78 
“Book of the Stars and Constellations” 
(Suwar Razi), illus. 279 
Books, 279, 281-2, illus. 279-81 
Brachistochrone problem, 70 
Brahe, Tycho, 70,147 n., 237, illus. 78; 
on astrology and alchemy, 65-6 n.; 
Kepler with, 58-62; supernova ob¬ 
served by, 234 



358 - Index 


Brain, 276-9, illus. 276-7; cerebral con 
tex, 277-9, illus. 276; corpus callo- 
sum, 278; neurons, 277, 278, illus. 
278; R-complex, 276-7, 279, 326, 
331 

Brain library: human, 276, 278; of 
whale, 273 

Brainstem, 276, illus. 278 
British Interplanetary Society, 203 
Bruno, Giordano, 86, 143, 147, 189, 
265 n. 

Buddha, 183 n. 

Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte 
de, 27-8 n. 

Burke, Bernard, 159 
Burroughs, Edgar Rice, John Carter 
novels, 110-11, illus. 110 
Bussard, R. W., interstellar ramjet, 206, 
207 

Calame, Odile, 85, 86 
Calculus, see Differential calculus 
Calculus of variations, 70 
Calendars, early astronomical, 97 
Callisto, satellite of Jupiter, illus. 96, 
148, 160, 161 

Cambrian explosion, 32-3, 38 n., 300 
Camel, constellation (Camelopardalis), 
illus. 279 

Cancer, constellation, illus. 283 
Canterbury monks, lunar impact seen 
by, 85, 86 
Carbohydrates, 33 

Carbon: atom, 220, 233; atomic nu¬ 
cleus, 220, 224; life associated with, 

126-7 

Carbon dioxide, 33; in atmosphere of 
Earth, 102 

Cartier, Edd, alien, drawing, illus. 40 
Casa Bonita, N.M., illus. 48 
Casa Rincafiada, N.M., illus. 48, 49 
Cassiopeia A, 242 

Catholic Church: and Copernicus, 53; 

and Galileo, 141,142; and Kepler, 59 
Celichius, Andreas, 78 
Cells, 34-5, illus. 36-7; animal, 31; nu¬ 
cleus of, 34, illus. 36-7; origin of, 31; 
plant, 31; work of, 34 
Centaurus A, galaxy (NGC 5128), illus. 
251 

Cerebral cortex, 277-9, illus. 276 
Chaco Canyon, N.M., 47 
Champollion, Jean Francois, 337; 
Egyptian hieroglyphics studied, 293— 
4; 296, 303 n.; portrait, illus. 292 
Chaos, Greek concept, 175 
Charon, satellite of Pluto, 11, illus. 14 
Chemical elements, see Elements, 
chemical 
Chichen Itzta, 47 

China: ancient culture, 175; astronomy, 
186-7, 235; creation myth and image, 
258, illus. 257; Dutch voyage to, 141; 


explorations from, 147 n., illus. 147; 
printing and books, 281 
Chlorine atoms converted to argon 
atoms, 230 
Chloroplasts, 31 

Christianity, Earth and heaven in, 188 
Chryse, region on Mars, 119-21, 130, 
illus. 121,126, 130, 132,133 
Chuang Tzu, 195 
Cicero, 52 n., 184 
Circinius X-2, 242 

Cleopatra, name in hieroglyphics, 294, 
29 6, illus. 296 

Cleopatra’s Needle, New York, 98 
Clepsydra, 179, illus. 179 
Clogks, nautical, 145 
Clube, S., 252 

Coignet, Leon, Champollion, portrait, 
illus. 292 

Colossi of Memnon, illus. 295 
Columbus, Christopher, 16-17, 188, 
508, 311,335, 345, illus. 208 
Comet Arend-Roland, 80 
Comet Encke, 78 

Comet Halley, 78-82, illus. 76, 77, 81, 

82 

Comet Humason, illus. 82 
Comet Ikeya-Seki, illus. 80 
Comet of 1556, illus. 79 
Comet of 1577, illus. 78 
Comets: collision with planets, 79, 82- 
83; fragments striking Earth, 75-7, 
79,82-3; gases in tails of, 80; meteors 
and meteorites as remnants of, 78; 
orbits of, 81-82; Spanish conquest of 
Aztecs preceded by comet, 307, illus. 
77; structure of, 76; Velikovsky’s hy¬ 
pothesis of encounters with planets, 
90-1; as warnings or prophecies, 
78-9, 307 

Comet West, illus. 12, 83 
Comte, Auguste, 93 
Confucius, 183 n. 

Constellations, 46, 196-7; in astrology, 
48; computer-generated images, 
196-7, illus. 196-8; apparent motion 
of planets through, illus. 50 
Copernicus, Nicholas, 57, 61, 62, 187— 
9, 200, 307, 335; astronomy, 53, 
145-6, illus. 56; portrait, illus. 52 
Cornell University, Laboratory for 
Planetary Studies, synthesis of or¬ 
ganic matter, 38-9, illus. 38 
Corpus callosum, 278 
Cortes, Hernan, 305-6, 311 
Cosa, Juan de la, map showing 
Americas, illus. 164 
Cosmic radiation, 246; detection of, 
235, 246, 261 

Cosmos: dimensions in measurement 
of, 5; evolution of, 337; Greek con¬ 
cept of, 18, 175, 184; human under¬ 
standing of, 332-3 


Crab Nebula, 234, 237, 283, illus. 233; 

pulsar at center of, 239 
Crab Supernova, 237 
Crane, Hart, 195 

Craters: on Earth, 87, 98 n.; on Jupiter’s 
satellites, illus. 96; on Mars, 83, 86 n., 
illus. 91,92; on Moon, 83,85-7,142, 
illus. 84, 85, 87; on planets, 83; on 
Venus, 95 

Creation myths and religious interpre¬ 
tations, 177 n., 257-9, illus. 257-60 
Croesus, King of Lydia, 177 
Cube, 263-4; hypercube (tesseract), 

264, illus. 262; two-dimensional rep¬ 
resentation, 264, illus. 262 
Cydonia, region on Mars, 119-20 
Cygnus, constellation, 226 
Cygnus Loop, illus. 233 
Cygnus X-l, 241-2, 250, illus. 238 
Cyril, Saint, 335-6 

Daedalus, Project, 203, 206, 207, illus. 
204, 205 

Darwin, Charles, 78 n.; The Origin of 
Species, 23, 28; theory of evolution, 
23, 27-9, 179, 339 
Davis, Don: death of the dinosaurs, 
painting, illus. 285; formation of the 
Moon, paintings, illus. 88-9; Io, sat¬ 
ellite of Jupiter, model, illus. 14; late 
stages of stellar evolution, painting, 
illus. 235; Olympus Mons, Mars, 
model, illus. 15; Viking lander, 
paintings, illus. 122 
Deimos, satellite of Mars, 83 
Democritus of Abdera, 28 n., 167, 
179-81, 188, 337; atomic theory, 

180; portrait on Greek bill, illus. 182 
Dendera, temple, 293, illus. 293; stars 
represented, illus. 239 
Deneh, 225 

Deoxyribonucleic acid, see DNA 
Descartes, Rene, 141, 142 n., 143 
Diamonds from comets and meteorites, 

77 

Differential calculus, 68, 70, 181 
Dinosaurs, 283, illus. 285 
Diogenes, 335 n. 

Dionysius of Thrace, 19 
Dixon, don, hypothetical planets, 
paintings, illus. 214 

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 31, 
34-5, illus. 36-7; double helix, 31, 
34, 273, illus. 36-7; and sexual activ¬ 
ity, 31-2 

DNA polymerase (enzyme), 34, illus. 

36-7 

Dodecahedron, 186-7, 350 
Dogon creation image, illus. 260 
Dollfus, Audouin, Titan, drawings, 
illus. 160 

Dolphins, sounds (songs) of, 271 
Dominic, Saint, 59 n. 



Index - 359 


Donne, John, 143 

Doppler effect, 252-6, illus. 252 -5 

Drake, Frank, equation, 299, 302 

Drosophila melanogaster, 29-30 

Durer, Albrecht, 305 

Dutch, see Holland 

Dutch East India Company, 140 

Earth 5, 7, 1142, 1448; approach to, 
from other planets, 11142; atoms in 
221; as center of universe, 51-3, illus. 
54, 56; circumference estimated by 
Eratosthenes, 15; circumnavigation 
of, 15; craters on, 87, 98 n.; curvature 
in Eratosthenes’ experiments, 1445; 
death of, 2314, illus. 228-9; evolu- 
tion of, 338; first map to show the 
Americas, illus. 164; life on, see Life 
on Earth; maps of the world, early, 
illus. 17, 164; orbit around Sun, 61, 
63, 82 n.; planetary fragments strik- 
ing, 75-7, 79, 82-3; planets colliding 
with, 79, 82-3; surface changes, 98, 
99, 102; view of, from Moon, illus. 

67, 344; views of, from space, 111- 
12, illus. 1004, 11448; voyages of 
discovery, 139-41, map, illus. 19; 
water on, affected by comets, 80 
Ebla, 336 

Eclipses, paper computers for study of, 
illus. 44, 54, 55 
Edda of Snorri Sturluson, 73 
Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley, 218 
Egge, David: hypothetical ice planet in 
Ring Nebula in Lyra, painting, illus. 
194; hypothetical planets, paintings, 
illus. 211, 215; hypothetical worlds, 
paintings, illus. 312 

Egypt: ancient civilization, 293-4, 296, 
illus. 293-6; astrology, 49; creation 
represented, illus. 260; hieroglyphics, 
293-4, 296, illus. 294, 296; incanta¬ 
tion to Ra, 217; maps, illus. 16 
Einstein, Albert, 198-201, 209, 242, 
330, 331, 334, 337; general theory of 
relativity, 206; “Miracle Year,” 1905, 
69; particle theory of light, 144 n.; 
portrait, illus. 199; special theory of 
relativity, 200-2 

Einstein High-Energy Astrophysical 
Observatory, deep sky survey, illus. 
263 

Electrons, 218-19, 221, 223 
Elements, chemical, 221, 224, illus. 221; 

rare, 221, 233; in stars, 233, 234 
Elements, four, 185, 220 
Emmons, G. T., 303 
Empedocles, 28 n., 179-80, 183 n. 
Encyclopaedia Galactica , 314, 315; hy¬ 
pothetical computer summaries of 
extraterrestrial civilizations, illus. 
313-14; hypothetical worlds, illus. 
312 


Endoplasmic reticulum, illus. 36-7 
Enuma Hish , 105 

Environment, human effects on, 103 
Enzymes, 34, 38 

Eratosthenes, 1447,145, 208, 334, 337 
Eridanus, constellation, deep sky sur¬ 
vey, illus. 263 
Erosion, 98, 99 

Eskimo creation myth, 167, 291 
Euclid, 19, 56,60,68,94,176,187,334 
Eudoxus, 181 n. 

Europa, satellite of Jupiter, 102, 149, 
151, 157, illus. 148, 150 
Euripides, 336 

Evolution: artificial selection, 26-7; 
Darwin’s theory of, 23, 27-9, 179; 
Greek theories on, 178; of human 
beings, 282-4, 338, 339; mutations 
in, 27, 30; natural selection, 27-30 
Explosions, extraterrestrial causes sug¬ 
gested, 75; see also Tunguska event 
Extraterrestrial visitors, 292, 307; pos¬ 
sible explorations by, 307-8, 311; see 
also Life on other worlds 

Farrington, Benjamin, 177, 186 
Fijian creation myth, 177 n. 

Fire in ancient cultures, 170-1 n. 

Five solids, see Solids 

Hags, astronomical symbols on, 50 

Hatland, 262-4 

Forests, destruction of, 103, 133 
Fossil fuels, 102, 133 
Fossils, 29, 30 

Fourier, Joseph, 292-3, 296 
Fourth dimension, 264—5, 267 
Fox, Paul, 110 
Franklin, Kenneth, 159 
Friedman, Imre, 124 

Galaxies, 5, 7, 8, 191, 193, 246-56, 
264-5; barred spiral, 247, 249, illus. 
7, 249; black holes in, 249, 255; 
Centaurus A (NGC 5128), illus. 251; 
clusters of, 247-8, illus. 2, 4; collid¬ 
ing, illus. 253; Doppler effect in, 

252- 6, illus. 252; elliptical, 247-9, 
illus. 247; elliptical, radio image, illus. 
262; exploding radio galaxy with 
symmetrical jets, illus. 5; formation 
of, 246-7; Hercules cluster, illus. 255; 
Local Group, 7-8, 247; M81, illus. 
248; M87, 249, illus. 250; NGC 
147, Ulus. 247; NGC 1300, illus. 249; 
NGC 2623, illus. 253; NGC 4038 
and 4039, illus. 253; NGC 5128, 
illus. 251; NGC 6251, 249; NGC 
7217, illus. 249; quasars in, 249-50, 
255, 256, illus. 6, 249; red shift in, 

253- 6; ring, 248, illus. 4; Seyfert’s 
Sextet, illus. 254; Sombrero, Ml04 
(NGC 4594), illus. 247; spiral, 8, 247, 
265, illus. 7, 248; spiral arms, 248, 


249, 251, 252, illus. 246-9; Stephan’s 
Quintet, illus. 254; Virgo cluster, 
247, 256-7; Whirlpool, M51 (NGC 
5194), illus. 246; see also M31; Milky 
Way 

Galen, 334 

Galileo Galilei, 60-1, 67, 142-3, 145, 
189, 231; and Catholicism, 141, 142; 
painting by Huens, illus. 141; tele¬ 
scope used by, 66, 91, 142; Venus 
observed by, 91-2, 96 
Gamma rays, 93, 235; burst of, and su¬ 
pernova remnant, 237, 238 
Gamow, George, 201 
Ganymede, satellite of Jupiter, 102, 

149, illus. 96, 159 
Garcilaso de la Vega, 317 
Gene library, 273, 276, illus. 273-5 
General theory of relativity, 206 
Genetic code, 31, 38 n. 

Geocentric hypothesis, 51-3, illus. 54, 
56 

Gervase of Canterbury, chronicle, 85 
Giacconi, Ricardo, 262 
Gilbert Islands, creation myth, 257 
Gingerich, Owen, 53 n. 

Giotto, Adoration of the Magi , 79, illus. 

77 

Giraffe brought to China, illus. 147 
Glaciers, 102 

Goddard, Robert Hutchings, 111, 232, 
337; portrait, illus. Ill; rockets de¬ 
signed by, 111 , illus. 112 
Gold, 224, 233; in alchemy, 220-1 
Goldstone Tracking Station, Jet Pro¬ 
pulsion Laboratory, studies of 
Venus, illus. 95 
Googol, 219-20 
Googolplex, 219-20 
Grasslands, destruction of, 103, 133 
Gravity: as distortion of space, 242; ac¬ 
celeration, due to on Earth, 206-7, 
240-1, illus. 237; influence on matter 
and light, Alice in Wonderland ex¬ 
ample, 240, illus. 236; Newton’s the¬ 
ory of, 69-70 

Great Bear, see Big Dipper 
Great Designer, idea of, 28-9 
Great Nebula in Orion, see Orion 
Nebula 

Greek civilization and science, 174-88, 
illus. 187, map 174; anatomy, 183-4 
n.; astronomy, 178, 182-3, 188-9; 
atomic theory, 180; decline of sci¬ 
ence, 186; evolution of animals, 178; 
mathematics, 181, 183-5; slavery in 
culture, 186-8; time measurement, 
177-8 

Greek literature in Alexandria Library, 
334 

Greenhouse effect in atmosphere: of 
Earth, 102, 133; of Venus, 97, 98 n. 
Grotius, Hugo, 142 



360 — Index 


GX339-4, star, 242 

Halley, Edmund, 69 n., 79, 90 n. 

Halley’s Comet, see Comet Halley 
Hals, Frans, 141 
Hand, significance of, 176 
Hardy, David, hypothetical planets, 
paintings, illus. 21345 
Harlow, Harry and Margaret, 331 
Harmony of the spheres, 63, 64 
Hartung, Jack, 85'6 
Heike, samurai clan, 25, illus. 25 
Heike crabs, 25-6, 29, illus. 25 
Helfand, David, 237 
Helicase (enzyme), illus. 36-7 
Helicopter, Leonardo’s design, illus. 

203 

Heliocentric hypothesis, 53, 57, 145-6, 
188-9, illus. 56 
Heliopause, 165 

Helium, 93, 220, 2244; atoms, 224; in 
stars, 233, 238; in sun, 225, 226, 230, 
231 

Hera, 173 

Heraion (Temple of Hera), Samos, 173, 
illus. 173 

Hercules cluster, of galaxies, illus. 255 
Heron of Alexandria, 19 
Herophilus of Chalcedon, 19, 184 n. 
Herschel, William, 190, 191 
Hertz, unit of sound frequency, 272 
Hexokinase (enzyme), 273 
Hieroglyphics, 293-4, 296, illus. 294, 

296 

Hinduism: cosmic death and rebirth in, 
258; Shiva’s dance of creation, 
bronze, 259, illus. 244 
Hipparchus, 19, 334 
Hippasus, 185 n. 

Hippocrates, 17 8-9, 181 
Hiroshima, nuclear attack, 321, 322 
Holbach, Paul Heinrich Dietrich, Baron 
von, 167 

Holland: in exploration and trade, 140— 
1, 143; as intellectual and artistic 
center, 141-3 
Hooke, Robert, 136 
Huai-nan Tzu, 258 
Hubble, Edwin, 193, 254, 256 
Huens, Jean-Leon: Albert Einstein, 
portrait, illus. 199; Galileo, painting, 
illus. 141; Isaac Newton, portrait, 
illus. 69; Johannes Kepler, portrait, 
illus. 52; Nicholas Copernicus, por¬ 
trait, illus. 52 
Huggins, William, 23, 80 
Huichol: painting of creation, illus. 258; 
painting of origin of Sun, illus. 259 
Human behavior: signs of improve¬ 
ment in, 332, 339; study of, 331-2 
Human beings: chemicals in body, 
127-8; effect on environment, 103; 
evolution of, 33, 282-4, 338, 339; 


future of, 339, 342, 345; intelligence 
of, 284; understanding of Cosmos, 
332-3 

Humason, Milton, 253-4, 256, 337; 
comet discovered by, illus. 82; por¬ 
trait, illus. 256 

Humboldt, Alexander von, 78 n. 

Hume, David, 79 

Huxley, T. H., 3, 23, 28 

Huygens, Christiaan, 105, 136, 137, 

143- 7, 291, 317, 337; astronomy, 
145-7, illus. 145, 230; brass plate for 
measuring distance to stars, 190, 191, 
illus. 190; inventions, 145; life on 
planets believed possible, 147,162 n.; 
microscope studies, 144, illus. 144; 
portrait, illus. 143; telescope studies, 

144- 5; theory of light, 143, 144 n. 
Huygens, Constantijn, 143 
Hydrogen, 218, 224-5; in atmosphere, 

38; in Milky Way, 250; in stars, 233, 
238; in Sun, 225, 226, 230, 231 
Hygnius, Caius, De S ideribus Tractatus , 
illus. 281 

Hypatia, 20, 335-6, 337 

Ice planet, hypothetical, in Ring Nebula 
in Lyra, painting, illus. 194 
Inca myth, 317 

India, ancient culture, 175, 187 
Indians, American, see Native Ameri¬ 
cans 

Indonesian Palintangatan astrological 
calendar, illus. 284 
Inertia, law of, 69 
Infinity, sign for, 220 
Infrared radiation, 93 
Integral calculus, 68, 70, 181 
Intelligence: of animals, 284; of human 
beings, 284; on other planets, 284-5 
Interstellar communication, radio, 272 
Interstellar dust, 24, 211-12, 225, illus. 
24 

Interstellar flight, 307-8, 310-11, 313— 
15; exploration and colonization, 

308, 310-11, illus. 310, 311; see also 
Spacecraft 

Interstellar gas, 233, 247 
Io, satellite of Jupiter, 102, 149, 156-9, 
illus. 148, 153-5; atmosphere, 158; 
map, illus. 164; model, illus. 14; vol¬ 
canoes, 157-8, illus. 153-5 
Ionia, culture and science, 175-7, 179, 
181-3,186-8; see also Greek civiliza¬ 
tion and science 
Ionian Sea, 174 n. 

Irrational numbers, 185 

Jacobson, Dov, interstellar space colo¬ 
nization, animated film, illus. 310, 
311 

Japanese creation myth, 177 n. 

Jesuits in China, 187 


Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 138, illus. 

139 

Job, Book of, 3, 45 
John Paul II, Pope, 142 n. 

Josephus, 78-9 

Judeo-Christian view of creation, illus. 
258 

Jupiter, 11, 38, 57, 83, 87, 102, 149, 
158-60; craters on satellites, illus. 96; 
Galilean satellites, 142, 149, 151; 
Great Red Spot, illus. 136, 152; hy¬ 
drogen in, 224 n.; interior, 159, 
model, illus. 156; life on, possible, 
300; liquid metallic hydrogen, 159; 
magnetic field, 159; orbit, 63; radio 
emission from, 159; rings, 90, 139, 
157, 159, illus. 162; satellites, 60, 61, 
83, 142, 210, 299, illus. 148; see also 
Amalthea, Callisto, Europa, Gany¬ 
mede, Io; a star that failed, 158; in 
Velikovsky’s hypothesis of comet, 
90, 91; Voyager 1 observations, 151, 
illus. 148, 150-6, 159-61; Voyager 2 
observations, 138-9, 149, 152, illus. 
136,150,159,162 

Jupiter-like planet, possible lifeforms 
on, 40-1, illus. 42-3 

Kant, Immanuel, 191 
Kamak: ruins, illus. 293; temple, 293-4, 
296, illus. 293 
Kasner, Edward, 219 
Kazantzakis, Nikos, 73 
Kepler, Johannes, 19 n., 45, 68, 113, 
142 n., 302, 334, 337; astronomy, 
51-2, 57-8, 60-4, 146; on comets, 
79; five Platonic solids, Cosmic Mys¬ 
tery, theory of, 57-8, 60, illus. 58; 
The Harmonies of the World , 63; laws 
of planetary motion, 61-4, 69, 70, 
illus. 62, 63; life and works, 56-67; 
mother accused of witchcraft, 65, 67; 
Newton influenced by, 69-71; por¬ 
trait, illus. 52; Somnium, 65-7; super¬ 
nova observed, 234, 237; third 
(harmonic) law, 63, 69, 70, 165, 211, 
251, illus. 63; with Tycho Brahe, 
58-62 

Keynes, John Maynard, on Newton, 68 
Kissinger, Henry, 326 
Koran, 23 

Krejanovsky, Judy, Big Dipper, inter¬ 
pretations of, illus. 46, 47 
Kuiper, Gerard Peter, 143 n., 160 
Kulik, L. A., illus. 74 
!Kung Bushmen, beliefs on Milky Way, 
172-3 

Kuo Shou-ching, 186-7 

Lao-tse, 183 n., 245 
La Perouse, Comte de, expedition to 
Alaska, 302-3, 307, illus. 304 
Large Magellanic Cloud, 237'8, illus. 
234 



Index - 361 


Laser retroreflectors on Moon, 86, Ulus. 

86 

Latitude, determination of, 145 
Leakey, Mary, 345 

Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 141, 143, 
144; microscope studies, 144 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 70 
Leo, constellation, computer-generated 
image, 197, illus. 198 
Leonardo da Vinci, 188, 203, 209, 337; 
bust, illus. 202; flying machines, de- 
signs for, 203, 207, illus. 203 
Libraries, 281-2; see also Alexandria, 
Library 

“Life of the Prophet” ( Daver Siyar-e 
Nabi), illus. 281 

Life on Earth, 24, 30-40, 122; in An¬ 
tarctica, Vishniac’s studies, 123-4; 
new forms after Cambrian explosion, 
32-3; origin of, 30-1; seen by visitors 
from other planets, 112; and sun¬ 
light, 234-5; views of, from space, 
111-12, illus. 114-18 
Life on other worlds, 11, 24, 238, 270, 
284-5, 298-302, 307-8, 310-11, 

313-15; Arecibo Interstellar Message 
to, illus. 290; attempts to communi¬ 
cate with, 296-302, illus. 297, 300-1; 
chemical composition of, 128; esti¬ 
mated number of advanced technical 
civilizations, 298-302; Huygens’ 
opinion of, 147, 162 n.; hypothetical 
computer summaries of advanced 
civilizations, illus. 313-14; intelli¬ 
gence, 284-5; possible lifeforms on 
Jupiter-like planet, 40-1, illus. 42-3; 
radio communication with, 285-7, 
297-8, illus. 290, 297; science and 
mathematics as common language, 
296-7; television transmission to, 
286-7, 289; on Titan, suggested, 162; 
Voyager spacecraft carries recorded 
messages to, 287, 289, illus. 288; see 
also extraterrestrial visitors; Mars 
Light: Doppler effect in, 253; Einstein’s 
theory of, 144 n.; Huygens’ theory of, 
143,144 n.; Newton’s discoveries on, 
68, 144 n.; red shift, 253, 261; in 
spectrum, 92-3;speed of, 5,198-202, 
207 

Light-years, 5, 198 
Lilienthal, Otto, 203 
Locke, John, 141 

Lomberg, Jon: advanced technical civi¬ 
lization rebuilds its solar system, 
painting, illus. 308; barred spiral gal¬ 
axy, painting, illus. 7; The Great 
Chain of Being, painting, illus. 319; 
hypothetical summaries of extrater¬ 
restrial civilizations, illus. 313-14; 
hypothetical world, painting, illus. 
312; infinite regression from one 
universe to another, painting, illus. 


266; Milky Way, Ulus. 7; Milky Way 
(The Backbone of Night), painting, 
illus. 166; Milky Way, schematic 
representation, illus. 191; spiral gal¬ 
axy, painting, illus. 7 
London, causes of death in 1632, 49, 
illus. 51 

Long, Knox, 237 

Longitude, determination of, 145 
Louis XVI, 302 

Lowell, Percival, 107, 125, 134-5, 151, 
illus. 107, 108; studies of Mars, 108— 
12, illus. 109 

Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., 

108 

Luther, Martin, 53 
Lymphocytes, illus. 35-7 

M13, globular cluster, Arecibo Inter¬ 
stellar Message transmitted to, 297, 
illus. 290 

M31, Great Galaxy, 8, 191, 193, 198, 
207, 247, 265, illus. 246 
M81, galaxy, illus. 248 
M87, galaxy, 249, illus. 250 
M104, see Sombrero Galaxy 
Maclaurin, Colin, 291-2 
MacLean, Paul, 276 
Magellan, Ferdinand, 15, 238 
Magellanic Cloud: Large, 237-8, 243, 
illus. 234; Small, 238 
M ahapurana Jinasena , 245 
Mankind, see Human beings 
Marduk, 176 

Mariner 9, observations of Mars, 110, 
117,118,125, illus. 91,92,119,120, 
128, 129 

Mariner Valley, Mars (Vallis Marin- 
eris), Ulus. 119 

Mars, 11, 57, 60, 99, 105-35, illus. 106; 
atmosphere, 79, 112, 113, 117; bio¬ 
logical studies, 119, 122-3, 125, 128; 
canals, 107-12,134-5,151, illus. 107, 
109; craters, 83, 86 n., 87, illus. 91, 
92, 121; crescent, illus. 130; dust 
storms, 117, 125; environment, sim¬ 
ulated, 113; first photographs from 
surface, 121, illus. 131; future inves¬ 
tigations of, 129—35; Huygens’ studies 
of, 145; Kasei Vallis, illus. 121; life 
on, possible, 106-10, 112, 121-2, 
126,128,132-3, 300; Lowell’s studies 
of, 108-12; Mariner 9 observations, 
110,117,118, 125, illus. 91,92, 119, 
120,128,129;motion, 52-3, illus. 50, 
56; Noctis Labyrinthus, Ulus. 121; 
North Polar Cap, illus. 128, 130; 
Olympus Mons, illus. 130, model, 
Ulus. 15, 120; orbit, 62, 63; polar 
caps, future studies of, 132-3; pyra¬ 
mids, 130 n., illus. 129; rovers, 130, 
illus. 134; satellites, 60-1; see also 
Deimos, Phobos; in science fiction, 


107, 110-11,129, illus. 110;seasonal 
changes, Ulus. 106; soil sample col¬ 
lection and study, 124-6, 129, illus. 
123, 125, 134; Soviet explorations 
(Mars 3 and 6), 113, 117; surface 
changes, 102; terraforming, 133-5; 
Thersis plateau, linear markings, 
illus. 129; Viking studies of, 117-29; 
see also Viking mission to Mars; vol¬ 
canoes, illus. 120; winds, 117, 118 
Mars 3 and 6, Soviet spacecraft, 113, 
117 

Mathematics: Greek, 181, 183-5; of 
Newton, 68, 70; square root of two, 
185,347 

Mauna Kea, Hawaii, illus. 132 
Mayans, 175, 187; canal system, illus. 
340-1; time scales in inscriptions, 259 
n. 

Mazets, E. P., 238 

McDonald Observatory, University of 
Texas, telescope, illus. 86 
Medicine Wheel, Saskatchewan, illus. 

49 

Menok i Xrat, Zoroastrian text, 45 
Mercury, 57, 60, 61, 63, 83; craters, 
illus. 90 

Merton, Robert, 146 
Mesopotamian astronomy, 91 
Meteor Crater, Ariz., 85, 86, illus. 84 
Meteorites, 77, 78 n. 

Meteors: as remnants of comets, 78; 

showers of, 77-8 
Michell, John, 241 
Michelson-Morley experiment, 201 
Microscope: Huygens’ studies, 144, 
illus. 144; Leeuwenhoek’s studies, 

144 

Microtubules, illus. 36-7 
Milky Way, 7,8,10, 24,181,198, 226, 
243, 247, illus. 8, 10, 166, 192, 243; 
core of, illus. 10; edge-on and face- 
on, illus. 234; estimated number of 
advanced technical civilizations in, 
298-302; globular star clusters, illus. 
192; !Kung Bushmen’s beliefs on, 
172-3; motion of stars in, 250-2; 
movement toward Virgo cluster, 
256; origin of name, 173; spacecraft 
flight to, 207; studies of, 190-1, Ulus - 
191; supernovae in, 237 
Miller, Stanley, 38 

Mite, electron micrograph of, illus. 22 
Mitochondrion, 31, 38 n., illus. 36-7 
Moctezuma, Emperor, 306-7, illus. 

77 

Molecules, 218, 221; in cells, 34; in 
human body, 127; in origin of life, 

30-1, 38-40 

Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de, 

317 

Moon: ancient knowledge of, 47, 48; 
craters, 66-7,83,85-7,142, illus. 84, 



362 - Index 


paintings, illus. 88-9; influence on 
life, 48; Kepler’s Somnium as journey 
to, 65-7; in Newton’s gravitation 
theory, 69-70; spacecraft design 
(1939) for flight to, 203; views of, 
from Earth, illus. 66 
Morabito, Linda, 157 
Morowitz, Harold, 128 
Mortality, causes of death in London in 
1632, 49, illus. 5 1 

Mount St. Helens, volcanic eruption, 
321 

Mount Wilson Observatory, 94 
Mulholland, Derral, 85, 86 
Muller, H. ]., 29-30 
Multicellular organisms, 31 
Mutations, 27, 30; lethal, 31; from nu¬ 
clear weapons, 323; in nucleotides, 

31, 35; from radiation, 29 

Nagasaki, nuclear attack, 321 
Napier, W., 252 

Napoleon, 303 n.; Egyptian expedition, 
293 

National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 
ministration (NASA), 123; budget, 
illus. 342 

Native Americans: astronomy, 47, 237, 
illus. 48, 49, 232; La Perouse meets in 
Alaska, 303, illus. 304; Tlingit narra- 
tive of first meeting with white men, 
303-5; see also Anasazi; Aztecs; Incas; 
Mayans 

Natural selection, 27-30 
Navajo sand painting, illus. 259 
Necho, Pharaoh, 15, 183 n. 

Neptune, 11, 60, 90, 165 
Neurons in brain, 277, 278, illus. 278 
Neutrinos, xv, 230 
Neutrons, 220, 221, 223, 224 
Neutron stars, 239, 241 
Newman, William I., 310 
Newton, Isaac, 45, 67-71, 108 n., 113, 
176, 181, 217, 221, 334, 337;calculus 
of variations, 70; chronologies of an¬ 
cient civilizations, 71; comets ob¬ 
served, 79-80; differential and 
integral calculus invented, 68; gravi- 
tation theory, 69-70; and Huygens, 
143-4 n.; Kepler’s influence on, 69- 
71; law of inertia, 69; portrait, illus. 
69; Principia , 69 n., 70; studies on 
light, 68, 144 n. 

NGC, galaxy numbers, see Galaxies 
Nitrogen in atmosphere, 32 
Noise pollution by ships, 272 
Norcia, Anne: globular cluster, paint- 
ing, /illus. 9; Sun, painting, illus. 15 
Norm4n conquest of England, 79, illus. 
76 

Novae, 233 

Nuclear arms race, 326-9 
Nuclear fusion reactors, 203 


Nuclear war, 320-9; effects of, 321-3; 
fallout from, illus. 321; prevention 
of, 330-1 

Nuclear weapons, 320-2; balance be¬ 
tween U.S. and Soviet Union, 320, 
326-9; effect on survivors, 322-3; 
explosions, illus. 324, 325; mutations 
caused by, 323; in Project Orion, 
203; in World War II, 320-1, 328 
Nucleic acids, 34, 35, 38, 39; in genetic 
material, 273 

Nucleotide bases, illus. 36-7 
Nucleotides, 31, 39, 273 

Oceans, life in, 270, 283 n. 

Orion, constellation, 197 
Orion, Project, 203,206,207, illus. 204, 
205 

Orion Nebula, 197, 226, illus. 12, 230; 
interior, illus. 13; spiral arm, 252; 
Trapezium, illus. 13 
Ovid, 245, 269 

Oxygen: in atmosphere, 32; plants gen¬ 
erating, 32 

P’an Ku myths, 258 
Paracelsus, 221 

Paper computers for study of eclipses, 
illus. 44, 54, 55 
Pascal, Blaise, 3 
Pasteur, Louis, 144 
Payne, Roger, 271, 272 
Peale, Stanton, 157 
Perfect solids, see Solids 
Pericles, 182 

Peter the Great, Czar, 146-7 
Phobos, satellite of Mars, 83; Viking 
orbiter photographs, illus. 94 
Photons, 230 
Photosynthesis, 31 
Physics, new laws of, 260 n. 

Pioneer 11, observations of Saturn, 

165, illus. 163 
Pioneer spacecraft, 292 
Pioneer Venus Orbiter, 95, 95-6 n.; 

photographs from, illus. 99 
Plague after nuclear war, 323 
Planetary nebulae, 232, 233, illus. 232, 
233 

Planetary systems, 210-12; hypotheti¬ 
cal, illus. 211-15; seven systems gen¬ 
erated by computer system 
ACCRETE, illus. 209 
Planets, 10-11; in astrology, 48-9; birth 
of, 225; craters on, see Craters; Huy¬ 
gens’ studies of, 145-7; influence on 
human beings, 49, 51; Kepler’s study 
and laws of motion, 61-4, 69, 70, 
illus. 62, 63; and Kepler’s theory of 
five solids, 57-8,60, illus. 58; life on, 
see Life on planets; Mars; motion, 
52-3, illus. 50, 56; number of, in all 
galaxies, 7; orbits, 61-3, 188-9, illus. 


62, 63; see also Heliocentric hypoth¬ 
esis 

Plant cells, 31 

Plants, oxygen generated by, 32 
Plato, 61, 184, 186-8 
Platonic solids, see Solids 
Pleiades, 226, illus. 13, 231 
Pliny, 49 
Plutarch, 186 

Pluto, 11,60,107, 165, illus. 14 
Plutonium, 224 
Pollack, J. B., 125 
Polycrates, 178, 186 
Popul Vuh of the Quiche Maya, 3, 27, 
n., 257 

PPLO (pleuropneumonia-like organ¬ 
isms), 39 

Prescott, James W., 331 
Printing, invention of, 281 
Project Daedalus, 203, 206, 207, illus. 
204, 205 

Project Orion, 203, 206, 207, illus. 204, 
205 

Prophets, Biblical, 183 n. 

Proteins, 38,39; and DNA, 34,35, illus. 
36-7 

Protestantism and Kepler’s astronomy, 
56, 65 

Protons, 220, 221, 223, 224 
Proxima Centauri, 198, 199 
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus), 17, 
19—20, 61, 71; astrology, 50-1; as¬ 
tronomy, 51-3, illus. 56; on comets, 

78 

Ptolemy III Euergetes, 334 
Ptolemy V Epiphanes, name on Rosetta 
stone, 294, 296, illus. 296 
Ptolemys, kings, 334 
Pulsar neutron star, illus. 235 
Pulsars, 238, 239; at center of Crab 
Nebula, 239; at center of supernova 
remnant, illus. 11; quasars related to, 
250 

Pythagoras, 61, 63, 183, 188, 223, 317, 
illus. 183 

Pythagoreans, 183-6 
Pythagorean solids, see Solids 
Pythagorean theorem, 183 

Quarks, 220 

Quasars, 198-9, 260, 261; in galaxies, 
249-50, 255, 256, illus. 6, 249 

Radio astronomy, 297-8, 301, 302, 
illus. 297 

Radio communication: interstellar, 272 
n., 285-7, 311; with other worlds, 
297-8, illus. 290, 297 
Radio telescopes, 260-1, illus. 261 
R-complex, 276-7, 279, 326, 331 
Red giant stars, 232-4, 239, illus. 10, 
235; Sun to become, 231, 238, 239, 
illus. 229 



Index -363 


Red shift, 253-6, 261 
Reductio ad absurdum, 347 
Relativity: general theory of, 206; spe- 
cial theory of, 200-2 
Rembrandt, 141, 143 
Ribonucleic acid, see RNA 
Ribosomes, illus. 3 6- 7 
Richardson, L. F., 323, 326, 327, 330, 
diagram, Ulus. 327 
Rishpon, ]., 125, 126 
RNA (ribonucleic acid), 34'5, 39, illus. 

36-7; messenger, 35, illus. 36-7 
Rockets, 111, illus. 112, 113 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 208 
Rosetta stone, 294, 296, 303 n., illus. 
294, 296 

Rosette Nebula, illus. 231 
Rubens, Peter Paul, 143 
Rudolf II, Emperor, 58, 67 
Russell, Bertrand, 183-4 
Rutherford, Ernest, 218 n. 

Sacro Bosco, Joannes de, Sphaera 
Mundi, illus. 280 

Sagittarius, constellation, 191; star 
cloud in, illus. 309 
Salpeter, E. E., 40, 41 
Samos, 174; decoration from, illus. 176; 
Heraion (temple of Hera), 173, illus. 
173; tunnel of Eupalinos, 178, illus. 
178 

Saturn, 11, 57, 60, 61, 160, 165; Huy¬ 
gens’ studies of, 145, illus. 145; mag¬ 
netic field, 165; model, illus. 14; 
orbit, 63; Pioneer 11 observations, 
165, illus. 163 ; rings, 87,90,145,162, 
165, illus. 145, 163; satellites, 210, 
299; Voyager 2 passes, 139 
Schaller, Adolf: black dust cloud, 
painting, illus. 11; cells, paintings, 
illus. 36-7; core of Milky Way, 
painting, illus. 10; dark cloud of in¬ 
terstellar dust, painting, illus. 24; 
death of the Earth and Sun, paint¬ 
ings, illus. 228-9; exploding radio 
galaxy with symmetrical jets, paint¬ 
ing, illus. 5; Milky Way Galaxy, 
painting, illus. 243; Pleiades, painting, 
illus. 13; possible lifeforms on Ju- 
piter-like planet, paintings, illus. 
42-3; quasars, paintings, illus. 6, 249; 
ring galaxy with supernova explo¬ 
sion, painting, illus. 4; small cluster of 
galaxies, painting, illus. 2 
Schaller, Adolf, and John Allison: black 
dust cloud and stars embedded in 
gaseous nebulosities, painting, illus. 
10; red giant star and spiral arm, 
painting, illus. 10 

Schaller, Adolf, and Rick Sternbach, 
extended cluster of galaxies, painting, 
illus. 4 

Schaller, Adolf, Rick Sternbach, and 


John Allison; death of a solar system, 
paintings, illus. 235; Saturn, model, 
illus. 14 

Schiaparelli, Giovanni, 107, 109, 135 
Schiller, Julius, Coelum Stellatum 
Christianum Concauum , illus. 283 
Science fiction: aliens in, 40, illus. 40; 
extraterrestrial civilizations in, 311; 

Kepler’s Somnium, 65; Mars in, 110— 
11, illus. 110; see also Wells, H. G. 
Sequoia trees, 270 n. 

Sex in evolution, 31-2 
Seyfert’s Sextet, illus. 254 
Shakespeare, William, 307, 336; first 
folio, title page, illus. 284 
Shapley, Harlow, 191, 193 
Sherrington, Charles, 277 
Shiva, dance of creation, bronze, 259, 
illus. 244 

Shklovskii, I. S., 242 
Sickle cell anemia, 35 
Sikorsky, Igor, 203 

Silicon: atoms, 221 n., 233; fusion, 233, 
238 

Simultaneous events, paradox of, 199— 
200, illus. 200 

Sirius, measurement of distance to, 190 
Sivin, Nathan, 187 
Slavery in Greek civilization, 186-8 
Slipher, V. M., 254 
Small Magellanic Cloud, 238 
Smoot, George, 256, 257 
Snell (Snellius), Willebrord, 142, 143 
Sobotovich, E., 77 
Socrates, 181 
Solar features, see Sun 
Solar systems, hypothetical, see Plane¬ 
tary systems 

Solar telescope, view of human being, 
illus. 224 

Solids (Pythagorean or Platonic), 184-5, 
349-50, illus. 184; in Kepler’s theory, 
57-8, 60,185-6, illus. 58 
Sombrero Galaxy, M104 (NGC 4594), 
illus. 247 
Sophocles, 336 

Sound: propagation of, 201; speed of, 
200-1 

Soviet Union: expenditures for space 
exploration, 432; invasion of Af¬ 
ghanistan, 345; Mars spacecraft, 113, 
117, illus. 118; non-nuclear weapons, 
328—9; in nuclear arms race, 326-9; 
nuclear weapons, 320; planetary ex¬ 
ploration programs, 113, 117; search 
for extraterrestrial civilizations, 302; 
see also Venera spacecraft 
Space: curved, 262; and time, 198-9 
Spacecraft, 203, 206-7, 210; accelera¬ 
tion and speed of flight, 206-7; de¬ 
signs for interstellar flight, illus. 

204-5 

Space exploration, future of, 342, 345 


Special theory of relativity, 200-2 
Spectrum, 92-3, illus. 93 
Speed of light, 5,198-9; and interstellar 
space travel, 207; in special theory of 
relativity, 200-2 
Speed of sound, 200-1 
Speed of thought, 201 
Spheres, celestial, 52-3 
Sphinx, 98, 99, illus. 103 
Spice Islands, 141 
Spinoza, Benedict, 141 
Square root of two, 185, 347 
SS433, star, 242 

Stars, 8, 10, 46-8, 168-9, 196-8, 231; 
ancient ideas of, 171-3; in astrology, 
48-9; atoms in, 218; binary, 212, 
232-3, illus. 213-15; birth of, 225-6, 
illus. 256; black dwarf, 232-3; central 
temperatures, 231; colors of, 10; core 
in supernova explosion, 238—9; dou¬ 
ble, 10; evolution of, 247; explora¬ 
tion or colonization of planets 
orbiting, 308, 310, illus. 310; falling, 
46, 77; on flags, 50; flight to, see In¬ 
terstellar flight; Spacecraft; globular 
clusters of, 10, 243, illus. 9, 214; 
measurement of distance to, 189-90, 
illus. 190; neutron, 239, 241; and 
planetary companions, model, illus. 
210; red giant, see Red giant stars; 
white dwarf, 232-3, 239, 241 
Stephan’s Quintet, illus. 254 
Sternbach, Rick: hypothetical worlds, 
paintings, illus. 312; starship designs, 
paintings, illus. 205 

Sternbach, Rick, and Adolf Schaller, 
extended cluster of galaxies, painting, 
illus. 4 

Sternbach, Rick, Adolf Schaller, and 
John Allison, Saturn, model, illus. 14 
Stonehenge, 47 
Strabo, 16, 17 

Sumerian creation myths, 177 n. 
Sumerian pictograph for god, 243 n. 
Sun, 7, 10, 11, 225-32, 234, illus. 15, 
216; birth of, 225-6; as center of 
universe, 53, 57,145-6,188-9, illus. 
56; death of, 231—2, illus. 228—9; and 
family of stars, 226; hole in corona, 
illus. 227; interior of, 225, 230; ion¬ 
ized gas loops, illus. 226; magnetic 
field, 225; magnetism (gravity) sug¬ 
gested by Kepler, 64; measurement of 
distance to, 189-90; in Milky Way, 
252; neutrinos in, 230; orbits of 
planets around, 61-3, illus. 62, 63; 
photosphere, illus. 223; to become 
red giant star, 231, 238, 239, illus. 
228-9; solar flares, 225; solar promi¬ 
nences, 225, illus. 216; solar storms, 
225; solar wind, 82; stars nearest to, 
198; surface of, illus. 222; worship of, 
243 



364 — Index 


Sunlight and life on Earth, 234-5 
Sunspots, 225, illus. 223 
Supernovae, 10, 197, 236-9; in Anasazi 
rock painting, 237, illus. 232; explo- 
sions, 197, 226, 233, 234, 237, 238, 
241, 247, 283, illus. 4, 233, 234; and 
formation of new planetary systems, 
illus. 235; nebula (gas island) sun 
rounding explosion, illus. 11; pulsar 
at center of remnant, 239, illus. 11; 
quasars related to, 250; remnants of, 
237-9, 242, illus. 11,233 
Surrogate mothers, 331, illus. 330 
Swift, Jonathan, 149 
Syene, Eratosthenes’ use of observa- 
tions at, 14-15, illus. 16 
Synthesis of organic matter, 38-9, illus. 
38 

Talmey, Max, 199 

Tantric Buddhism, world egg, illus. 257 
Tanzania, human footprint 3.6 million 
years old, 345, illus. 343 
Taurus, constellation, illus. 233; super' 
nova in, 235'6 

Telescope: Galileo’s use of, 66, 91, 142; 
Huygens’ studies, 144-5; invention 
of, 66, 67 

Television, transmission to other 
planets, 286'7, 289 
Terraforming on Mars, 133'5 
Tesseract (hypercube), illus. 262 
Thai manuscript on astrology and as- 
tronomy, illus. 282 
Thales of Miletus, 176'7 
Theodorus, engineering inventions, 
178 

Theophrastus, 332 

Thirty Years’War, 64'5, 67 

Time and space, 198'9 

Time line of people and events, illus. 

335 

Time travel, 207T0, illus. 208 
Titan, satellite of Saturn, 145, 160'2, 
165, illus. 160; atmosphere, 160T; 
possibility of life on, 162, 300 
Tlingit poeple, 311; first meeting with 
white men, 303'5 
Toon, O. B., 125 

Toscanelli, Paolo dal Pozzo, map, illus. 

17 

Travelers’ tales, 148'9 
Trees, 33, 38, illus. 33 
Triffid Nebula, illus. 230 
Trilobites, 32, illus. 32 
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin Eduardovich, 
110, 111, portrait, illus. 110 
Tsurezuregusa of Kenko, 50 n. 
Tunguska Event, 73'6, 78, 82, 86, illus. 
75 

Twain, Mark, 217 

Twins, astrology tested by, 49'50 


UFOs, 292, 307, 311; see also Extrater- 
restrial visitors 

Uhuru, observations of X-rays, 241 

Ultraviolet radiation, 92-3 

United States: Arms Control and Dis¬ 
armament Agency, 330; bombing of 
Cambodia, 342; budget for space sci¬ 
ences, 342, 345, illus. 342; non¬ 
nuclear weapons, 328-9; in nuclear 
arms race, 326-9; nuclear weapons, 
320; search for extraterrestrial civili¬ 
zations, 302 

Universe: Big Bang and formation of, 
246, 247, 256, 257, 259; evolution 
and structure of, 246-57; expanding, 
255-7, 259; four-dimensional, 264-5; 
hierarchy of universes, 265, 267; in¬ 
finite regression between universes, 
265, 267, illus. 266; oscillating, 259, 
260, 262 

Uranium, Geiger counter measure¬ 
ment, 235 

Uranus, 11, 60, 165; rings, 90; satellites, 
210, 299; Voyager 2 passes, 139 

Urey, Harold, 38 

Utopia, region on Mars, 120, 121, illus. 
104, 131, 132 


V-2 rocket, 111 

V 861 Scorpii, 242 

Vaillant, Bernard, Christian Huygens, 
portrait, illus. 143 

Valley of the Kings, Egypt: motifs of 
Sun and stars, illus. 240; stele, illus. 
295 

van Gogh, Vincent, 217 

Veil Nebula, illus. 233 

Vela satellite, 76 

Velikovsky, Immanuel, Worlds in Col¬ 
lision , 90—1 

Venera spacecraft, 238; observations of 
Venus, 94, 96, 97 m, 113, 121, illus. 
98, 340 

Venne, Adriaen van der, harbor at 
Middelburg, Holland, painting, illus. 
140 

Venus, 57, 60, 61, 91-9, 102, 145; at¬ 
mosphere, 94, 96-7, 102; craters, 95; 
Galileo’s observations, 91-2, 142; 
greenhouse effect and temperature, 
97, 98 n.; Pioneer Venus Orbiter 
photographs of, illus. 99, 340; radio 
and radar observations of, 94'8, 
illus. 95, 340; surface, illus. 340-1; 
surface, model reconstructions of, 
illus. 99; surface temperatures, 95, 97, 
illus. 97; Velikovsky’s hypothesis of 
comet in collision, 90-1; Venera 
spacecraft observations of, 94,96,97 
m, 113,121, illus. 98, 340 

Vermeer, Jan, 141, 143, 144, 307 


Very Large Array (VLA) of radio tele¬ 
scopes, 261, illus. 261 
Vespucci, Amerigo, 17 
Viking 1, 119-20, 129, illus. 123, 124 
Viking 2, 119-20, illus. 104 
Viking mission to Mars, 117-29,139 n., 
339, 342, illus. 130, 131; biological 
studies, 119, 122-3, 125, 128, 129; 
landers, 119-22, 124, illus. 122, 127, 
134; landings, 120-1, illus. 123; land¬ 
ing sites, 119-21; orbiter photo¬ 
graphs, illus. 94, 121; orb iters, 

118-20; soil sample collection and 
study, 124-6, illus. 124, 134 
Vinci, Italy, traffic sign, illus. 201 
Vinci, Leonardo da, see Leonardo da 
Vinci 

Virgo cluster, 247, 256-7 
Viroids, 39 

Vishniac, Helen Simpson, 124 
Vishniac, Wolf, 126, 129; in Antarc¬ 
tica, 123-4, illus. 124; Wolf Trap, 
122-3 

Voltaire, Francois Marie Arouet, 149 
Voyager 1, 139; observations, 151, 
illus. 148, 150-6, 159-61 
Voyager 2, 138; observations, 138-9, 

149, 151, illus. 96, 136, 150, 151, 
159, 162 

Voyager spacecraft, 83, 147, 149, 151, 
154,156-8,165,199, 292, 342, illus. 
138; recorded messages for other 
civilizations, 287, 289, illus. 288 

WAC Corporal rocket, 111 
Waldseemiiller, Martin, 17 
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 134, 191 n.; 
criticism of Lowell, 108-9; evolution 
theory, 27-30 
Wallenstein, Duke of, 67 
War: alternatives to, 330; causes, Rich¬ 
ardson’s study of, 323, 326, 327, dia¬ 
gram, illus. 327; hope for avoiding, 
332; nuclear, see Nuclear war 
Water molecule, 221 
Welles, Orson, The War of the Worlds , 
radio version, 107 n., 110, 129 
Wells, H. G., 339; “The Discovery of 
the Future,” 317T8; The Time Ma¬ 
chine, illus. 208; The War of the 
Worlds , 107, 110, 111, 129 
Wesley, John, 27 n. 

Whales, 270-3; communications, 272; 
finback, 272; genetic material, 273; 
humpback, 287, illus. 268; slaughter 
of, 273; sounds (songs) of, 271, 287, 
illus. 271 

Whirlpool Galaxy, M51 (NGC 5194), 
illus. 246 

White dwarf stars, 232-3, 239, 241 
Wilkins, John, 137, 182 
William the Conqueror, 79, illus. 76 



Index - 365 


Wolf Trap, Vishniac’s device, 122-3 Writing, 281 Young, Thomas, 294 

World, see Earth Wurttemberg, Duke of, 57-8, 67 

World War 11, 327^8; conventional Zeus, 173, 176 

bombs, 320;nuclear weapons, 320-1, Xenophon, 186 Zodiac, 197; signs of, illus. 54 

328 X-rays, 93; black holes observed with, Zoroaster, 183 n. 

Wren, Christopher, 105 24T2; deep sky survey in Eridanus, 

Wright, Thomas, 181, 191 Ulus. 263; glow between galaxies, 262 



About the Author 


CARL Sagan is Director of the Laboratory for Planetary Studies 
and David Duncan Professor of Astronomy and Space Sciences 
at Cornell University. He has played a leading role in the Mari¬ 
ner, Viking and Voyager expeditions to the planets, for which he 
received the NASA medals for Exceptional Scientific Achievement 
and for Distinguished Public Service, and the international 
astronautics prize, the Prix Galabert. He has served as Chairman 
of the Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astro¬ 
nomical Society, as Chairman of the Astronomy Section of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science, and as 
President of the Planetology Section of the American Geophysi¬ 
cal Union. For twelve years, he was Editor-in-Chief of Icarus , the 
leading professional journal devoted to planetary research. In 
addition to 400 published scientific and popular articles, Dr. 
Sagan is the author, co-author or editor of more than a dozen 
books, including Intelligent Life in the Universe , The Cosmic Com 
nection , The Dragons of Eden , Murmurs of Earth and Broca’s 
Braim In 1975, he received the Joseph Priestley Award “for dis¬ 
tinguished contributions to the welfare of mankind,” and in 1978 
the Pulitzer Prize for literature. 



